
Forest Lake, MN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF FOREST LAKE, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 680, passed 10-8-2018









Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 557



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A CITY CODE FOR THE CITY OF FOREST LAKE AND SETTING
FORTH A SUMMARY THEREOF



   The City Council of the City of Forest Lake, Washington County,
Minnesota hereby ordains as follows:



   ADOPTION OF CITY CODE



   Pursuant to M. S. §§ 415.02 and 415.021, the City Council of the City
of Forest Lake hereby adopts the City Code for the City of Forest Lake which
is a codification of all ordinances of the city of a permanent and general
nature as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters and sections to be known and designated as
the “City Code” or "Forest Lake Code" in form and as on file in the
office of the City Clerk on the 13th day of November, 2006.



   PURPOSE



   The City Code is adopted to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the City of Forest Lake and its people.



   AREA OF APPLICATION



   The City Code is applicable to and enforceable in all of the area
within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as
amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time.



   ADMINISTRATION



   The City Code shall be administered by the City Council of the City of
Forest Lake and/or its designees, including the City Administrator and the
Community Development Director.



   SUMMARY OF REGULATIONS



The City Code contains the following component codes, titles and chapters:



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



10.  General Provisions



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



30.  City Government



31.  Departments, Boards And Commissions



32.  Elections



33.  Taxation and Finance



34.  Emergency Management



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



50.  Garbage And Waste Materials



51.  Water Services



52.  Sewer Service



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



70.  General Provisions



71.  Motorized and Non-Motorized Vehicle Regulations



72.  Parking Regulations



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



90.  Parks and Recreation



91.  Shields Lake Management



92.  Outdoor Entertainment



93.  Alarm Systems



94.  Fire Protection and Prevention



95.  Pollution Control



96.  Nuisances; Health and Sanitation



97.  Trees



98.  Streets and Sidewalks



99.  Animals



100.  Lawn Fertilizer and Pesticide Application Control



101.  Soil Erosion Control



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



110.  Car Wash Establishments



111.  Amusements Licensing and Regulation



112.  Adult-Oriented Businesses



113.  Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants



114.  Pawnbrokers



115.  Saunas and Massage Parlors



116.  Gambling



117.  Taxicabs; Limousines



118.  Tobacco Regulations



119.  Alcoholic Beverages



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



130.  General Offenses



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



150.  Building Regulations



151.  Storm Water Management



152.  Subdivision Regulations



153.  Zoning Code



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



I.  Franchises



II.  Zoning Map Changes



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Minnesota Statutes



References to Minnesota Rules



References to Prior Code



References to Ordinances



INDEX



   GENERAL REPEALER



   Any ordinance of a permanent and general nature heretofore existing
excluding any such ordinance passed on or after July 1, 2006 and whether
adopted by the City of Forest Lake or the Town of Forest Lake prior to its
annexation to the City of Forest Lake pertaining to the subjects treated in
the Forest Lake Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this Ordinance, except as they are included and reordained in whole
or in part in the Forest Lake Code; provided, this repeal shall not affect
any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the
provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing
territory, establishing franchises, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, zoning or rezoning of
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Forest Lake Code. All fees established by ordinance whether codified in this
Code or otherwise and presently in effect shall remain in effect unless
amended in this Code or until an ordinance adopting a fee schedule is adopted
or amended.



   PENALTY



   Section 1.   The City Code establishes certain administrative
penalties and penalty procedures for violations of specific provisions of the
Code to provide the public and the City with an informal, cost effective and
expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of the Code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary
on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   Section 2.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of the Code for which another penalty is not specifically provided
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be
imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under the City Code, including
Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of
not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both.



   Section 3.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of the City Code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted
by reference, which are designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be
imposed for any petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a
sentence of a fine of not more than $300.00.



   Section 4.   In either of the case of a misdemeanor or a petty
misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added.



   Section 5.   In addition to any other penalties provided for in the
City Code, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any
provisions of the City Code, the Council or any City Official designated by
it may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct or abate the violation.



   EFFECTIVE DATES



   This Ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and publication in
the legal newspaper of the City of Forest Lake.



   PUBLICATION



   This Ordinance adopting the Forest Lake Code shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously published in
the city’s official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a
substantial quantity of the Forest Lake Code to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost. A printed copy of the entire City
Code shall be available for inspection by any person during regular office
hours at the City Administrative Offices, the City Department of Community
Development and the City Library. The official copy of this Code of
Ordinances shall be marked and kept in the office of the City Clerk.



   EVIDENCE OF THE LAW OF THE CITY



   The Forest Lake Code is declared to be prima facie evidence of the law
of the City of Forest Lake and shall be received into evidence as provided by
Minnesota Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.



   Adopted by the City Council of the City of Forest Lake this 27th day of
November, 2006.



       /s/                Terance Smith



Mayor



ATTEST:



        /s/              Charles P. Robinson



City Clerk/Administrator



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



   10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code” or “Forest Lake Code,” for which designation “code of
ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. 
Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The City of Forest Lake, Minnesota, consisting of the
area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or
as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future
time.  The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the
City Council and its authorized representatives.



      CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Forest Lake,
Minnesota.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Washington County, Minnesota.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right- of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection.  The Administrator shall provide a copy
for sale for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this
Minnesota Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and
statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in
the code to the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any Licensed Peace Officer of the city’s Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Administrator shall have the authority to administer
and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the City Administrator or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions
specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Administrator and any city official or employee
designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under
this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any
property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any
premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with
this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control
of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the
City Administrator, Peace Officer, or any employee or official charged with
the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court
of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant.  Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particular property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Administrator or any other authorized
city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this
code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are
being complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to
permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property.
Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person
in control of the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the
licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be
given an opportunity to appear before the City Administrator to object to the
termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Administrator's
decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the City to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



§ 10.98  SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in
this code and the enforcement powers granted in § 10.20, the City Council is
authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the members of
the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.



   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective
and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary
on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions
of the code, other than those penalties established in the code or in
statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time
by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to
be effective, an administrative penalty for a particular violation must be
established before the violation occurred.



   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Administrator, or
other person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this
code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail
to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving
notice may request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the
violation directly to the City Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the
violation. In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the
alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14
days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice has been
given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving notice
may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan
to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide
that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged
violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may
request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment
of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine
to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.
Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall
be no appeal from the decision of the Council.



   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative
penalty is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation
creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the City, through its
Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this
code. Likewise, the City, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in
the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an administrative
penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any
requested correction of the situation resulting in the violation is
completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the City for the alleged
violation.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or
in § 10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct or abate the violation.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY GOVERNMENT



      31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      32.   ELECTIONS



      33.   TAXATION AND FINANCE



      34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      35.   FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY GOVERNMENT



Section



   30.01   Compensation of Mayor and City Council members



   30.02   Worker’s compensation



§ 30.01  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The compensation of the Mayor and the compensation of each
Councilmember shall be established from time to time by City Council
ordinance pursuant to M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 1.01)  (Am. Ord. 379, passed 9-29-1986;  Am. Ord. 455,
passed 10- -1994;  Am. Ord. 488, passed 10- -1998;  Am. Ord. 518, passed
7-8-2002)



§ 30.02  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   As permitted by Minnesota Statute, all members of the Forest Lake City
Council and the Mayor of the city shall be considered as employees of the
city for purposes of the Minnesota worker’s compensation law and that all
such members and Mayor be henceforth included as covered employees under the
city’s workers’ compensation insurance.



(Prior Code, § 1.03)  (Am. Ord. 397, passed 1-9-1989)



CHAPTER 31:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Civil Service Commission for Police Officers




   31.01   Commission created



   31.02   Appointments



   31.03   Meetings



   31.04   Compensation



   31.05   Commission control over Police Department



   31.06   Police Department rules



   31.07   Promotions



   31.08   Jurisdiction



   31.09   Removal or discharge



   31.10   Standards of fitness and efficiency



   31.11   Charges against police employee



   31.12   Offering money and the like by applicants prohibited




Planning Commission




   31.25   Establishment



   31.26   Composition



   31.27   Organization meetings



   31.28   Duties of powers




Human Rights Commission




   31.40   Purpose



   31.41   Powers and duties



   31.42   Membership



   31.43   Bylaws




Airport Commission




   31.55   Establishment



   31.56   Powers and duties



   31.57   Membership



   31.58   Meetings and reports



   31.59   Administrative control



Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission



   31.75   Established; composition; terms, organization



   31.76   Duties and functions



   31.77   Operating authority



CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION FOR POLICE OFFICERS



§ 31.01  COMMISSION CREATED.



   There is created a Civil Service Commission of 3 members, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the City Council,
to be known as the Police Civil Service Commission.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 1)



§ 31.02  APPOINTMENTS.



   When first appointed, 1 Commissioner shall be appointed for 1 year, who
shall be President of the Commission, 1 for 2 years, and 1 for 3 years. Each
Commissioner shall hold his or her office until his or her successor is duly
appointed and qualified. There shall thereafter be 1 member of the Commission
appointed each year for a term of 3 years, and each shall during the last
year of his or her term be President of the Commission. No Commissioner
shall, during the term of his or her membership in the body, hold any other
office or employment under the city, except the office of notary public or
member of a civil service commission for firefighters or other municipal
personnel. Each Commissioner, before entering upon his or her duties, shall
subscribe and file with the City Clerk an oath for the faithful discharge of
his  or her duties.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 2)



§ 31.03  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall meet immediately after its appointment and
thereafter annually on the first Monday in February. The Commission shall
also from time to time fix the times of its meetings and adopt, amend, and
alter rules for its procedure.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 3)



§ 31.04  COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall pay from the City Treasury all necessary expenses
incurred by the Commission in the performance of its duties. Each
Commissioner shall serve without pay, but the Council may allow the Secretary
such compensation as it deems proper for the additional service rendered by
him or her in that office, not exceeding $100 per year.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 4)



§ 31.05  COMMISSION CONTROL OVER POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Commission shall have absolute control and supervision of the
employment, promotion, discharge and suspension of all members of the Police
Department and all grades and departments thereof in this city. The
Commission shall, immediately after its appointment, establish grades for the
employments in the Police Department and shall classify every employee now in
such service in the respective classification thus established. The
Commission shall keep a service register of all men and women in the service
in these classifications, giving their names, ages, compensation, past
employment, duties, and such other facts and data with reference to each
employee as the Commission may deem useful.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 5)



§ 31.06  POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES.



   (A)   The Commission shall, immediately after its appointment and
from time to time thereafter, make, amend, alter, and change rules to promote
efficiency in the Police Department services and carry out the purpose of
this chapter.



   (B)   The rules shall provide among other things for:



      (1)   The classification of all offices and employments in the
Police Department;



      (2)   Competitive examination to test the relative fitness of
applicants;



      (3)   Public advertisements of all examinations at least 10
days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and posting
advertisement for 10 days in the City Hall and at each station house;



      (4)   The creation and maintenance of lists of eligible
candidates after successful examination in order of their standing in the
examination and without reference to the time of examination. The lists shall
be embraced in an eligible register. The Commission may by rule provide for
striking any name from the eligible register after it has been 2 years
thereon;



      (5)   The rejection of candidates or eligibles who, after the
entry of their names, shall fail to comply with the reasonable rules and
requirements of the Commission or otherwise, or who have been guilty of
criminal, infamous, or disgraceful conduct, or of any willful
misrepresentation deception or fraud in connection with their applications
for employment;



      (6)   The certification of the 3 names standing highest on the
appropriate list to fill any vacancy (except where the provisions of the
Minnesota Veterans’ Preference Law provides otherwise);



      (7)   Temporary employment without examination, with the
consent in each case of the Commission, in cases of emergency; but no such
temporary employment shall continue more than 30 days, nor shall successive
temporary employments be permitted for the same position;



      (8)   Promotion based on competitive examination and upon
records of efficiency, character, conduct and seniority;



      (9)   Policy recommendations to the City Council on service
connected injuries, sick leave, salary schedule, uniform allowance, vacation,
hours of duty, false arrest insurance, health insurance, and other employee
benefits;



      (10)   Such other rules not inconsistent with the provisions
of this act as may from time to time be found necessary to secure the
purposes of this act.



   (C)   Copies of all rules adopted by the Commission shall be kept
posted in the police station house, and no rule of general application with
reference to employment, promotion, discharge or suspension shall become
effective until so posted.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 6)



§ 31.07  PROMOTIONS.



   When the Commission has established a list of eligible candidates for
promotions or for new positions in the Police Department, appointment to any
position shall be made of 1 of the 3 candidates given the highest ratings by
the Commission or its examiner; provided, however, that on demotions for
retrenchment or any other but disciplinary reasons the persons above entrance
grade shall not lose their seniority.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 7)



§ 31.08  JURISDICTION.



   All present employees of the Police Department of the city who have
been regularly so employed for the period of 6 months prior to February 19,
1968 shall come under the jurisdiction of the Commission without examination
and shall not be classified in a position with a lower pay scale than that in
force as of February 19, 1968.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 8)



§ 31.09  REMOVAL OR DISCHARGE.



   No officer or employee after 6 months’ continuous employment shall be
removed or discharged except for cause, upon written charges and after an
opportunity to be heard in his or her own defense as in this subchapter
hereinafter provided. The charges shall be investigated by or before the
Civil Service Commission. The findings and decision of the Commission shall
be forthwith certified to the Chief or other appointed or superior officer
and shall be enforced by the officer. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the
power of any officer to suspend a subordinate for a reasonable period, not
exceeding 60 days, for the purpose of discipline or pending investigation of
charges when he or she deems the suspension advisable.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 9)



§ 31.10  STANDARDS OF FITNESS AND EFFICIENCY.



   The Commission, in classifying positions under this subchapter, shall
prescribe standards of fitness and efficiency for each office, employment or
position and shall adapt each examination to the respective position. All
examinations shall be impartial, fair and practical and designed to test the
relative qualifications and fitness of applicants to discharge the duties of
the respective employments which they seek to fill. Notice of the time,
place, and scope of all examinations shall be given 10 days in advance by
publication and by posting in the same manner as rules for the respective
departments. Notice shall also be mailed to all applicants on the proper
register at least 10 days in advance. Applicants for position of trust shall
be especially examined as to moral character, sobriety and integrity; and no
question in any examinations shall relate to religious convictions or
affiliations. The head of the Police Department shall assist the Commission
in making up its classification and in conducting examination in the
Department on request.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 10)



§ 31.11  CHARGES AGAINST POLICE EMPLOYEE.



   (A)   Charges against any police employee may be filed by any
superior officer of the Department or by any member of the Commission on his
or her own motion; and thereupon the Commission shall try the charges after
no less than 10 days written notice to the accused. The notice shall set
forth the charges as filed. The trial shall be open to the public. Each
Commissioner shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas; and
disobedience to the same shall be punishable the same as contempt of court in
the district court of this county. Witnesses, except public officials, shall
be entitled to the same fees and mileage as for attendance upon the court.
The employee may be suspended by his or her superior officer pending
determination of the charges against him or her.



   (B)   If the Commission upon trial finds the employee guilty of
inefficiency, breach of duty or misconduct, he or she shall be removed,
reduced or suspended, and his or her name be stricken from the service
register. If the charges are not sustained, the case shall be dismissed; and
if the employee has been suspended he or she shall be immediately reinstated
and shall be paid all back pay for the period of suspension. Findings of the
Commission shall be filed within 3 days after the completion of the hearing.
Any person suspended, reduced or removed by the Commission after hearing may
appeal to the district court by serving written notice upon the Secretary of
the Commission within 10 days after the filing of its order and receipt of
the same by the employee. The Secretary shall within 5 days certify a copy of
the proceedings to the clerk of the district court, and the matter shall be
before the court for the review of the reasonableness of the findings based
upon the evidence presented.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 11)



§ 31.12  OFFERING MONEY AND THE LIKE BY APPLICANTS PROHIBITED.



   No applicant for examination, appointment or promotion in the Police
Department shall offer, give or promise any money, service or other thing to
any person in connection with the proposed appointment or promotion. Any
person violating the provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in
§ 10.99; and if such person is an employee of any service under this
subchapter, he or she shall be subject to suspension and removal as above
provided.



(Prior Code, § 2.01, Subd. 12)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 31.25  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A City Planning Commission for the city is established.



(Prior Code, § 7.01)



§ 31.26  COMPOSITION.



   The Planning Commission shall consist of 7 members to be appointed as
follows:



   (A)   Seven members from the resident population of Forest Lake,
other than persons elected to a public body, to be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council. Members shall be appointed to serve a
term of 3 years from the first day of February. Upon expiration of a term,
the appointee shall continue until reappointed or a successor is appointed.
In the event of any vacancy, the Mayor, with the approval of the Council,
shall appoint a person to complete the unexpired term.



   (B)   Each of the 7 Planning Commission members shall have equal
voting privilege. Any member may be removed for cause by a four-fifths vote
of the City Council upon written charge and after a public hearing.



   (C)   Failure to attend 3 consecutive regular scheduled meetings
shall constitute an automatic resignation on the part of any member.



(Prior Code, § 7.02) (Am. Ord. 554, passed 8-28-2006; Am. Ord. 673, passed
2-12-2018)



§ 31.27  ORGANIZATION MEETINGS.



   At the first regular meeting in February, the Commission shall elect a
Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and Secretary from among its appointed
members for a term of 1 year; and the Commission may create and fill such
other offices as it may determine. The Commission shall hold at least 1
regular meeting each month at such time and place as it may fix by
resolution. A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. It shall
adopt rules and procedures for the transaction of its business and shall
record its findings in official minutes, which record shall be a public
record. On or before January 1 of each year, the Commission shall submit to
the City Council a report of its work during the preceding year.



(Prior Code, § 7.03)



§ 31.28  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   Preparation of Comprehensive Plan. It shall be the duty of the
Planning Commission to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan for the
physical development of the city, including proposed public buildings, street
arrangements and improvements, efficient design of major thoroughfares for
moving of traffic, parking facilities, public utilities services, parks and
playgrounds, a general land use plan and other matters relating to the
physical development of the city. The plan may be prepared in sections, each
of which shall relate to the Comprehensive Plan program.



   (B)   Means of executing plan. Upon the adoption of a Comprehensive
Plan or any section thereof, it shall be the duty of the Planning Commission
to recommend to the City Council reasonable and practicable means of putting
into effect the plan or section thereof in order that the same will serve as
a pattern and guide for the orderly physical development of the city and as a
basis for judging the timely disbursements of funds to implement the
objective. Means of effectuating the plan shall consist of a zoning law,
subdivision regulations, thoroughfare plan, capital improvement programing
and technical review and recommendations on matters referred to the Planning
Commission by the Council.



   (C)   Zoning ordinance. The Planning Commission shall review all
proposed amendments to the zoning regulations and make recommendations within
45 days, as such, to the City Council. Before making the recommendations, the
Planning Commission shall hold such public hearings as are prescribed by the
zoning regulations.



   (D)   Appeals. The Planning Commission shall have the power to
review all appeals from a ruling of the Building Inspector or other
administrative officer where an error in any order, regulation, decision or
determination made by such officer in enforcing the zoning ordinance is
alleged.



   (E)   Variance. The Planning Commission shall have the power to hear
and review all requests for variances to the zoning regulations as they apply
to a particular parcel of land or use of such a parcel pursuant to § 153.036.



   (F)   Special permits. The Planning Commission shall have the power
to hear and review all requests for conditional use permits and interim use
permits pursuant to §§ 153.034 and 153.035.



   (G)   Subdivisions. The Planning Commission shall have the power to
review applications for subdivisions of land as prescribed by Ch. 152. The
Commission shall report its recommendation to the Council for action.



   (H)   Capital improvement program. The Planning Commission, when
requested by the City Council, shall prepare a recommended capital
improvement program for necessary public works.



(Prior Code, § 7.04) (Am. Ord. 637, passed 3-24- 2014)



Cross reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Ch. 152;



   Zoning Code, see Ch. 153



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 31.40  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the Commission are to promote the elimination of hate,
prejudice and discrimination against persons or groups based on race, gender,
religion or other status of the person or group; to educate the community on
issues of discrimination and cultural diversity; to advise the City Council
on human rights issues; and to promote the goals and objectives of the
Minnesota Human Rights Act.



(Ord. 504, passed - -2001)



§ 31.41  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Human Rights Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To generally advise the Council regarding civil rights and
human rights issues and policies;



   (B)   To advise and aid the City Council on matters concerning the
Minnesota Human Rights Act;



   (C)   To cooperate with other groups and governmental agencies
concerned with human rights;



   (D)   To develop and implement, in cooperation with the Minnesota
Department of Human Rights, programs of formal and informal education on
diverse values and cultures, and conflict resolution;



   (E)   To provide support and information services to persons in
matters of discrimination and intolerance;



   (F)   To develop a community response plan to address problems
arising from discrimination or intolerance;



   (G)   To attempt to conciliate, within its authority, all grievances
involving discrimination or intolerance;



   (H)   To perform such other functions concerning human rights as the
City Council may from time to time direct.



(Ord. 504, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 544, passed 3-27-2006)



§ 31.42  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership in the Human Rights Commission shall be as follows:



   (A)   The Commission will be composed of not less than 5 nor more
than 7 members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. Commission
members shall be appointed by the Council.



   (B)   Two members of the original Commission shall serve a term of 1
year, 2 for a term of 2 years and 3 for a term of 3 years. After the terms of
the original Commission members expire, members shall be appointed for terms
of 3 years.



   (C)   One non-voting ad hoc representative shall be appointed from
the Police Department and 1 non-voting ad hoc representative shall be
appointed from Independent School District 831.  The representatives shall
attend meetings of the Commission and participate in the discussion of
matters coming before the Commission and may participate as deemed
appropriate in other activities of the Commission.



(Ord. 504, passed - -2001;  Am. Ord. 532, passed 3-22-2004; Am. Ord. 544,
passed 3-27-2006; Am. Ord. 582, passed 4-13-2009; Am. Ord. 604, passed
3-28-2011)



§ 31.43  BYLAWS.



   The Commission shall adopt bylaws and/or rules of conduct to govern its
affairs. The bylaws of the Commission and any amendments thereto shall be
submitted to the City Council for approval.



(Ord. 504, passed - -2001)



AIRPORT COMMISSION



§ 31.55  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established a non-salaried, advisory airport commission to be
known as the “Municipal Airport Commission of the City of Forest Lake.”



(Ord. 508, passed - -2001)



§ 31.56  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Airport Commission shall plan, promote and encourage the
development and utilization of the municipal airport. It shall advise the
Council, both with respect to general policies and detailed administration,
in all matters relating to the acquisition, construction, improvement,
maintenance, operation, management and control of the municipal airport and
appurtenances thereto. It shall advise the Council with respect to the
airport budget, the charges and other financial arrangements for the use of
the airport property as well as recommendations for the zoning and protection
of aerial approaches. It shall consult and cooperate with such federal, state
and other agencies as may be necessary to insure that the city receives the
maximum cooperation, financial and otherwise, from the agencies for the
operation and maintenance of the airport facilities.



(Ord. 508, passed - -2001)



§ 31.57  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Airport Commission shall be composed of 5 members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council from persons interested in the
development and utilization of the municipal airport. Members may include
both citizens and up to 2 members of the City Council and shall be residents
of the city. The Commission shall designate 1 of its members as Chairperson.
Two members of the original Commission shall serve for a term expiring on the
date of the second regular City Council meeting held in January 2003. Three
members of the original Commission shall serve for a term expiring on the
date of the second regular City Council meeting held in January 2004. After
the terms of the original Commission members expire, members shall be
appointed for terms of 3 years with the exception of City Council members,
who shall be appointed for a term of 1 year. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment of the Mayor with approval of the City Council for the balance of
the term.



(Ord. 508, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 547, passed 5-8-2006; Am. Ord. 665,
passed 6-12-2017)



§ 31.58  MEETINGS AND REPORTS.



   The Commission shall adopt bylaws and/or rules of conduct to govern its
affairs and may otherwise conduct its business as it chooses consistent with
the laws and ordinances of the city. It shall meet monthly, or more often, on
the call of its Chairperson or a majority of its members and shall keep
accurate minutes of its proceedings. The minutes shall be furnished to the
City Council following a meeting. At the end of each year, the Commission
shall make and file with the City Council a full report of its transactions
for the preceding year.



(Ord. 508, passed - -2001)



§ 31.59  ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as removing from the City
Council any of its governmental power or authority to manage the municipal
airport, personnel, funds and properties.



(Ord. 508, passed - -2001)



PARKS, TRAILS, AND LAKES COMMISSION



§ 31.75  ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; TERMS, ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The city's Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission is hereby
established with the powers and duties given it by this chapter. The Parks,
Trails, and Lakes Commission shall consist of 7 regular members appointed by
the Mayor, with the consent of the Council. One of the appointed members
shall be from the Forest Lake Lake Association and 1 member shall be from the
Clear Lake Lake Association. Regular members of the Parks, Trails, and Lakes
Commission shall be qualified voters and residents of the city.  Regular
members will be appointed to 3-year terms which shall expire on December 31
of the 3rd year of such term and until a successor is duly appointed and
qualified. Members appointed to the initial Board shall serve the following
initial terms: 2 members shall serve a term of 1 year, 2 for a term of 2
years and 3 for a term of 3 years.  In the event of a vacancy, the City
Council shall appoint a person to complete the unexpired term.



   (B)   Members of the Commission shall receive compensation of $25
per meeting and shall be entitled to a reasonable reimbursement for travel
and other necessary expenses incurred.



   (C)   A member of the Commission may be removed with or without
cause by the City Council.



(Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 31.76  DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.



   The duties and functions of the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission
shall be as follows:



   (A)   To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in matters
relating to a parks, trails, and lakes in the city.



   (B)   To prepare and recommend updates to the parks component of the
Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   To periodically examine the need for new park recommendations
to be submitted to the Council.



   (D)   To review and make recommendations to the City Council on
development applications for conformance to park dedication requirements of
the Comprehensive Plan.



   (E)   Evaluate the city's current parks and desires of citizens for
such services.



   (F)   Keep acquainted with the current state, regional and national
parks and recreation standards for communities.



   (G)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission will coordinate
special events including musical and free entertainment for the general
public, provided funds are available therefor.



   (H)   Study and recommend long-range park and trail plans for the
city;



   (I)   Submit to the City Council each year an annual report of the
activities of the Commission during the previous year.



   (J)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters
which are requested by the City Council.



(Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642, passed 6-22-2015)



Cross reference:



   Parks and recreation, see Ch. 90



§ 31.77  OPERATING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may employ necessary
personnel and fix their compensation.



   (B)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may, upon prior
approval by the City Council, construct trails, buildings and other necessary
structures and improvements in parks, provided funds are available therefor.



   (C)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may, upon prior
approval by the City Council, make contracts and leases for the construction
and operation of park facilities for terms not exceeding 10 years. Every such
contract and lease shall provide that the structure shall be operated for
public use and convenience and that the charges shall be reasonable, and the
contracts shall reserve to the City Council power to prescribe reasonable
rules and regulations from time to time for the conduct of the privilege.



   (D)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may purchase all
necessary materials and supplies, equipment and services, provided funds are
available therefor in accordance with city purchasing policy.



   (E)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission shall maintain,
beautify and care for park property.



   (F)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may provide musical
and free entertainment for the general public, provided funds are available
therefor.



   (G)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may perform whatever
other acts are reasonable, necessary and proper to carry out the specific
powers set forth above.



   (H)   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission may execute any of its
powers through duly authorized employees.



   (I)   The City Council may review and may adopt, amend, or reject
such plans and programs as the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission shall
recommend.



   (J)   No obligation incurred by any person on behalf of the Parks,
Trails, and Lakes Commission shall be valid unless the expenditure is
authorized by a majority vote of the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 5.04)



CHAPTER 32:  ELECTIONS



Section



   32.01   Elections



   32.02   Voter registration



§ 32.01  ELECTIONS.



   The annual city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday of November of each year.



(Prior Code, § 3.01)



§ 32.02  VOTER REGISTRATION.



   (A)   The system for the permanent registration of voters provided
for by M.S. Ch. 201, as amended from time to time, is adapted for the city.



   (B)   No person shall be permitted to vote at any election in the
city unless he or she is registered as provided by Minnesota Statutes.



(Prior Code, § 3.02)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCE AND TAXATION



Section




Deferral of Special Assessments for Senior Citizens




   33.01   Providing for deferral of assessments



   33.02   Application for deferral



   33.03   Determination of interest rate



   33.04   Termination of right of deferred payment



DEFERRAL OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS



§ 33.01  PROVIDING FOR DEFERRAL OF ASSESSMENTS.



   From and after the adoption of this chapter, the City Council may, in
its discretion, defer the payment of any special assessment heretofore or
hereafter made for local improvements constructed by the city within the city
when, in its discretion, it determines by a three-fifths vote of the Council
that the property upon which the assessment is to be levied is homestead
property, that 1 or more of the owners of the property is 65 years of age or
over, and that payment of the assessment would be a hardship for the owner
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 22.01)



§ 33.02  APPLICATION FOR DEFERRAL.



   Senior citizens seeking the deferral shall make application for the
same on a form prescribed by the County Assessor of Washington County. In the
event that the forms do not require the same, the applicant shall in addition
furnish to the City Council a statement under oath setting forth
applicant’s income and assets at the time of the making of the application.



(Prior Code, § 22.02)



§ 33.03  DETERMINATION OF INTEREST RATE.



   The City Council shall hereafter at the time of levying any special
assessments determine in addition to the interest rate to be charged to
property owners on installments of the special assessments, the interest
rate, if any, which will be charged to the senior citizens seeking deferral
of the collection of the assessments in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 22.03)



§ 33.04  TERMINATION OF RIGHT OF DEFERRED PAYMENT.



   (A)   Deferrals granted hereunder shall terminate and the amount
deferred, together with accumulated interest, shall become due upon the
occurrence of any of the following events:



      (1)   The death of the owner, provided that the spouse is
otherwise not eligible for the benefits hereunder;



      (2)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property or
part thereof;



      (3)   If the property should for any reason lose its homestead
status; or



      (4)   If for any reason the taxing authority deferring the
payments shall determine that there would be no hardship to require immediate
or partial payment.



   (B)   At the time of the termination of the deferral, the Council
may, in its discretion, provide for payment of the deferred sum in
installment payments in accordance with the terms of the original assessment.



(Prior Code, § 22.04)



CHAPTER 34:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   34.01   Policy and purpose



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Establishment of emergency management organization



   34.04   Powers and duties of Director



   34.05   Local emergencies



   34.06   Emergency regulations



   34.07   Emergency management a government function



   34.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



   34.99   Penalty



§ 34.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters.



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters.



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions.



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an immediate and serious
impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has
resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for
which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation,
fire-fighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical,
evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public
utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the
foregoing functions.  Emergency management includes those activities
sometimes referred to as “civil defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state,
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 34.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.  The Director
shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time.  The Director shall serve with a salary
as established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary
expenses.  The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.



§ 34.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management.  The Director shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great
to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State
Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. 
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans
of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans
of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary
to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a
disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city's emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each department
or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 34.05  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order, or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Administrator.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting:  the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator. 
A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during
business hours.  Notice of the existence of these regulations and their
availability for inspection at the City Administrator's Office shall be
conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of
the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall
designate in the resolution.  By resolution, the Council may modify or
rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time.  If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first.  Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding
any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its
Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.  The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by
law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment
agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bids.



Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.  The provisions of this
section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to
receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 34.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than
official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 35:  FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES



Section



   35.01   Schedule of fees and service charges



   35.02   Valuation-based permit fee schedule



   35.03   Fees for development projects



   35.04   Sanitary sewer and Water Works user rates/charges



§ 35.01  SCHEDULE OF FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES.



   The following schedule of licenses, permits, and service fees and other
city charges is hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Forest
Lake, Minnesota as follows.



 

LICENSE, PERMIT, SERVICE OR OTHER CHARGE
 
FEE




ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE


Assessment Search
 
$25.00 each


Audio Disc/Copy of Public Meetings
 
$10.00 each


Faxes (send or receive)
 
$1.00 per page


Non-Sufficient Funds Check Fee
 
$25.00 each


Notary Fee
 
$1.00 per document


Photocopies
 
$0.25 per page


City Code
 
$25.00 per disc


ADMINISTRATION: LICENSES AND PERMITS


Adult-Oriented Business
 
$50.00 annual


Antenna Lease
 
Varies per lease


Background Check Fee
 
$25.00 per background


Billboard
 
$50.00 per new billboard


Carnival/Circus
 
$100.00 per event


Dog License
 
$10.00 per dog for the duration of rabies certification


Fertilizer/Pesticide Applicators
 
$50.00 annual


Gambling Licenses
 
$50.00 per application


Garbage/Rubbish Hauler
 
$50.00 annual


Massage Location
 
$50.00 annual


Massage Therapist
 
$50.00 annual


Outdoor Entertainment
 
$50.00 per event


Pawnbroker
 
$100.00 annual, $1.00 per billable transaction, bond


Peddlers
 
$200.00 per 7 day week


Group Peddler
 
$200.00


Solicitor
 
No charge


Transient Merchant
 
$200.00 per 7 day week


Taxi/Limousine
 
$25.00 per vehicle in fleet annual


Tobacco
 
$250.00 annual


Liquor
 
 


   Off Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   On Sale
 
$3,000.00 annual


   3.2% Beer On Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   3.2% Beer Off Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   Club
 
$300.00 annual


   Wine
 
$500.00


   Wine with Strong Beer Authorization
 
$700.00 (wine & 3.2% on sale combination)


   Investigation fee, In State Applicants
 
$500.00


   Investigation Fee, Out of State Applicants
 
Billed to Applicant, not to exceed $10,000.00


   Set Up
 
$100.00 annual


   Brewer Taproom On Sale
 
$500.00 annual


   Brewpub Off Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   Brewpub On Sale
 
$200.00 annual</ce>


   Brewery Off Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   Microdistillery Cocktail Room
 
$700.00 annual


   Microdistillery Off Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   Sunday On Sale
 
$200.00 annual


   Culinary Class
 
$100.00 annual


AIRPORT COMMISSION


Monthly Hangar Rent
 
 


   Hangar “E”
 
$125.00 per month


Hangar Lease Transfer
 
$200.00 per transaction


Non-Commercial Leased Land
 
$0.11 per square foot per year


 
 
$280.00 flat charge per unit


Commercial Use Leased Land
 
$0.165 per square foot per year


 
 
$280.00 flat charge per unit


The $280.00 rent increase is designed to fund the cost increase associated
with constructing and maintaining the paved runway. It is the goal of the
City Council to eliminate this rent increase in 2026, or earlier if airport
revenues are sufficient to pay the increased costs.


Tie Downs
 
 


   Monthly
 
$45.00 per month


   Daily
 
$2.00 per day


BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES AND LICENSES


BUILDING PERMIT FEE


Permit fee to be based on job cost valuation or a fixed fee as stated in this
schedule. The determination of value or valuation shall be made by the
building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and
plan review fees shall be the total of all construction work for which the
permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical,
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems
and any other permanent equipment.


Valuation-Based Permit Fee Schedule: See § 35.02


Fixed Fee Schedule for One and Two Family Dwellings


   Deck
 
$100.00


   Drain Tile
 
$75.00


   Fence Over 6 Feet in Height
 
$75.00


   Insulation
 
$50.00


   Siding (stucco, brick, and masonry valuation based with $100.00 minimum
 
$100.00


   Roof
 
$100.00


   Swimming Pool, Above Ground
 
$100.00


   Swimming Pool, Below Ground
 
$150.00


   Window and/or Door Replacement
 
$25.00 per window-door, $100.00 minimum


Demolition and Moving Structure from Site Permit Fee


   Base Fee: Parcels not connected to city utilities
 
$25.00


   Base Fee: Parcels connected to city utilities
 
$50.00


   Escrow Fee
 
$1.00 per sq. ft. along with signed Demolition Assessment Agreement or escrow
of 125% of the demolition costs


Manufactured Home Permit Fee (manufactured home park)


   New installation or replacement
 
$100.00


      (valuation based fee scheduled to be applied for manufactured
home installations outside of parks)
 
 


Moving Permit Fee


   Moving within or into the city (permit for moving only)
 
$50.00


Salon Compliance Inspection


   Building code compliance inspection when required for license
requirements
 
$55.00


BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT FEES


Plumbing Permit Fee*


   Residential
 
$50.00 plus $9.00 per fixture


   Commercial
 
$85.00 plus 2% of estimated job cost


Mechanical Permit Fee*


   Residential
 
$25.00 per piece of equipment ($50.00 minimum fee)


   Commercial
 
$75.00 plus 2% of estimated job cost


*A state surcharge of one-half mill (0.0005) of the fee or $1.00, whichever
is greater, is charged on all fixed fee permits as set by the State of
Minnesota


OTHER INSPECTIONS AND FEES


Inspections:


   Inspections - outside of normal business hours: $80.00 per hour, 2-hour
minimum


   Reinspections: $55.00 per hour, 1-hour minimum


Investigation Fee: Work Without A Permit


   Whenever any work for which a city permit is required has commenced
without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made
before a permit will be issued. An investigation fee, in addition to the
permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently
issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this schedule. The payment for such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all other provision of this code nor
from any penalty prescribed by law.


Plan Review Fee


   ∙   When a building permit is required and a plan is required to
be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid. Plan review fees for all
buildings shall be 65% of the building permit fee. The fee for similar plans
shall be 25% of the normal building permit fee as defined in M.S.B.C. § 1300.


   ∙   The plan review fees specified are separate fees from the
building permit fees specified and are in addition to the permit fees. Plan
review fees will be charged for any plan review even if a permit is not
issued.


   ∙   When submittal documents are incomplete or change so as to
require additional plan review, or when the project involves deferred
submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the above
rate.


   ∙   Expiration of plan review: Applications for which no permit is
issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by
limitation; plans and other documentation submitted for review may thereafter
be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The
building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a
period not exceeding 180 days upon request of the applicant with evidence
that circumstances beyond the applicant’s control have prevented required
action. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew
action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans
and pay a new plan review fee.


Refund Fee


   ∙   The building official may authorize refunding any fee paid
under this schedule that was erroneously paid or collected.


   ∙   The building official may authorize refunding not more than
80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under an issued permit.


   ∙   The building official shall not authorize refunding of the
plan review fee when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled
after a plan review has been completed.


   ∙   The building official shall not authorize refunding any fee
paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment.


Renewal Fee


   ∙   Permits renewed within 6 months after a permit has expired
shall be charged a permit renewal fee of $25.00.


   ∙   Permits not renewed within 6 months after a permit has expired
and work remains to be done shall be charged as required for a new permit.


Licenses


   Gas Installer License
 
$50.00 annual


   Excavator License
 
$50.00 annual


FIRE INSPECTIONS

Permit fee to be based on job cost valuation or a fixed fee as stated in this
schedule. The determination of value or valuation shall be made by the fire
official. The value to be used in computing the fire permit and fire plan
review shall be the total of all work for which the permit is issued.


REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION PERMITS


Fire Suppression:


   Permit, value based
 
See § 35.02


   Plan Review
 
65% of permit fee


Temporary Tent Canopy (as defined by State Fire Code)
 
$50.00 per tent or canopy


Construction Permits Required in IFC § 105.7
 
See § 35.02


REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS


Fire Code Inspection


   Initial Inspection and Follow-up Inspection
 
No Charge


   All subsequent re-inspections
 
$50.00 per hour - 1 hour minimum


   After hours inspections
 
$80.00 per hour - 2 hour minimum


   Inspections without assigned fee
 
$50.00 per hour - 1 hour minimum


   Open burning permit
 
No Charge


   Fireworks/pyrotechnic display
 
$250.00 per event ( American Legion 4th of July fee waived)


   Retail sale of fireworks
 
$350.00 per application


   Hazardous material (storage tank)
 
$4,150.00 per tank


   Permits required in IFC § 105.6
 
$100.00 per application


   Permit reinspection (upon request revoked permit holder)
 
$55.00 per hour - 1 hour minimum


   Double permit
 
2x normal fee


   Daycare inspection
 
$50.00 per inspection


OTHER INSPECTIONS AND FEES


Work Without A Permit

   Whenever any work for which a city permit is required has commenced
without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made
before a permit will be issued. An investigation fee, in addition to the
permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently
issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee
required by this code. The payment for such investigation fee shall not
exempt any persons from compliance with all other provisions of this code,
nor from any penalty prescribed by law.


Plan Review Fee


   ∙   When a fire permit is required and a plan is required to be
submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid. Plan review fee shall be 65% of
the fire permit fee.


   ∙   The plan review fees specified are separate fees from the
building permit fees specified and are in addition to the permit fees. Plan
review fees will be charged for any plan review even if a permit is not
issued.


   ∙   When submittal documents are incomplete or change so as to
require additional plan review, or when the project involves deferred
submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the above
rate.


Expiration of Plan Review


   ∙   Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days
following the date of application shall expire by limitation; plans and other
documentation submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the
applicant or destroyed by the fire official. The building official may extend
the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon
request of the applicant with evidence that circumstances beyond the
applicant’s control have prevented required action. No application shall be
extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after
expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.


Refund Fee


   ∙   The fire official may authorize refunding any fee paid under
this schedule that was erroneously paid or collected.


   ∙   The fire official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of
the permit fee paid when no work has been done under an issued permit.


   ∙   The fire official shall not authorize refunding of the plan
review fee when an application for a permit is withdrawn or cancelled after a
plan review has been completed.


   ∙   The fire official shall not authorize refunding any fee paid
except on written application filed by the original permittee no later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.


Renewal Fee


   ∙   Permits renewed within 6 month after a permit has expired
shall be charged a permit renewal fee of $25.00.


   ∙   Permits not renewed within 6 months after a permit has expired
and work remains incomplete shall be charged as required for a new permit.


PARKS


Farmers Market Booth Fees
 
 


   Commercial Products

      Seasonal Rate:

      Single night rate:
 
 

$75.00

$15.00


   Handmade Items and Farm Products

      Seasonal Rate:

      Single night rate:
 
 

$50.00

$10.00


Non-Profit / Art Exhibit (no sales)
 
No Charge


Park Electricity Use Fee
 
$25.00


Gazebo Rental
 
$150.00 per event


Park Shelter Reservation
 
$10.00 per hour


Athletic Field Rental
 
$15.00 per field per day


Ice Rink Rental
 
$15.00 per hour


Warming House Reservation (With Rink Attendant)
 
$10.00 per hour


PLANNING AND ZONING


Comprehensive Guide Plan Amendment Application Fee
 
$4,000.00


Conditional Use Permit (includes site plan review)
 
$1,000.00


Condition Use Permit Amendment
 
$500.00


Interim Use Permit
 
$1,000.00


Documents
 
 


   Comprehensive Guide Plan
 
Cost of production + tax


   Zoning Ordinance
 
Cost of production + tax


   Other Studies and Ordinances
 
Cost of production + tax


   Zoning Maps
 
 


      Color (8½ x 11)
 
$5.00 + tax


      Color (11 x 17)
 
$10.00 + tax


      Color (17 x 20)
 
$15.00 + tax


      Color (24 x 36)
 
$20.00 + tax


      Color (35 x 39)
 
$25.00 + tax


      GIS Map
 
$3.20 + tax


Environmental Assessment Worksheets
 
 


   Escrow Fee for City Consultant Services
 
$10,000.00


Certificate of Compliance
 
$50.00


Certificate of Compliance: Seasonal Sales
 
$250.00


Grading Permit
 
 


   50 - 100 cubic yards
 
$50.00


   More than 100 yards
 
$500.00


Planned Unit Development
 
 


   Concept Plan
 
$500.00


   Preliminary Plan
 
$1,500.00


      Plus per acre charge
 
$20.00 per acre


   Final Plan
 
$1,000.00


   PUD Amendment
 
$1,000.00


Rezoning
 
$1,000.00


Signs
 
 


   Valuation exceeding $2,000.00
 
See § 35.02


   Valuation under $2,000.00
 
$50.00


   Temporary Banner Permit
 
No Charge


Site Plan Review
 
 


   Site: Less than 1 acre
 
$500.00


   Site: 1 acre or more
 
$1,000.00


   Site Plan Amendment
 
$500.00


Subdivision
 
 


   Concept Plan
 
$500.00


   Preliminary Plat
 
$1,000.00


      Residential
 
Add $10.00 per residential unit


      Commercial/Industrial
 
Add $50.00 per unit


   Final Plat
 
$500.00


   Minor
 
$500.00


   Administrative - lot line adjustment
 
$250.00


   Other Subdivision (waiver of subdivision per state statute)
 
$250.00


   Lot Combination
 
$250.00


Vacation of ROW Easement
 
$250.00


Variance
 
$500.00


Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment
 
$1,000.00


Single Family Landscape Escrow (paid at time of building permit)
 
$1,000.00 per unit


Single Family Erosion Control Escrow (paid at time of building permit)
 
$1,000.00 per unit


Park Dedication Fee per housing unit/residential
 
$2,500.00


Park Dedication Fee - commercial
 
$2,500.00 per acre or $50.00 per sq. ft.


Tree Mitigation Fee
 
$75.00 per caliper inch


Development Fees
 
See § 35.03


City Staff and Consultant Billing


   For applications that include excessive staff time, services performed
by city personnel will be billed at 2.5 times the actual payroll hourly rate.
Services provided by city consultants will be billed at the current
consultant rates. All recording fees will be billed at the current rate.


POLICE DEPARTMENT


Audio Tape
 
$10.00


Background Check
 
$25.00


Fingerprinting
 
$20.00


Lock-Out (opening locked vehicle)
 
$25.00


Parking Ticket (violation on city street 2:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.)
 
$35.00


Municipal Parking Lot Violation
 
$35.00


Copies of Photos
 
$0.25 per page


Police Reports
 
$0.25 per page


PUBLIC WORKS FEES


Equipment - Per hour charge (does not include operator)


   Jetter/Vacuumed Truck
 
$200.00


   924G Cat Loader
 
$85.00


   143H Cat Road Grader
 
$85.00


   Street Sweeper
 
$65.00


   5-foot Snow Blower
 
$65.00


   8-foot Snow Blower
 
$150.00


   Bucket Truck
 
$50.00


   Tandem-axle Truck
 
$45.00


   Tractor Loader Backhoe
 
$65.00


   8-foot Ditch Mower
 
$45.00


   60-inch Boom Mower
 
$50.00


   21-foot Wing Mower
 
$45.00


   Skid Loader
 
$50.00


   Compact Tractor
 
$45.00


   12-foot Wing Mower
 
$35.00


   Air Compressor
 
$45.00


   1-ton Dump Truck
 
$35.00


   Pick-up Truck
 
$35.00


   Front-Mount Mower
 
$35.00


   Equipment Trailer
 
$25.00


   Brush Chipper
 
$25.00


   Paint Stripper
 
$22.00


   Asphalt Roller
 
$35.00


   Asphalt Saw
 
$25.00


   Plate Compactor
 
$25.00


   21-inch Push Mower
 
$9.00


   Weed Whip
 
$5.00


   3-inch Water Pump
 
$24.00


Streets and Signs
 
 


   Street Name, per Blade
 
$61.86


   6-foot Extension Post
 
$21.00


   7-foot Extension Post
 
$26.00


   12-foot 2-inch Round Post
 
$39.00


   Stop Sign 30" x 30"
 
$30.12


   Yield Sign 36" x 36"
 
$44.56


   Regulatory 18" x 24"
 
$31.42


   Regulatory 24" x 30"
 
$49.05


   Regulatory 12" x 18"
 
$19.27


   Regulatory 18" x 18"
 
$25.94


   Regulatory 24" x 24"
 
$41.39


   Regulatory 30" x 30"
 
$55.96


   Regulatory 36" x 36"
 
$95.08


   Warning 30" x 30"
 
$80.45


   Warning 36" x 36"
 
$103.13


   Sign Bracket Cross Pieces
 
$15.47


   Driveway Escrow
 
$2,500.00


Swing-Away Mailbox and Post (Installed)
 
$135.00


Street Equipment Operator
 
$56.50 per hour


Public Works Inspector
 
$56.50 per hour


Utilities
 
 


   Meter Disconnection
 
$50.00


   Meter Reconnection
 
$50.00


   Water Turn On
 
$50.00


   Water Turn Off
 
$50.00


   Water Shutoff Locating (no fee if turn on/off performed)
 
$50.00


   Water Emergency Turn Off
 
$163.00


   Water Emergency Turn On
 
$163.00


   Water Meter Accuracy Check
 
$125.00 [over 1- inch = consulting fee + 25%]


   Water Meter Installation
 
$50.00 [over 1- inch plumber installed]


   Water and Sewer Inspection (residential)
 
$50.00


   Storm Water Utility
 
$40.00 per REF per year/billed annually


   Water User Fees
 
See § 35.04


   Sewer User Fees
 
See § 35.04


   Metropolitan Council SAC Fee
 
See § 35.03


   Street Opening Excavator’s License
 
$50.00 annual


   Street Opening Permit
 
$50.00


   Street Opening Deposit
 
$3,500.00


   Meters:
 
 


      ¾-inch (includes reader)
 
$272.59


      1-inch (includes reader)
 
$434.13


      2-inch Compound (includes flanges and reader)
 
$2,636.59


      3-inch Compound (includes flanges and reader)
 
$3,725.67


      4-inch Compound (includes flanges and reader)
 
$5,003.49


   Horns:
 
 


      ¾-inch (includes UFR and 2 swivels)
 
$256.18


      1-inch (includes 2 swivels)
 
$180.34


   Corp Valve 1-inch
 
$74.16


   Curb Stops 1-inch
 
$121.58


   1¼-inch curb box with rod
 
$69.52


   Lockable Valve Box
 
$76.55


   Locking Valve Box Lid (replacement)
 
$28.86


   Utility Operator Charge
 
$56.50 per hour


   Hydrant Meter Deposit
 
 


      2½-inch meter rental
 
$1,050.00


   Hydrant Water Rental and Usage Fee
 
 


      2 ½, ¾ meter rental
 
$114.00 (includes use of meter and 5,000 gallons of water)


      Usage per 1,000 gallons
 
$4.00


   Fill Station
 
$3.00 per 1,000 gallons


   Sewer/water capping/on-site septic abandonment/well seal
 
$500.00 escrow


   Late Payment Charge
 
3%


   Non-compliant Sump Pump Charge
 
$100.00 per month


All prices are subject to change as they are based on manufacture cost plus
sales tax.


Some data requests may fall under the Minnesota Data Practices Act, M.S. Ch.
13, and may have different fees applied.


RIGHT-OF-WAY


Excavation Permit
 
$300 plus $2,500 cash escrow


Minor Excavation Permit
 
$100 per permit/$500 per year


Small Wireless Facility Permit
 
$100




 



(Ord. 555, passed 9-11-2006; Am. Ord. 593, passed 1-11-2010; Am. Ord. 615,
passed 4-9-2012; Am. Ord. 617, passed 7-9-2012; Am. Ord. 625, passed
2-11-2013; Am. Ord. 653, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 654, passed 3-28-2016;
Am. Ord. 657, passed 6-27-2016; Am. Ord. 661, passed 11-14-2016; Am. Ord.
672, passed 12-4-2017; Am. Ord. 680, passed 10-8-2018)



§ 35.02  VALUATION-BASED PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.



 

Total Valuation
 
Fee




$1.00 to $500.00
 
$25.00


$501.00 to $2,000.00
 
$25.00 for the first $500.00 + $3.25 for each additional $100.00, or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000.00


$2,001.00 to $25,000.00
 
$73.75 for the first $2,000.00 + $14.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00


$25,001.00 to $50,000.00
 
$413.00 for the first $50,000.00 + $10.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00


$50,001.00 to $100,000.00
 
$681.75 for the first $50,000.00 + $7.50 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00


$100,001.00 to $500,000.00
 
$1,056.75 for the first $100,000.00 + $6.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00


$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00
 
$3,456.75 for the first $500,000.00 + $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00


$1,000,001.00 and up   
 
$5,956.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 + $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof


Note: A state surcharge is added to all valuation-based fees equaling the
following:

(1)   If the valuation of the structure, addition, or alteration is
$1,000,000 or less, the surcharge is equivalent to one-half mill (0.0005) of
the valuation of the structure, addition, or alteration;

(2)   If the valuation is greater than $1,000,000, the surcharge is $500
plus two-fifths mill (0.0004) of the value between $1,000,000 and $2,000,000;

(3)   If the valuation is greater than $2,000,000, the surcharge is $900
plus three-tenths mill (0.0003) of the value between $2,000,000 and
$3,000,000;

(4)   If the valuation is greater than $3,000,000, the surcharge is $1,200
plus one-fifth mill (0.0002) of the value between $3,000,000 and $4,000,000;

(5)   If the valuation is greater than $4,000,000, the surcharge is $1,400
plus one-tenth mill (0.0001) of the value between $4,000,000 and $5,000,000;
and

(6)   If the valuation exceeds $5,000,000, the surcharge is $1,500 plus
one-twentieth mill (0.00005) of the value that exceeds $5,000,000.   




 



(Ord. 625, passed 2-11-2013; Am. Ord. 653, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 661,
passed 11-14- 2016)



§ 35.03  FEES FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



 

Development Project
 
Fee




Project Design Letter of Credit
 
15-20% of construction cost (determined by City Engineer)


Public/Private Improvement Costs Letter of Credit
 
100% of construction costs


Landscaping Letter of Credit
 
125% of approved landscaping costs


Sealcoat Escrow
 
$0.25/SF of public road


Water System Area Charges
 
$4,585.00 per acre (pay at time of signing Development Agreement)


Sanitary Sewer Area Charges
 
$3,150.00 per acre (pay at time of signing Development Agreement)


Metropolitan Council SAC Fee
 
$2,485 per SAC unit or as set by Metropolitan Council (pay at time of
Building Permit)


City WAC Fee   
 
$1,800.00 per unit (pay at time of Building Permit)


City Core Sewer Core Fee
 
$1,800.00 per unit (pay at time of Building Permit)


Parkland Dedication Fee
 
 


   Residential zoned areas
 
$2,500.00 per residential unit


   Comm ercial/Industri al zoned areas
 
$2,500.00 base fee and $2,500.00 per acre


Other fees or costs may be required as part of the Development Agreement for
special public improvement needs associated with the project, such as
existing street improvements, traffic signals, drainage and the like.


All plans for public improvement projects, including private streets projects
with public utilities, may be prepared by a qualified engineer as stipulated
by a Zoning code amendment adopted by the city. Construction is to be funded
privately by the project developer. Financial guarantees in the form of a
Letter of Credit for Engineering and construction costs is to be posted with
the city prior to the start of construction.




 



(Ord. 625, passed 2-11-2013; Am. Ord. 653, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 661,
passed 11-14- 2016)



§ 35.04  SANITARY SEWER AND WATER WORKS USER RATES/CHARGES.



   WATER RATE SCHEDULE



 


Service Meter Size (Inches)

 

Minimum Units Per Quarter

 

Cost per Unit

 

Fixed Charge Quarterly Bill

 

Water Above Units/
Quarter

 

Fall/
Winter Quarter Cost/Unit

 

Spring/
Summer
Quarter
Cost/Unit

 

Water Above Units/
Quarter

 

Fall/
Winter Quarter Cost/Unit

 

Spring/
Summer Quarter Cost/Unit






¾

 

5

 

$4.70

 

$23.50

 

5

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

15

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




1

 

10

 

$4.53

 

$45.30

 

10

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

30

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




1½

 

22

 

$4.53

 

$99.66

 

22

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

66

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




2

 

40

 

$4.53

 

$181.20

 

40

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

120

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




3

 

90

 

$4.53

 

$407.70

 

90

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

270

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




4

 

160

 

$4.53

 

$724.80

 

160

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

480

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




6

 

320

 

$4.53

 

$1,449.60

 

320

 

$3.34

 

$3.67

 

960

 

$3.50

 

$4.79




Lead testing: $1.59 per quarter





 



   SEWER RATE SCHEDULE



 


Meter Size (Inches)

 

Minimum Units per Quarter

 

Cost per Unit

 

Minimum Quarterly Bill

 

Sewer Above Units

 

Cost per Unit Above Minimum*




¾

 

5

 

$11.68

 

$55.40

 

5

 

$6.08




1 and large r

 

5

 

$11.68

 

$55.40

 

5

 

$6.08



* Maximum of $96.42 for residential per quarter.

* Sewer charge based on winter quarter water use on residential accounts.

* The sewer flat rate charge for unmetered residential or other accounts
shall be $96.42 per quarter, multiplied by the number of SAC units.



 



   SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT CHARGE



$40.00 annually per resident



(Ord. 625, passed 2-11-2013; Am. Ord. 653, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 661,
passed 11-14-2016)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND WASTE MATERIALS



      51.   WATER SERVICES



      52.   SEWER SERVICE



      53.   STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM



CHAPTER 50:  COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND WASTE MATERIALS



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   General regulations



   50.03   Method of collection



   50.04   Billing for collection



   50.05   Licensed collector



 



   50.98   Violations



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COLLECTOR. Any person, corporation or other entity engaged in the
business of collecting refuse, recyclables or demolition and construction
waste.



   COMPOST. Organic matter such as leaves, grass, clippings, lake weeds,
and other biodegradable material which under proper conditions will convert
to a soil like substance used for fertilizer and a soil conditioner.



   GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food and
decayed and spoiled food from any source.



   RECYCLABLES. Materials that are separated from refuse for the purpose
of recycling, including plastic, paper, glass, metals, automobile oil and
batteries.



   REFUSE. Includes garbage and rubbish.



   RUBBISH. All inorganic solid waste such as ashes, sweepings and other
non-reusable waste.



(Ord. 589, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 50.02  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Refuse in streets and the like. No person shall place any
refuse in any street, alley or public place or upon any private property
except in proper containers for collection. No person shall throw or deposit
refuse in any lake, stream or other body of water or in such manner as to
cause litter or contamination of the environment.



   (B)   Disposal of refuse. No person shall bury any refuse in the
city, except in an approved and licensed sanitary landfill.



   (C)   Compost. A person may place upon private property for
collection or compost leaves, grass clippings, lake weeds, and easily
biodegradable organic material.



      (1)   Compost for collection. No person shall combine clean
grass clippings and/or leaves for disposal into the refuse. Grass clippings
and leaves shall be placed in approved containers for separate collection or
composting.



      (2)   Compost on private property. Compost containing garbage
may be composted only in a rodent-proof structure or in an otherwise sanitary
manner.



   (D)   Disposal required. Every household or occupant or owner of any
residence and owner of any commercial or industrial establishment shall, in a
sanitary manner, place in a proper container or otherwise dispose of refuse
that may accumulate upon the owner's or occupant's property.



(Ord. 589, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 50.03  METHOD OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   Exclusive collection in certain residential areas.



      (1)   The city may, by negotiated written contract or bid,
provide exclusive collection of refuse and recyclables for dwellings
containing not more than 4 dwelling units.



      (2)   Container size, description and placement of containers
for collection, specific zones within the city for collection, frequency and
specific day certain of collection within zones, and other collection
specifics, including costs to be billed for collection, may be prescribed by
and incorporated into the negotiated contract or bid and may be subject to
change from time to time.



   (B)   Collection in other areas. Except as authorized by the city's
contract, pursuant to division (A) of this section, no owner or occupant of a
premises greater than 4 units, or commercial, industrial or office
establishment shall permit refuse or recyclables to be collected from the
premises by an unlicensed collector.



(Ord. 589, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 50.04  BILLING FOR COLLECTION.



   Billing for collection by licensed collectors of all residential
dwellings, multiple residential units or commercial, industrial or office
establishments shall be the responsibility of the collector, and the amount
due shall be payable directly to the licensed collector.



(Ord. 589, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 50.05  LICENSED COLLECTOR.



   (A)   License required. No person, corporation or other entity shall
engage in the business of collecting refuse, recyclables or demolition and
construction waste within the City of Forest Lake without obtaining a
business license as provided by this section.



   (B)   Application. Any person, corporation or other entity desiring
to be licensed as a collector shall make application to the city on a
prescribed form setting forth:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   A description of each piece of equipment proposed to be
used in the collection;



      (3)   The proposed charges to be made of those who use the
service;



      (4)   A description of the kind of service proposed to be
rendered and the frequency of the collection;



      (5)   The place to which the refuse is to be hauled;



      (6)   The manner in which the refuse is to be hauled;



      (7)   A description of each type of container that will be
used to receive and contain refuse that may accumulate between collections.



   (C)   Insurance. No license shall be issued until the applicant
files with the city a current policy of public liability insurance covering
vehicles to be used by the applicant in the licensed business. The limits of
the insurance shall be not less than $500,000 against liability for bodily
injuries or death for each person; not less than $1,500,000 against liability
for bodily injuries or death to more than 1 person from 1 accident and not
less than $500,000 against liability for damage or destruction of property.



   (D)   Fee.  The annual fee for a license shall be in an amount
established by duly adopted ordinance.



(Ord. 589, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 50.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to law.



(Ord. 589, passed 12-14-2009)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER SERVICES



Section



   51.01   Water Works Superintendent



   51.02   Application for installation of service connections



   51.03   Installation



   51.04   Plumbers rules applying to water services



   51.05   Meters



   51.06   Charges for water connection and usage



   51.07   Water service billing and collection of charges



   51.08   Refusal of water service



   51.09   Interference with hydrants



   51.10   Water for lawn sprinkling



   51.11   Shut off of water



   51.12   City inspectors



   51.98   Violations



§ 51.01  WATER WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   There is created and established within the city the office of
Water Works Superintendent, such office to be filled by the chief operator of
the Water Department as so designated by the City Council.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Water Works
Superintendent to assume general supervisory control over the water works
system of the city; to carry out the provisions of this section and of all
other laws hereafter enacted by the Council relating to the water works; to
operate and repair the system and to keep the same in good working order at
all times; to maintain such daily and monthly records as may be deemed
necessary by the Council or Clerk; provided, however, the Superintendent
shall be and remain at all times under the immediate direction and control of
the Council, the Clerk and administrative assistant, and subject to
assignment to duties other than those herein expressly provided.



      (2)   Whenever mentioned in this section, the word
“Superintendent” shall mean and refer to Water Works Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subds. 1, 2)



§ 51.02  APPLICATION FOR INSTALLATION OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Property owners desiring service connection made to their
premises must file an application with the Clerk’s office on blanks
provided for this purpose. The application must be accompanied by a payment
for the total cost of the service from the main to the curb stop, the cost to
include the cost of a water meter, and the costs to be according to the
schedule hereinafter set forth. If it appears to the Superintendent that the
application is in due form and that the purpose for which service connection
is desired is consistent with a proper use of the water works system, he or
she will then cause the connection from main to curb box to be installed by
the person or persons duly authorized by the Council to do the work or shall
make the connection himself or herself.



   (B)   The application must state the purpose for which the water is
to be used, together with the proper description and location of the property
and must be signed by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent. The
application must state distinctly the point on the property line where the
service is to enter the premises. No service shall be installed under
concrete walks, steps or other permanent structures, either existing or
contemplated, between the property line and the buildings to be supplied.
Every person making application as herein provided shall be deemed to have
entered into a contract with the city. This section and all amendments
thereto shall be considered a part of the contract and every person accepting
and receiving water from the city shall be deemed to have expressed his or
her consent to be bound thereby. Whenever any of the rules or regulations are
violated, the water shall be turned off from the place of the violation, even
though 2 or more parties are receiving water through the same pipe and shall
not again be turned on except by order of the Superintendent and the payment
of costs hereinafter set forth for turning water off and on.



   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount
established by Council resolution payable to the city, which fee shall not be
refundable if the application is denied.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 3) 



§ 51.03  INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The cost incident to the introduction of water services to any
premises shall be a charge against the applicant therefore. The installation
is to be done under the supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance
with the rules and regulations herein set forth and as may be amended.



   (B)   The city is to furnish the corporation valve, curb cock, curb
box, and necessary piping, all completely installed from the main to the curb
box, for which a charge will be made according to the schedule hereinafter
set forth. Perch connection from the main to the curb box shall remain the
property of the city and shall not be operated without authority from the
Superintendent. The service connection from the curb box to any premises must
be installed by the consumer, owner, or occupant subject to the rules in this
section provided. All water meter charges must be paid in full prior to the
water turn on by the city and all water meters must be fully installed and
operational 30 days after turn on of water service by the city.



   (C)   Excavation for water service connection or repairs shall be
done in such a manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the public.
The trench shall be properly guarded at all times and during the night.
Warning lights shall be maintained at any excavations lying within the street
lines.



   (D)   Refilling the opening after service pipes are laid shall be
carefully done. The earth must be laid in layers of not more than 12 inches
(1 foot) in depth, each layer compacted to prevent settling. This and the
replacing of sidewalks and other public structures must be done so as to
leave the street in as good condition as before it was disturbed. Opening the
streets or tapping the mains when the ground is frozen may be prohibited by
the Superintendent.



   (E)   Tapping the mains will be done only by such person or persons
who are expressly authorized by the Superintendent to do the work, or it
shall be done by the Superintendent or other city employees, under the
supervision of the Superintendent. Mains shall be tapped at a 45 degree angle
from the horizontal and not in any case at or within 12 inches back or 30
inches ahead of a hub or another tap.



   (F)   Curb boxes shall be set as nearly in line with the property
line as possible, and the top of the box shall level with the ground surface
unless the Superintendent specifies otherwise. Where there is a continuous
concrete surface between the building and the curb, then the box shall be set
6 inches inside of the curb.  If the box is situated in or under any
permanent hard surface, a lockable cover must be installed over the box.  If
a curb box set at grade is extended more than three-quarters of an existing
extension, an additional extension must be provided to prevent the initial
extension from being disconnected from the corp valve



   (G)   Every separate building supplied with water must have its own
service connection directly with the mains, except that double houses under
the same roof may be supplied with one service. Two or more adjacent
buildings owned by the same person may be supplied with the same connection
provided that the single ownership continues and that the owner agrees to pay
for all water consumed on the entire premises. Upon termination of the single
ownership, a separate connection shall be made immediately to the building or
premises theretofore having the indirect connection, provided that in case
there is no water main on any street on which the premises abut, the Council
may permit the connection to remain until the water main is laid in the
abutting street.



   (H)   (1)   New water connections shall be constructed of
materials as specified by city engineering standards.



      (2)   Water service connections must be laid 7-1/2 feet below
the finished grade of the ground or street surface.  If it necessary to lay
the connection at less than 7-1/2 feet below the finished grade, 2 inches of
insulation must be provided for each foot by which the depth of installation
is decreased.  Before the trench is backfilled, the complete service
connection line is to be tested in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing
Code. Unused water service connections are required to be cut off at the main
when property is redeveloped and at the time the new service connection is
installed.



   (I)   Every service shall be metered and only meters/metering
systems furnished by the city shall be installed. Metering systems shall
consist of a water meter, a radio read device and a connecting cable.
Seasonal cottages may be exempted from this provision in the discretion of
the Clerk. However, at the time that any seasonal cottage is remodeled into a
year-round dwelling, a meter/metering system shall be installed at the
owner’s expense. In cases where services exist that are not metered, the
owner of the services must install a meter within 30 days after receiving
notification from the Superintendent or the Clerk and pay for the meter
according to rates established in this chapter. If the owner fails to install
the meter, the city may order one installed and charge the cost against the
water bill of the premises served. If the owner does not pay for the
installation, the amount shall be certified to the County Auditor as in the
case of delinquent water bills. If the person refuses entry to his or her
premises for purposes of installing the meter, the Clerk may discontinue
water service to the premises.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 4)



§ 51.04  PLUMBERS RULES APPLYING TO WATER SERVICES.



   (A)   All work done by any person on the pipes, fixtures or
appurtenances of the water works system must be done in accordance with the
rules and regulations prescribed by law governing the work.



   (B)   No person or plumber, except an authorized city employee,
shall turn on or turn off the water supply at any corporation valve at curb
or main, nor allow any person in his or her employ to do so, except when
expressly authorized by the Superintendent.



   (C)   Two or more services must not be connected together. No
connection shall be made at any time between the fire service pipe system and
the regular water supply unless the water meter is within 6 feet of the
entrance of the sprinkler pipe to the interior of the building. There shall
be no connection whereby unsafe water can be drawn into the city water system
unless an air gap or an acceptable and approved backflow preventer is
provided at the connection point.



   (D)   Services must enter the front of the building whenever
possible or practicable. Where there is no basement the meter shall be of the
remote reading type, will have provisions made to prevent it from freezing,
and shall be paid for as prescribed in these regulations. No meter shall be
placed in any location where it will be subject to becoming submersed in
water. Where the installations exist, the owner shall be liable to have the
meter location changed to a location where it will not be subject to
submersion and will be easily accessible for reading and maintenance. Where
the meters require replacement or rebuilding because of the submersion, the
cost will be paid by the water user or the property owner. If the user or
owner refuses to pay the costs, the costs will be added to the water bill for
collection in the usual manner and, when delinquent, shall be certified to
the County Auditor.



   (E)   Meters and remote meter reading receptacles must be easily
accessible at all times so that they may be examined and meter readings
obtained by city staff. Meters must not be exposed to danger from frost or
contamination. Meters damaged due to freezing shall be repaired or replaced
at the expense of the consumer or property owner. Any meter improperly
installed shall be relocated at the expense of the property owner.



   (F)   No plumber or other person shall make an attachment to a
service connection, nor extend any service connection without prior approval
from the city. No lateral pipe branches will be allowed to be connected to
the service except on the house side of the meter; service pipes must not be
smaller than 5/8" up to the first kitchen sink. Branches for lawn sprinklers
must be at least 3/4" in diameter with separate shutoff and drip.



   (G)   All corporation valves on the service or branches underground
up to 1" inclusive shall be ball valve and waste cocks with solid core and
socket heads of heavy pattern and shall be made of hard brass, red metal.
Valves of 2" and larger sizes shall be straightway gate valves. The first
valve on the house side of the meter must be provided with a waste for
draining.



   (H)   No bibs are allowed to be used. Stop cocks are not allowed to
be used as a house shut-off valve on the house side of the meter.



   (I)   Approved backflow preventers must be installed on all
connections to steam plants used for the generation of power. A swing back
flow preventer of a size not less than the service pipe must be installed
near the meter on the house side of the meter on all connections to furnace
coils or any other kind of plant for the purposes of heating water for
domestic purposes, for heating buildings or dwellings where there is no
expansion tank. A brass body compression disc and safety valve of a size not
less than 3/4" must also be installed on the service.



   (J)   For violation of any of the foregoing rules relating to
plumbers, or for the introduction either voluntary or at the request of any
consumer of any pipe or fixture not in compliance herewith, the plumber shall
be liable on his or her bond for any damages which the city or any individual
may sustain by reason thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 5)



§ 51.05  METERS.



   (A)   The supply of water through each separate service must be
recorded by 1 meter only. If additional meters are desired for recording the
subdivision of the water supply on the premises, they must be furnished and
set by the owner or consumer at his or her own expense and he or she must
assume all responsibility for maintaining the same. A meter must be installed
on all services laid.



   (B)   Meters must be at all times easily accessible so that they may
be examined and read by city employees. A 24-inch by 24-inch area shall be
provided for the meter location.  They must not be exposed to danger from
frost or submersion and all damages to the meter by freezing, hot water, or
otherwise due to the carelessness or neglect of the owners or occupants of
the premises must be paid for by the owner or occupants. The cost of ordinary
maintenance and repairs will be borne by the city. In case of breakage,
stoppage or other irregularity in the meter, the owner or consumer is to
notify the Superintendent immediately. City employees shall at all reasonable
times have access to premises for reading meters or inspecting plumbing. 
Meters shall not be installed in crawl spaces.



   (C)   The city may test the water meter at any time to determine
meter accuracy. The meter shall be tested at 3 rates of flow; maximum,
intermediate and minimum as defined by the American Water Works Association
(AWWA) standard for testing cold water meters, C705-60 or latest revision
thereof.



   (D)   The city may replace existing water meters with meter reading
systems when deemed advisable to do so. Remote meter reading receptacles
shall be located on the exterior front one half of the building as directed
by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 6)



§ 51.06  CHARGES FOR WATER CONNECTION AND USAGE.



   (A)   (1)   Before a permit is issued allowing the initial water
connection to a water line or main of the city a water connection charge of
$1,313 for each equivalent residential unit must be paid to reimburse the
city for expenses incurred in the past and to be incurred in the future for
making water supply, treatment and storage facilities available. The number
of equivalent residential units for each water service connection shall be
determined as follows.



 


Meter Size - Inches

 
Equivalent Residential Units




3/4
 
1


1
 
2


1-1/2
 
4


2
 
16


3
 
18


4
 
32


6
 
72


8
 
128




 



      (2)   The assessed costs for water main and/or water service
connection installation shall be paid in addition to the water connection
charge and these costs shall be determined based upon cost of improvements
installed and as determined by the city. Parcels of land not previously
assessed for permanent water mains and desiring a water connection shall be
granted permission to connect to the water system after payment to the city
of an amount equal to the sum of $25 per front foot of land served by the
water main adjusted for inflation and $1,313 for each equivalent residential
unit served by the water connection adjusted for inflation. The amounts
herein stated are established as the base amounts as of January 1, 2003.
These amounts shall be adjusted for inflation by use of the Construction Cost
Index published monthly in the Engineering News-Record (ENR). The adjusted
amounts at the time of connection shall be determined by multiplying the base
amounts by the ENR Construction Cost Index at the time of connection, then
dividing by the ENR Construction Cost Index for January, 2003.



   Adjusted Amount =



   Base Amount x ENR Index at Time of Connection



              ENR Index for January, 2003



   (B)   In addition to the above water connection charge, the city
will charge all users for actual work in connection with service connections
from the water main to and including the curb box and also including the
furnishing of one meter. All water meters and all work done by the city in
connection with the installation of water meters shall be charged to the user
at the city cost plus 25% to cover administrative expenses. All meter and
material charges, as well as an estimate of the city labor charge, if
applicable, shall be paid before the service connection is begun.



   (C)   All water meters shall remain the property of the city.



   (D)   A charge of $50 shall be made for turning water off and a
charge of $50 shall be made for turning water on. For failure to comply with
city policy regarding water restrictions, the city shall charge a $100 turn
on fee to reinstate water service after termination of the customer’s water
service for violation of city policy.



   (E)   (1)   Rates for water consumed.



         (a)   For water consumed the rates shall include a fixed
charge based upon the size of meter required to furnish water to the property
and consumption rate for all water supplied through the meter in accordance
with the schedule established from time to time by duly adopted resolution of
the City Council.



         (b)   The fixed charge shall be continued as long as the
meter remains on the property or until service is ordered off by the owner.
Upon request of the owner or authorized agent, the water meter will be
removed. After service has been shut off, it shall not be reestablished until
the owner or authorized agent has resubmitted an application for service,
paid an application fee of $50, and, if the meter has been removed, paid to
install the meter or metering system. For meters not exceeding 1 inch the
meter installation charge shall be $50. For each meter 1-1/2 inches or
larger, the actual cost of installation, but not less than $50, shall be
charged.



      (2)   Charges for hydrant rental. A security deposit will be
paid for the use of a city hydrant and meter. In addition to the security
deposit, a consumption charge will also be made for all water used according
to the regular consumption charge. Any breakage or damage to the hydrant
shall also be paid by the permittee.



   (F)   New developments with public utilities. There is imposed on
each new development with public utilities a trunk area water system charge
of $4,450 per net developable acre defined as the gross area of the
development less delineated wetlands and state or county right-of-way. The
trunk area water system charge is payable to the city upon execution of a
final plat for the development.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 7)  (Ord. 469, passed 11-11-1995;  Am. Ord.
492, passed 5-24-1999;  Am. Ord. 520, passed - -2003)



§ 51.07  WATER SERVICE BILLING AND COLLECTION OF CHARGES.



   (A)   A statement of charges shall be rendered quarterly in January,
April, July and October of each year. A penalty of 3% of the balance of each
account remaining unpaid 30 days after the billing date shall be added to the
account. Each year at the September meeting of the City Council, the Clerk
shall submit a full report of water accounts that are delinquent. The Council
shall then determine in each case to authorize the necessary proceedings to
collect the same by certifying the delinquent amount and penalty to the
County Auditor for collection along with real estate taxes, or by other
methods, with costs and interest, as the Council may see fit. The Clerk may
authorize discontinuance of water service to any lot or parcel of land for
which a statement of charges has not been paid within 30 days after the
billing date.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pay
for all connection charges and water furnished to each property. The property
owner shall be billed for water used in any rental units; however, the Clerk
may, in his or her discretion, bill the occupant of commercial rental
property, if requested to do so. The billing to an occupant shall not,
however, relieve the property owner from the obligation of paying charges
incurred under this chapter.



   (C)   In order to partially reimburse the city for expenses incurred
in connection with certification of delinquent water and sewer accounts to
the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes a charge of $10 for
each $100 of delinquency or fraction thereof shall be added to the delinquent
accounts at such time as they are certified to the County Auditor. From and
after the time the accounts are certified for collection to the County
Auditor they shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of
the certification to the date of payment.



(Prior Code, §18.02, Subd. 8)  (Ord. 469, passed 11-11-1995;  Am. Ord.
492, passed 5-24-1999)



§ 51.08  REFUSAL OF WATER SERVICE.



   The city reserves the right to refuse water service to any person, firm
or corporation if, in the opinion of the City Council, use of the water
system or the resultant sewage effluent from any premises shall in any way
damage or overburden municipal water and sewer facilities.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 9(a))



§ 51.09  INTERFERENCE WITH HYDRANTS.



   No person shall without authority use or interfere with any fire or
street sprinkling hydrant. The city may permit water to be used temporarily
from any fire hydrant in localities where no other supply can be obtained.
The permission will not be granted unless written application and deposit is
made in accordance with the rules, regulations and rates regarding hydrant
use.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 9(b))



§ 51.10  WATER FOR LAWN SPRINKLING.



   The use of water for lawn sprinkling shall be subject to any conditions
that the City Council may impose but shall include the following:



   (A)   Lawn sprinkling is limited to allow only customers with house
numbers ending in an odd number to sprinkle on odd-numbered calendar days and
to allow only customers with house numbers ending in an even number to
sprinkle on the even-numbered calendar days. Sprinkling may occur only
between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. and between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 11:00 p.m.



   (B)   When peak day water consumption exceeds twice the daily
average water consumption or when an emergency exists which limits the
city’s ability to supply city water needs, the City Administrator shall
forbid the use of water for lawn sprinkling and the restrictions shall remain
in force until removed by the City Administrator;



   (C)   No consumer shall allow water to waste through any fixture and
the City Administrator is authorized to prevent any and all wastage of water
and may turn off the water to any customer if the action is required and
proper;



   (D)   The use of water from the city water system for any
non-conserving air conditioning system shall not be permitted.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 9(c)) (Am. Ord. 566, 6-11-2007)



§ 51.11  SHUT OFF OF WATER.



   (A)   The Council reserves the right at any time to shut off the
water for the purposes of extending, replacing, repairing or cleaning the
mains or appurtenances and the City Council shall not be liable for any
damages arising therefrom. No claim shall be made against the city by reason
of the breaking of any service pipe or connection.



   (B)   For a violation of the rules and for non-payment of any of the
charges herein enumerated, the city reserves the right to shut off the water
upon 10 days mailed notice. After the water has been shut off on account of
non-payment of charges or violations of rules, it will not be turned on again
until all charges, penalties and fines are paid, together with the expense of
shutting off and turning on the water, and no water shall be furnished to any
person who is indebted to the city. Charges shall be deemed unpaid and
subject to water shut-off if the account remains unpaid after 30 days from
the mailing date of the last water bill.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 9(d) and (e))



§ 51.12  CITY INSPECTORS.



   Inspectors from the city shall, in accordance with § 10.20, have free
access at all reasonable hours to all parts of every building served by city
water for the purpose of reading, inspecting, removing, testing or replacing
meters, remote meter reading receptacles or connecting cables, examining
water fixtures and observing the manner in which water is used.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 9(g))



§ 51.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to wilfully and without authority injure
or remove any property under the control of the Water Superintendent, or
interfere in any way with the operation, construction or repairing of the
water system or operate any valve or hydrant connected thereto, or unlawfully
enter any building or structure of the water system.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person without authority of the
City Council to lay any main or service or take water from the city main or
service pipe.



   (C)   Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or
who shall interfere with the execution of this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 18.02, Subd. 10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 52:  SEWER SERVICE



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Inspectors and the like



   52.02   Permits required to connect with public sewers



   52.03   Classes of permits



   52.04   Sewer availability charge



   52.05   Rates and charges



   52.06   Statement of charges




Regulations




   52.20   Interference with sewage system



   52.21   Depositing human or animal waste prohibited



   52.22   Discharging sewage or industrial wastes prohibited



   52.23   Draining rain or surface waters into sewer system prohibited



   52.24   Toilet facilities required



   52.25   Outhouses, privies and the like



   52.26   Building sewers



   52.27   Persons permitted to tap into city sewer line



   52.28   Plumbing work to be supervised




Regulation of Industrial Use of Sewer Facilities




   52.45   Recitals



   52.46   Establishment of strength charges



   52.47   Establishment of strength charge formula



   52.48   Strength charge payment



Regulation of Discharges into the Storm Sewer System



   52.60   Definitions



   52.61   Prohibitions



   52.62   Property maintenance



   52.63   NPDES permits compliance



   52.64   Prohibited discharge, action required



   52.65   Access to buildings for inspection, monitoring and/or dye
testing



   52.66   Suspension of storm sewer system access



   52.67   Enforcement



Storm Water Utility



   52.80   Establishment of storm water utility



   52.81   Purpose of funds derived and allocation of revenue



   52.82   Storm water utility fee



   52.83   Appeals



   52.84   Exemptions



   52.85   Billings



   52.86   Recalculation of fees



 



   52.98   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  INSPECTORS AND THE LIKE.



   The City Administrator, or other duly authorized employees of the city,
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
upon all properties for the purpose of inspections, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
§ 10.20.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 2)



§ 52.02  PERMITS REQUIRED TO CONNECT WITH PUBLIC SEWERS.



   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the office of the City Administrator
and otherwise complying with the terms of this chapter and the conditions
accompanying the permit.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 11)



§ 52.03  CLASSES OF PERMITS.



   (A)   There shall be 2 classes of sewer permits:



      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and



      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial
wastes.



   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agents shall make
application on a special form, furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information which
the City Administrator may reasonably require. A permit and inspection fee
for a building sewer permit in an amount set by resolution of the Council
shall be payable to the City Treasurer at the time the application is filed.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 12)  (Am. Ord. 352, passed 1-9-1984)



§ 52.04  SEWER AVAILABILITY CHARGE.



   (A)   There is imposed upon all sanitary sewer connections within
the city a sewer core charge to reimburse the city for expenses incurred in
the past and to be incurred in the future for making sewage treatment
facilities available. The sewer core charge imposed shall be the sum of
$1,200 per service availability unit charge as determined by the current
Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Division’s Service Availability
Charge Procedure Manual.



   (B)   There is imposed a sewer access charge upon all new sanitary
sewer connections within the city in the amount which is charged to the city
by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Division for its sewer
access charge.



   (C)   Payment of the sewer core charge and sewer access charge shall
precede the issuance of a sewer/building permit under this chapter and shall
be payable to the city.



   (D)   In all new developments with public utilities, there is
imposed a trunk area sanitary sewer charge of $3,000 per net developable
acre. Net developable acres are defined as the gross area of the development
less delineated wetlands and state or county road right-of-way. The trunk
area sanitary sewer charge shall be paid to the city upon execution of the
final plat for the development.



   (E)   The payments imposed by this section shall be deposited in the
city’s water and sewage utilities fund.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subds. 20, 21, 22)  (Am. Ord. 443, passed
6-14-1993;  Am. Ord. 520, passed 2-24-2003; Am. Ord. 601, passed 9-13-2010)



§ 52.05  RATES AND CHARGES.



   Each user of the city sewage disposal system shall pay the following
rates and charges billed quarterly.



   (A)   For all properties, the sewer service charge is based upon the
actual water consumption for each billing period subject to a minimum charge
based on meter size. Sewer service charges shall be as shown in a rate
schedule established from time to time by a duly adopted resolution of the
City Council.



   (B)   Organizations, governmental units and properties outside the
city shall be charged a sewer rate based upon the above rate schedule plus an
additional 35% surcharge.



   (C)   Any water volume which is used by an industrial customer for
processing of a product which may be exempt from sewer charges must be
approved by the City Administrator prior to being exempt from billing charges
and the water volume used in the processing shall be metered as directed by
the City Administrator.



   (D)   For each property that is not metered, a base rate per adopted
fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 24)  (Am. Ord. 520, passed 2-24-2003;  Am.
Ord. 523, passed 4-14-2003)



§ 52.06  STATEMENT OF CHARGES.



   (A)   A statement of charges shall be rendered quarterly in January,
April, July and October of each year.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pay
for all sewage charges furnished to each property. The property owner shall
be billed for sewer charges applicable to any rental unit or mobile home
within a mobile home court; provided, however, that the City Clerk may, in
his or her discretion, bill the occupant of commercial rental property, if
requested to do so. The billing to an occupant shall not, however, relieve
the property owner from the obligation of paying charges incurred under this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 25)



REGULATIONS



§ 52.20  INTERFERENCE WITH SEWAGE SYSTEM.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage system.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.21  DEPOSITING HUMAN OR ANIMAL WASTE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal
waste.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.22  DISCHARGING SEWAGE OR INDUSTRIAL WASTES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or to any storm
sewer or storm drain within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.23  DRAINING RAIN OR SURFACE WATERS INTO SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   Except as otherwise expressly authorized in this section, no water from
any roof surface, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, any other natural
precipitation, cooling water or industrial process water shall be discharged
into the sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures
which require sump pumps or footing tiles shall have a permanently installed
discharge line which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary
sewer system, except as provided herein. A permanent installation shall be
one which provides for year round discharge capability to either the outside
of the dwelling, building, or structure or is connected to a city storm
sewer. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line, without valving or quick
connections for altering the path of discharge or a system otherwise approved
by the City Administrator.



   (A)   Before March 15, 2004, any person, firm or corporation having
a roof surface, groundwater sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process water now connected and/or discharging
into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect or remove same. Any
disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer system shall be closed or
repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner.



   (B)   Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into
the city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow the city or a designated
representative of the city to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is
no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. In
lieu of having the city inspect the property, any person may furnish a city
inspection report from a city approved licensed plumber certifying that the
property is in compliance with this section.



   (C)   Any property with a sump pump found not in compliance with
this section but subsequently verified as compliant shall be subject to an
annual reinspection to confirm continued compliance. Any property found not
to be in compliance upon reinspection, or any persons refusing to allow their
property to be reinspected, within 30 days after receipt of mailed written
notice from the city of the reinspection, shall be subject to the
nonrefundable charge set forth in division (E) below.



   (D)   All new dwellings with sumps for which a building permit is
issued after January 1, 2004 shall have a pump and shall be piped to the
outside of the dwelling before a certificate of occupancy is issued.



   (E)   A nonrefundable fee of $100 per month is imposed on every
sewer bill mailed on and after April 1, 2004 to property owners who are not
in compliance with this section or who have refused to allow their property
to be inspected to determine if there is compliance. All properties found
during any reinspection to have violated this section will be subject to a
$100 per month nonrefundable charge for all months between the 2 most recent
inspections in addition to all other regular charges for sanitary sewer
service.



   (F)   (1)   The City Administrator is authorized to issue a
permit to allow a property owner to discharge water into the sanitary sewer
system. Prior to issuance of the permit, the City Administrator may consult
with the City Engineer or Public Works Director to verify one of the criteria
to issue the permit has been satisfied. The permit shall authorize the
discharge only from November 15 to March 15, shall require the owner to
permit an inspection of the property on March 16 or as soon thereafter as
possible to determine that discharge into the sanitary sewer has been
discontinued and shall subject the owner to the $100 monthly nonrefundable
charge in the event the owner refuses an inspection or has failed to
discontinue the discharge into the sanitary sewer. The nonrefundable charge
will commence with the April water billing and continue until the property
owner establishes compliance with this section. A property owner is required
to meet at least one of the following criteria in order to obtain the permit:



         (a)   The freezing of the surface water discharge from
the sump pump or footing drain is causing a dangerous condition, such as ice
buildup or flooding, on either public or private property;



         (b)   The property owner has demonstrated that there is
a danger that the sump pump or footing drain pipes will freeze up and result
in either failure or damage to the sump pump unit or the footing drain and
cause basement flooding;



         (c)   The water being discharged from the sump pump or
footing drain cannot be readily discharged into a storm drain or other
acceptable drainage system.



      (2)   Following 10 days written notice and an opportunity to
be heard, the City Administrator may require the owners of property to
discharge their sump pump into the sanitary sewer from November 15 to March
15 if surface water discharge is causing an icy condition on streets.



   (G)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150
degrees Fahrenheit;



      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts
per million by weight of fat, oil, or grease;



      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 6)  (Am. Ord. 531, passed 2-9- 2004)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 52.24  TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   The owner of each house, building, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way is required, at his or her
expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect the
facilities directly with the proper sewer system in accordance with the
provisions of the laws of the city within 90 days after official notice to do
so.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 7)



§ 52.25  OUTHOUSES, PRIVIES AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The owner of the premises wherein an outhouse, privy, vault,
cistern, cesspool or septic tank shall have been abandoned shall cause the
same to be removed, destroyed, renovated or closed up so as not to menace
public health or welfare.



   (B)   If the owner of the property affected shall fail to comply
with the requirements of division (A) of this section, the Council may cause
the required work to be done and shall assess the costs of the work against
the property affected thereby.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subds. 9, 10)



§ 52.26  BUILDING SEWERS.



   (A)   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or other damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the Plumbing
Inspector to meet all requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building.  The owner shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of the building sewer from the sewer main to the building.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subds. 14, 15, 16)



§ 52.27  PERSONS PERMITTED TO TAP INTO CITY SEWER LINE.



   Only the city employees or the city’s licensed contractor or persons
under the direct supervision of the city employee designated for such
purposes may tap into the city sewer line and no one else shall do so.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 18)



§ 52.28  PLUMBING WORK TO BE SUPERVISED.



   No plumbing shall be done except under the direct supervision of a
master plumber or city licensed contractor when connecting with the public
sewer; provided, however, that the building sewer may be constructed (except
for connections) by the owner of the buildings or by the sewer or other
licensed contractor under the following conditions:



   (A)   The owner or licensed contractor shall first obtain a permit
as required by this chapter;



   (B)   Before covering or backfilling the building sewer, the owner
or contractor must obtain inspection and approval of the building sewer
construction by the city inspector designated for such purpose;



   (C)   In no case shall the owner or contractor be permitted to carry
out the construction within street right-of-way or to connect directly to a
public sewer lateral or stub and must be done by a city licensed contractor.



   (D)   In cases where the owner or contractor chooses to construct a
building sewer without connecting to either the public sewer or the building
drain, the construction shall be permitted if carried out in accordance with
this chapter, and provided that at such time as connection is made to either
the building drain or a public sewer, there shall be obtained a second permit
and inspection and approval of the additional connection by the Building
Inspector before the connection is covered or back filled.



   (E)   In cases where the city inspector has reason to believe that
the owner is not competent to do the work contemplated by this chapter, the
owner shall demonstrate his or her skill, training, knowledge and experience
to the satisfaction of the inspector. In the event the inspector concludes
that the owner is not competent, the permit shall stand terminated and
revoked until a licensed plumber or contractor is retained.



(Prior Code, § 18.01, Subd. 19)



REGULATION OF INDUSTRIAL USE OF SEWER FACILITIES



§ 52.45  RECITALS.



   The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a metropolitan commission
organized and existing under the laws of the state (the “Commission”), in
order to receive and retain grants in compliance with the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 and regulations thereunder (the
“Act”), has determined to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge
upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal System (as defined in M.S. §
473.121, Subd. 24, as it may be amended from time to time) to recover
operation and maintenance costs of treatment works attributable to the
strength of the discharge of industrial waste, the sewer strength charge
being in addition to the charge based upon the volume of discharge. In order
for the city to pay the costs based upon strength of industrial discharge and
allocated to it each year by the Commission, it is found, determined and
declared to be necessary to establish sewer strength charges and a formula
for the computation thereof for all industrial users receiving waste
treatment services within or served by the city. Furthermore, M.S. §
444.075, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, empowers the city
to make the sewer charge a charge against the owner, lessee, occupant or all
of them and certify unpaid charges to the County Auditor as a tax lien
against the property served.



(Prior Code, § 18.015, Subd. 1)



§ 52.46  ESTABLISHMENT OF STRENGTH CHARGES.



   For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the city each year by
the Commission that are based upon the strength of discharge of all
industrial users receiving waste treatment services within or served by the
city, there is approved, adopted and established, in addition to the sewer
charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person,
company or corporation receiving waste treatment services within or served by
the city, based upon strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer
system of the city (the “Strength Charge”).



(Prior Code, § 18.015, Subd. 2)



§ 52.47  ESTABLISHMENT OF STRENGTH CHARGE FORMULA.



   For the purpose of computation of the strength charge established by §
52.46, there is established, approved and adopted in compliance with the Act
the same strength charge formula designated in Res. 76-172 adopted by the
governing body of the Commission on June 15, 1976, the formula being based
upon pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced
through an evaluation of pollution qualities and quantities in excess of an
annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance
of waste treatment services provided by the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 18.015, Subd. 3)



§ 52.48  STRENGTH CHARGE PAYMENT.



   It is approved, adopted and established that the strength charge
established by § 52.46 shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste
treatment services and subject thereto before the twentieth day next
succeeding the date of billing thereof to the user by or on behalf of the
city, and the payment thereof shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid
to the billing entity before the sixtieth day next succeeding the date of
billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf of the city, the
delinquent sewer strength charge, plus accrued interest established pursuant
to this section shall be deemed to be a charge against the owner, lessee and
occupant of the property served, and the city or its agent shall certify the
unpaid delinquent balance to the County Auditor with taxes against the
property served for collection as other taxes are collected; provided,
however, that the certification shall not preclude the city or its agent from
recovery of the delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under
any other available remedy.



(Prior Code, § 18.015, Subd. 4)



REGULATION OF DISCHARGES INTO THE STORM SEWER SYSTEM



§ 52.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this section the terms and definitions in § 151.04
shall apply except as herein stated and together with the following
additional definitions:



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP).  Erosion and sediment control, water
quality, and permanent storm water management practices that are the most
effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing
the degradation of surface water, including construction-phasing, minimizing
the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management
practices published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies.



   DISCHARGE.  Adding, introducing, releasing, leaking, spilling,
casting, throwing, or emitting any pollutant, or placing any pollutant in a
location where it is likely to pollute waters of the state in the city.



   EROSION.  The process by which ground surface is worn away by action
of wind, water, ice, or gravity.



   GROUNDWATER.  Water contained below the surface of the earth in the
saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters whether under
confined, unconfmed, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated
sediment or regolith, or rock formations deeper underground.



   MPCA.  Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  The system of
conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and which is not used for collecting or conveying
sewage.



   NPDES.  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; the
program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring,
and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (§§ 301, 318, 402 and 405)
and 33 C.F.R. §§ 1317, 1328, 1342 and 1345 authorizing the discharge of
pollutants to water of the United States.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise,
association or governmental entity.



   POLLUTANT.  Any substance which, when discharged has potential to or
does: interfere with state designated water uses; obstruct or cause damage to
waters of the state; change water color, odor, or usability as a drinking
water source through causes not attributable to natural stream processes
affecting surface water or subsurface processes affecting groundwater; add an
unnatural surface film on the water; adversely change other chemical,
biological, thermal, or physical conditions, in any surface water or stream
channel; degrade the quality of ground water; or harm human life, aquatic
life, or terrestrial plant and wildlife.  POLLUTANT includes dredged soil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, wastewater, wastewater sludge,
chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, rock, sand,
dust, industrial waste, sediment, nutrients, toxic substance, pesticide,
herbicide, trace metal, automotive fluid, petroleum-based substance, and
oxygen-demanding material.



   POLLUTE.  To discharge pollutants into waters of the state.



   POLLUTION.  The direct or indirect distribution of pollutants into
waters of the state.



   PROHIBITED CONNECTION.  Either of the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater,
and wash water and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a residential,
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



   STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



   STATE DESIGNATED WATER USES.  Uses specified in state water quality
standards.



   STORM SEWER SYSTEM.  A conveyance or system of conveyances that is
owned and operated by the city or other entity and designated or used for
collecting or conveying storm water.



   STORM WATER.  Precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snow melt
runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage as defined under Minn. Rule
7077.0105, subpart 41(b).



   SURFACE WATERS.  All waters of the state other than ground waters,
which include ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, tidal and nontidal wetlands,
public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems except those
designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage.



   UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.



      (1)   A non-storm water discharge into the storm water system
or a natural water, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Debris or other materials such as grass clippings,
vegetative materials, tree branches, earth fill, rocks, concrete chunks,
metal, other demolition or construction materials, or structures;



         (b)   The disposal or misuse of chemicals or any other
materials that would degrade the quality of waters within the system,
including, but not limited to chemicals (fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides,
and the like) or petroleum based products (gasoline, oil, fuels, solvents,
paints, and the like);



         (c)   Erosion and sediment originating from a property
and deposited onto city streets, private properties or into the storm water
conveyance system, including those areas not specifically covered under an
approved storm water management plan or storm water permit; and/or



         (d)   Failure to remove sediments transported or tracked
onto city streets by vehicles or construction traffic within 24 hours of it
being deposited on the street.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES do
not include the following, unless information is available to indicate
otherwise: water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground water; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated
pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources; foundation
drains; air conditioning condensate; irrigation water; springs; water from
crawl space pumps; footing drains; lawn watering; individual residential car
washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; de-chlorinated swimming
pool discharges and street wash water.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 52.61  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, or
keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, maintained or kept, any
refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles, or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm
drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or
upon any public or private plot of land in the city, so that the same might
be or become a pollutant, except in containers, recycling bags, or other
lawfully established waste disposal facility.



   (B)   No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt,
or other landscape debris into a water resource buffer, street, road, alley,
catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse,
wetland, flood control channel, canal, storm drain or any fabricated natural
conveyance.



   (C)   No person shall cause any unlawful discharge to enter the
municipal storm water system unless such discharge:



      (1)   Consists of non-storm water that is authorized by an
NPDES point source permit obtained from the MPCA; or



      (2)   Is associated with fire fighting activities.



   (D)   No person shall use any unlawful connection to intentionally
convey non-storm water to the city storm water system.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)  Penalty, see § 52.98



§ 52.62  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.



   All owners or occupants of property within the city shall comply with
the following good housekeeping requirements:



   (A)   No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise
expose any chemical or septic waste in an area where discharge to streets or
the storm drain system may occur.  This section shall apply to both actual
and potential discharges.



   (B)   No person shall store objects, such as motor vehicle parts,
containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed
receptacles containing hazardous materials, in areas susceptible to runoff or
discharge to a storm water system.



   (C)   No person shall place any machinery or equipment that is to be
repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to runoff.  Said machinery and
equipment shall be placed in a confined area to contain or collect leaks,
spills, or discharges without discharge to the storm water system.



   (D)   Debris and residue shall be removed, as follows:



      (1)   Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially
harmful material, such as animal waste, garbage or batteries, which are
located in an area susceptible to runoff, shall be removed as soon as
possible and disposed of in an appropriate manner.



      (2)   Household hazardous waste shall be delivered to an
approved collection site for disposal.



   (E)   Water from swimming pools shall not be discharged into the
storm water system until a minimum of seven days has passed since the
addition of chemicals to the water.



   (F)   Runoff of water from residential property shall be minimized
to the maximum extent practicable.  Runoff of water from the washing down of
paved areas in commercial or industrial property is prohibited unless
necessary for health or safety purposes and not in violation of any other
provisions of the city code.



   (G)   Mobile washing companies (carpet cleaning, mobile vehicle
washing, etc.) shall dispose of wastewater to the sanitary sewer. 
Wastewater shall not be discharged where drainage to streets or the storm
sewer system may occur.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)  Penalty, see § 52.98



§ 52.63  NPDES PERMITS COMPLIANCE.



   Any person subject to an industrial activity NPDES storm water
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.  Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city
prior to allowing discharges to the storm sewer system.  All facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity which are, or
may be, the source of an unlawful discharge shall be required to implement,
at their expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system. Such BMPs shall be
part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 52.64  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE, ACTION REQUIRED.



   Not withstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected unlawful discharge into the storm sewer system or waters of the
state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release.  In the event of the release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.  In the event of
a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city no
later than the next business day.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 52.65    ACCESS TO BUILDINGS FOR INSPECTION, MONITORING AND/OR DYE
TESTING.



   (A)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect all buildings
and land as often as may be necessary to deteimine compliance with this
chapter.  Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, dye testing,
examination and copying of records that relate to the discharge of storm
water. The city shall have the right to set up at any building such devices
as are necessary to conduct monitoring, sampling and/or dye testing of the
facility's storm water discharge.  The city has the right to require the
facility operator to install monitoring equipment as necessary.



   (B)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility
is a violation of this section.



   (C)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which storm water is discharged, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 52.66  SUSPENSION OF STORM SEWER SYSTEM ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to unlawful discharges in emergency situations.
The city may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer system discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent or substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
storm sewer system or waters of the state.  If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system
or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to persons.



   (B)   Any person discharging to the storm sewer system in violation
of this chapter may have the person's storm sewer system access terminated if
such termination would abate or reduce an unlawful discharge.  A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates storm sewer system access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of
the city.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)  Penalty, see § 52.98



§ 52.67  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the city finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section,
the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of unlawful connections or discharges;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which
such remediation or restoration must be completed.  Said notice shall
further advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore within
the established deadline the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



   (C)   If the invoice received for abatement and/or restoration is
not paid within 30 days, the city may draw the amount of the bill from any
financial guarantees the city may hold or may assess the property from which
the offense originated.  After notice and hearing as provided pursuant to
M.S. § 429.061, the City Council may then spread the charges against the
property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101 for
certification to the county auditor and collection along with the current
taxes the following year or in annual installments not exceeding ten as the
Council may determine in each case.



(Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)  Penalty, see § 52.98



STORM WATER UTILITY



§ 52.80  ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM WATER UTILITY.



   A storm water utility for the City of Forest Lake is hereby
established.  The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated as a public
utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075 from which revenue will be derived
subject to the provisions of this chapter and Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.81  PURPOSE OF FUNDS DERIVED AND ALLOCATION OF REVENUE.



   The purpose of all funds derived from the storm water utility is to pay
for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement,
improvement or other obtainment in the maintenance, operation and use of the
storm sewer utility as established by the city.  All revenues derived from
the stormwater drainage utility fees shall be credited to the appropriate
storm sewer fund.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.82  STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.



   (A)   Rates and charges for the use and availability of the system
are to be determined through the use of a "residential equivalent factor"
which assesses the amount of runoff from an average single-family urban
parcel during a standard ten-year rainfall.  Calculations for the storm
water utility for other land uses are based upon their residential
equivalency factor.  The rates for commercial/industrial, institutional, and
higher density residential land uses also take into consideration the amount
of hard surface on the property and the acreage of the site.



   (B)   Other land uses not listed in the fee ordinance table are to
be classified by the City Administrator either by assigning them to the land
use classification with the most similar hydrologic response or based on the
amount of site impervious surface.  Appeals from the City Administrator's
determination of the property classifications may be made to the City Council
in the same manner as other appeals from administrative determinations.



   (C)   The storm water utility fee for use of the city's storm water
management facilities shall be determined by resolution of the City Council,
from time to time, and shall be just and equitable.  Charges made for the
use of the facilities may be fixed by reference to a reasonable
classification of the types of premises to which the service is furnished, or
by reference to the quantity, pollution qualities, and difficulty of disposal
of the water, or in any other equitable basis including, but without
limitation, any combination of those referred to above.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.83  APPEALS.



   (A)   The City Council may by resolution, from time to time, adopt
policies providing for the adjustment of charges for parcels or grounds of
parcels, based upon data supplied by affected property owners providing more
accurate information, including parcel boundaries, site impervious area, or
delineated wetland area, substantially different from the calculation being
used for the parcel or parcels.  The adjustment may be made only after
receiving the recommendation of the City Administrator and may not be made
effective retroactively.



   (B)   If a property owner or a person responsible for paying the fee
questions the correctness of such charge, that person may have the
determination of the charge further reviewed within six months of the mailing
of the fee by submitting a written notice of appeal to city hall, along with
the proper documentation and storm water utility appeal fee established by
the city.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.84  EXEMPTIONS.



   The storm water utility fee established in § 52.82 will not be levied
against parcels with the following existing land use designations:



   (A)   Public right-of-way parcels;



   (B)   City-owned property;



   (C)   Wetland areas;



   (D)   Undeveloped parcels less than 1.0 acres in size.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.85  BILLINGS.



   A statement of charges shall be rendered quarterly in January, April,
July and October of each year on parcels receiving statements for sewer and
water charges and annually in January of each year on parcels not receiving
such statements.  A penalty of 3% of the balance of such account remaining
unpaid 30 days after the billing date shall be added to the account.  Each
year at the September meeting of the City Council, the Clerk shall submit a
full report of storm water utility accounts that are delinquent. The Council
shall then determine in each case to authorize the necessary proceedings to
collect the same by certifying the delinquent amount and penalty to the
County Auditor for collection along with real estate taxes, or by other
methods, with costs and interest as the Council may see fit.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.86  RECALCULATION OF FEES.



   If a property owner or a person responsible for the fee questions the
correctness of such charge, that person may have the determination of the
charge computed within six months of the mailing of the fee by submitting to
the City Administrator a written request for the computation.



(Ord. 576, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 52.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to other penalties provided, any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of the violation.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 52.60 through 52.67 shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, §18.01, Subd. 3) (Am. Ord. 581, passed 3-9-2009)



CHAPTER 53:  STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM



Section



   53.01   Policy and purpose



   53.02   Street lighting utility



   53.03   New subdivisions



   53.04   Existing subdivisions without a street light system



   53.05   Existing street lighting system



   53.06   Street lighting rates and fees



   53.07   Exemptions



§ 53.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   The City Council has determined that it is in the best interests of the
residents of the city to operate a street lighting system in the city to
promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents pursuant to
M. S. § 412.221, Subd. 7.  In order to pay the costs of the establishment,
construction, repair, replacement, maintenance, enlargement and improvement
of the street lighting system, it is hereby determined by the City Council
that every parcel of property, whether residential, commercial, institutional
or industrial, benefitting from the safety and convenience of street lights
shall pay a street light utility charge.  It is further determined to be the
policy of the city that payment for said services shall be established and
collected in a fair, reasonable and equitable basis.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 53.02  STREET LIGHTING UTILITY.



   There is hereby established a street light utility for the purpose of
paying the costs of the establishment, construction, repair, replacement,
maintenance, enlargement and improvement of the street lighting system and to
charge for and collect the costs thereof from the benefitted properties.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 53.03  NEW SUBDIVISIONS.



   In all new subdivisions, the developer shall install a street lighting
system in accordance with city standards. Thereafter, the owner of every lot,
parcel or piece of property within the subdivision shall be charged for and
pay a street light utility charge as hereinafter established.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 53.04  EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS WITHOUT A STREET LIGHT SYSTEM.



   (A)   In all existing subdivisions without a street lighting system,
the City Council, upon a petition of at least 35% of the property owners in
the subdivision, or upon its own initiative, shall determine the streets,
parks or other public and private areas on which the city will install and
operate a street lighting system.



   (B)   Before any service is furnished, the City Council shall
schedule a hearing pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 429, as it may be
amended from time to time, at which time the City Council will consider the
installation of the street lighting system.



   (C)   The city may pay a portion of the costs of installation of the
street lighting system in an amount as the City Council may determine from
its street lighting utility fund.  In the event the Council elects not to
pay some or all of the installation costs, the unpaid portion shall be
assessed against the benefitted property owners as a public improvement.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 53.05  EXISTING STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM.



   The owners of every lot, parcel or piece of property in the city
benefitted by the street lighting system shall be charged and pay a street
lighting service charge as hereinafter established.  The benefitted property
shall be established by a map prepared by the city engineer depicting the
property served by the street lighting system.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 53.06  STREET LIGHTING RATES AND FEES.



   (A)   The City Council shall by ordinance adopt a street lighting
service charge rate structure to defray the costs of the establishment,
construction, repair, replacement, maintenance, enlargement and improvement
of the street lighting system.  The City Council shall have the continuing
right to amend the rates if the established rates are not sufficient to cover
the costs of the street lighting system.



   (B)   A statement of charges shall be rendered quarterly in January,
April, July and October of each year on parcels receiving statements for
sewer and water charges and annually in January of each year on parcels not
receiving such statements.  A penalty of 3% of the balance of such account
remaining unpaid 30 days after the billing date shall be added to the
account.  Each year at the September meeting of the City Council, the Clerk
shall submit a full report of street light utility accounts that are
delinquent.  The Council shall then determine in each case to authorize the
necessary proceedings to collect the same by certifying the delinquent amount
and penalty to the County Auditor for collection along with real estate
taxes, or by other methods, with costs and interest as the Council may see
fit.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pay
for all street light utility charges.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



§ 53.07  EXEMPTIONS.



   Public rights-of-way, city-owned property and vacant parcels shall be
exempt from street light utility charges.



(Ord. 577, passed 10-27-2008)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   MOTORIZED AND NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Purpose and construction



   70.02   Traffic regulations incorporated by reference



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  PURPOSE AND CONSTRUCTION.



   This section is enacted pursuant to M.S.A. § 471.62, as it may be
amended from time to time, and other applicable laws of the state. The
purpose of this section is to provide uniform rules for the regulation of
traffic and the operation of vehicles upon the streets and highways in the
city in conformity with those rules applicable to the streets and highways of
the entire state.



(Prior Code, § 15.01, Subd. 1)



§ 70.02  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   M.S.A. Chs. 168, 168A, 169, 169A and 171, as they may be amended from
time to time, regulating the operation of motor vehicles, highway traffic and
drivers licenses, together with all amendments thereto, are incorporated by
reference and made a part of the City Code to the same extent as if the
sections were set forth in full herein.



(Prior Code, § 15.01, Subd. 2)  (Am. Ord. 511, passed 7-9-2001)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



CHAPTER 71: MOTORIZED AND NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Unreasonable acceleration



   71.02   U turns



   71.03   Use of watercraft



   71.04   Use and operation of snowmobiles



   71.05   Special vehicle use on roadways by physically disabled
persons



   71.06   All-terrain vehicles



§ 71.01  UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.



   (A)   No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an
unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private roadway or parking
lot within the city limits. Prima facie evidence of the unnecessary
exhibition of speed shall be unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds
emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the
vehicle or both.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.02)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  U TURNS.



   (A)   The making of a U turn by the operator of any vehicle at the
intersection of North Lake Street and Second Avenue in the city shall be
prohibited.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  USE OF WATERCRAFT.



   (A)   (1)   The Bay of Forest Lake is defined as that portion of
Forest Lake (82-159) located south of a line, which line is described as an
extension southeasterly of the northwesterly line of Lot 1, Block 8, Woodland
Park Addition to the city.



      (2)   SLOW-NO WAKE means operation of a watercraft at the
slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage and in no case greater
than 5 mph.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a watercraft in the Bay of
Forest Lake at greater than a slow-no wake speed.



      (2)   No person shall be towed or shall tow water skiers or
persons on other devices (other than another watercraft) in the Bay of Forest
Lake.



   (C)   Resource management, enforcement and emergency personnel are
exempt from this section when performing their assigned duties.



   (D)   Violation of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor.



   (E)   The Washington County Sheriff’s Department and the city
shall be responsible for the marking of the lake and enforcement of this
section.



(Prior Code, § 15.06)



§ 71.04  USE AND OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   All provisions of M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.915, as they may
be amended from time to time, together with all rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, are incorporated herein and made a part of this section by
reference, and it shall be unlawful to own or operate a snowmobile within the
city in violation thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile
over and upon any sidewalk or upon any public park or playground which has
been posted with signs prohibiting motorized vehicles in the city.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any snowmobile
within the city unless the snowmobile has attached to it as installed by the
manufacturer and in good operating condition a standard engine muffler and
exhaust system.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile upon the public
streets, alleys or public property within the city between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of each
week and between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday
of each week, except that operation of a snowmobile shall be permitted until
1:30 a.m. on Christmas Day and New Years Day.



   (E)   No person shall operate any snowmobile within the city at a
speed in excess of 30 miles per hour, except that snowmobiles may be operated
on the portions of the Hardwood Creek Regional Trail located south of the
State Highway 97 bridge and north of the U.S. Highway 8 overpass at speeds up
to 50 miles per hour.



   (F)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.07)  (Ord. 479, passed 11-12-1996; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-13-2016) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  SPECIAL VEHICLE USE ON ROADWAYS BY PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS.



   (A)   All provisions of M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from
time to time, entitled “Special Vehicle Use on Roadway,” are adopted by
reference as permitted by M.S. § 471.62, as it may be amended from time to
time. Permits will be issued by the Chief of Police for the operation of
motorized golf carts and/or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles on city streets.
Permits are restricted to physically disabled persons defined in M.S. §
169.345 Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Permits will be for a period of 1 year. The time of operation
of the vehicle shall be limited to daylight hours. Evidence of insurance
shall be provided at the time of application for the permit. No operation
shall be permitted in inclement weather, fog or any time visibility is less
than 500 feet. All vehicles allowed shall have a slow moving vehicle emblem
displayed when operated on any public street. All vehicle operation shall be
limited to city streets, except that North and South Lake Streets and
Broadway Avenue shall not be used for vehicle operation.



   (C)   Each applicant shall provide a signed certificate by the
applicant’s physician attesting to the fact that the applicant is capable
of operating a motorized vehicle on the streets. All traffic laws shall be
followed when the vehicles are operated on city streets.



   (D)   Any permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police when there is
evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate the vehicle or if the
vehicle is used illegally.



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.14) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.06  ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   All provisions of M.S. § 84.92, as it may be amended from
time to time, entitled “All-Terrain Vehicles” are adopted by reference as
permitted by M.S. § 471.62, as it may be amended from time to time, and it
shall be unlawful to operate an all-terrain vehicle within the city in
violation thereof.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of M.S. Ch. 84.92, as it may be
amended from time to time, and the references therein to operation on city
streets, it is declared to be unlawful to operate any all-terrain vehicle
upon city streets, parks, city owned land or parking lots within the city.



   (C)   At least 1 copy of the statutes hereby adopted shall be marked
as the official copy and filed in the office of the City Clerk for use and
examination by the public.



(Prior Code, § 15.12) (Ord. 381, passed 12-8-1986;  Am. Ord. 398, passed
1-9-1989)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Municipal parking lot



   72.02   Parking, snow removal



§ 72.01  MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be left standing or parked in the Municipal
Parking Lot located upon Lots 1 through 11, inclusive, Block 26 of the city
for more than 30 minutes before 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (B)   The parking of any trucks or other vehicles in excess of a
gross weight of 10,000 pounds on the Municipal Parking Lot is strictly
prohibited.



   (C)   Any persons or organizations violating any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall pay a fine of $35.



(Ord. 649, passed 10-12-2015; Am. Ord. 666, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 72.02  PARKING, SNOW REMOVAL.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   November 1 through April 15.



         (a)   No vehicle shall be left standing or parked for
more than 30 minutes on any street within the city between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., from November 1 through April 15, inclusive. Recreational vehicles, as
described in § 153.260, may not be parked on any public street at any time.
Vehicles exceeding 1-ton carrying capacity, as described in § 153.129(B),
may not be parked on any public street in residential districts at any time.



         (b)   On-street parking of non-recreational vehicles in
all districts and vehicles not exceeding 1-ton carrying capacity in
residential districts shall be permitted at all other hours, except where
otherwise specifically prohibited by signs or marking and except within 5
feet on either side of a mail box or bank of mailboxes, when such parking
does not interfere with the removal of snow and ice from city streets, or
with other city utility repair and maintenance activities, and, in any event,
for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive hours in any 1 location. A vehicle
parked on a street shall be removed from the street by its owner within 15
minutes of demand made by a city employee for snow and ice removal or street
and utility repair and maintenance activities. After removal, it shall be
unlawful to park on the street until the snow removal or street or utility
repair or maintenance activity is completed in the area involved.



      (2)   April 16 through October 31.



         (a)   Vehicles may park on- street during all hours of
the day unless otherwise prohibited. Recreational vehicles, as described in
§ 153.260, may not be parked on any public street at any time. Vehicles
exceeding 1-ton carrying capacity, as described in § 153.129(B), may not be
parked on any public street in residential districts at any time.



         (b)   On-street parking of non-recreational vehicles in
all districts and vehicles not exceeding 1-ton carrying capacity in
residential districts shall be permitted at all hours, except where otherwise
specifically prohibited by signs or marking and except within 5 feet on
either side of a mail box or bank of mailboxes, when such parking does not
interfere with the other city utility repair and maintenance activities, and,
in any event, for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive hours in any 1
location. A vehicle parked on a street shall be removed from the street by
its owner within 15 minutes of demand made by a city employee for street or
utility repair and maintenance activities. After removal, it shall be
unlawful to park on the street until the street or utility repair or
maintenance activity is completed in the area involved.



      (3)   In the event that on-street parking of a vehicle is
deemed to constitute a traffic hazard at any time of the year, it shall be
removed from its parking location by the order of a police officer.



      (4)   Failure to move a vehicle from the public street after
having been directed to do so by a police officer or other employee may
result in the vehicle being towed at the owner’s expense.



   (B)   Exceptions. All emergency and official vehicles responding to
an emergency call, including doctor’s automobiles, shall be excluded from
the provisions of this section.



   (C)   Snow removal from sidewalks.



      (1)   It shall be the obligation of the property owner or
tenant of any business or commercial building or parcel of land to promptly
and adequately keep the sidewalk in front of his or her business property
clear from snow at all times.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow from
private property and to deposit the same upon any street right-of-way or upon
any other city property without first obtaining permission therefore in
writing from the City Clerk. It shall further be unlawful to deposit snow
upon any property within the city in such a manner as to obstruct the
visibility of vehicular traffic at street intersections.



   (D)   Violations. Any person violating any provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.05)  (Ord. 351, passed 12-12-1983; Am. Ord. 618, passed
7-23-2012; Am. Ord. 666, passed 6-26-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      91.   SHIELDS LAKE MANAGEMENT



      92.   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT



      93.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      94.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



      95.   POLLUTION CONTROL



      96.   NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SANITATION



      97.   TREES



      98.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



      99.   ANIMALS



      100.   LAWN FERTILIZER AND PESTICIDE APPLICATION CONTROL



CHAPTER 90: PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Removing, defacing or destroying property prohibited



   90.03   Erection of structures



   90.04   Littering



   90.05   Motorized vehicle traffic



   90.06   Public park and public grounds hours



   90.07   Open fires prohibited



   90.08   Sale of articles



   90.09   Posting signs and placards



   90.10   Animals



   90.11   Climbing of trees and on buildings



   90.12   Posting of areas



   90.13   Fees for use of public park and public grounds



   90.14   Use of intoxicating liquor in parks



   90.15   Variances



   90.98   Violations



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKS. Public parks and all public service facilities, real estate and
buildings owned or leased by the city which are under the control of the City
Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission.



   VEHICLE.  Any vehicle conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn,
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size,
kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the
service of the city.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 1) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.02  REMOVING, DEFACING OR DESTROYING PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   No person shall remove, deface, destroy, diminish or impair the value
of public property located on or within any public park or public grounds
located in the city, including buildings, structures, trees, shrubs, grass,
vegetation, signs, tables, benches, fireplaces, trash receptacles, notices or
placards, boundary markers or fences, or any other public property, either
real or personal.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 2) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.03  ERECTION OF STRUCTURES.



   No person shall construct or erect any tent, building, or structure of
any kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across any public park or public
grounds, except with a special written permit issued by the City Clerk, after
prior Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission approval.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 3) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.04  LITTERING.



   No person shall litter or cast or allow to remain any rubbish or trash
of any kind or nature in or about any city public park or public grounds.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 4) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.05  MOTORIZED VEHICLE TRAFFIC.



   Motorized vehicles shall be driven or parked only in designated areas
on any city public park or public grounds and shall be driven therein at a
maximum speed of 5 miles per hour. Snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles shall
not be operated in any city park or public grounds except in areas
specifically designated and posted for their operation.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 5)  (Ord. 541, passed 1- 23-2006; Am. Ord. 640,
passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.06  PUBLIC PARK AND PUBLIC GROUNDS HOURS.



   No person, except authorized city personnel, shall enter or be in or
remain in any city public park or public grounds between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 4:00 a.m. except by special written consent of the City Clerk, after
prior Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission approval.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 6) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.07  OPEN FIRES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall build a fire in any place in any city public park or
public grounds, at any time, except in fireplaces or receptacles provided
therein by the city or in privately owned grills that are not harmful to
grass.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 7) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.08  SALE OF ARTICLES.



   No person shall sell any articles or solicit for the sale thereof, on
any city public park or public grounds without a permit issued by the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 8) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.09  POSTING SIGNS AND PLACARDS.



   No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription, whatsoever the same may be, on any city public
park or public grounds, without the prior written permission of the City
Clerk, and after approval of the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 9) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.10  ANIMALS.



   Domestic animals under physical restraint are allowed in all city
public parks unless otherwise posted. No person shall allow any domestic
animal, including dogs and cats, to go unattended and without physical
restraint in any city public park or on public grounds except Bixby Park.
Domestic animals under voice command or signal are allowed in Bixby Park
without physical restraint. Any person violating this subdivision shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 388, passed 6-26-1987; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22- 2015; Am. Ord. 659, passed 8-8-2016)



§ 90.11  CLIMBING OF TREES AND ON BUILDINGS.



   No person shall climb any trees or climb on any building or structure
in any city public park or public ground.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 12) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.12  POSTING OF AREAS.



   The Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commisssion of the city shall have the
authority to determine, from time to time, the areas of any city public park
and public grounds in which other activities and conduct not amenable to
efficient operation of the park or public grounds shall be prohibited and
shall post appropriate signs to notify persons thereof.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 13) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.13  FEES FOR USE OF PUBLIC PARK AND PUBLIC GROUNDS.



   The City Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission is authorized and enabled
to require payment of fees for the use of designated park facilities and
shall post a schedule of the designated fees in a conspicuous place. Any
person who shall fail to pay the prescribed fee for the use of the facilities
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 14) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22- 2015) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.14  USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to
take, use, possess, sell or consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquors,
as defined in M.S. Ch. 340A, in or upon any public park in the city, except
Fenway Athletic Complex, Lakeside Park and Kulenkamp Park, where sale and
consumption may be allowed as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   No person or group of persons shall sell or offer to sell any
intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in any public park without the
recommendation of the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission, approval of the
Chief of Police, and issuance of a temporary on-sale license by the city
approved by the State Commissioner of Public Safety pursuant to the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.404 Subd. 10. Sales shall be conducted only by a
person or entity holding a caterer's permit issued to the person or entity by
the State Commissioner of Public Safety pursuant to M.S. § 340A.404 Subd.
12, or by a club or charitable, religious or other nonprofit organization in
existence for at least 3 years. Sales shall only be allowed in connection
with an outdoor entertainment event for which a city permit has been
obtained. The fee for the license shall be established by city ordinance.



   (C)   An application for a license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the day for which the
license applies. In granting the license, the City Council may impose such
conditions and restrictions as it deems proper to preserve the public peace
and safety. Licensed, private security guards or off-duty police officers
shall be required to maintain order and insure compliance with the
regulations of the City Code and state statutes pertaining to the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages. Sales and consumption of alcoholic
beverages shall be confined to designated areas approved by the Parks,
Trails, and Lakes Commission. The licensee shall be responsible for the
collection and remittal to the city of any concession fees required for an
event.



   (D)   No license shall be issued for the sale of intoxicating liquor
or 3.2% malt liquor unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial
responsibility as described in M.S. § 340A.409, as amended. The city shall
be named as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance evidencing
the required insurance coverage.



   (E)   Consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquors, as
defined in M.S. Ch. 340A, may be allowed in designated areas in Fenway Park
Athletic Complex, Lakeside Park and Kulenkamp Park, with a permit issued by
the city, upon recommendation of the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission and
the approval of the Chief of Police, to groups that have reserved fields or
other park facilities. An application for a consumption permit shall be made
at least 30 days prior to the occasion for which it is required. The issuance
of the permits shall be subject to the conditions,  rules and regulations
adopted by the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission from time to time. The
permit may be issued for a series of occasions such as an athletic league
season.



(Prior Code, § 5.06)  (Am. Ord. 615, passed 4-9-2012; Am. Ord. 640, passed
6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642, passed 6-22-2015) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.15  VARIANCES.



   Variances to the strict application of this section may be granted only
by the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission and only in unusual circumstances.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the normal care, operation or functions of the
city or its authorized agents in or on any city public park or public grounds.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 15) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 90.98  VIOLATION.



   Any person violating this chapter, or any provision thereof, unless
otherwise designated, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 5.05, Subd. 16) (Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22- 2015) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91: SHIELDS LAKE MANAGEMENT




Section



   91.01   Application



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Restrictions and regulations



   91.04   Exceptions, enforcement and markings



   91.05   Preemption



   91.06   Effective date



   91.98   Violations



§ 91.01  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to the surface waters of Shields Lake and to
the city’s public access located adjacent to Shields Lake. This chapter is
designed to perpetuate and preserve the natural beauty and recreational
utility of Shields Lake into the future.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms MOTORBOAT, SLOW-NO-WAKE,
and WATERCRAFT shall have the meanings given to them in M.S. § 86B.005, as
it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)



§ 91.03  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall be allowed to operate a motorboat upon Shields
Lake, except those motorboats powered by an electric motor not exceeding 35
pounds of thrust.



   (B)   No person shall enter into any restricted area upon Shields
Lake. Restricted areas are marked on the lake by buoys, signs or other
markings.



   (C)   No person shall use the public access adjacent to Shields Lake
from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on the following day.



   (D)   No person shall enter into any area of Shields Lake affected
by the aeration system and/or marked by “thin ice” or other appropriate
signs or markings.



   (E)   The City Council shall direct the erection of signs
prohibiting or regulating vehicular traffic upon the public access adjacent
to Shields Lake as is deemed necessary, prudent and/or advisable by the City
Council.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)



§ 91.04  EXCEPTIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND MARKINGS.



   (A)   Resource management, enforcement, emergency and maintenance
personnel shall be exempt from this chapter while in the performance of their
official duties.



   (B)   Primary enforcement of this chapter shall rest with the
Washington County Sheriff’s Water Patrol. This shall not limit the
enforcement of this chapter by other licensed peace officers.



   (C)   The city shall place a sign at the public access adjacent to
the lake (and at other suitable locations) indicating the existence of
restrictions on the use of the lake and, in addition, will insure that the
buoys or signs used to mark the restricted areas of the lake and the “thin
ice” signs meet the requirements of Minn. Rules, § 6110.1500, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)



§ 91.05  PREEMPTION.



   It is the intention of this chapter to pre-empt, pursuant to M.S. §
86B.205, Subd. 5(iii), as it may be amended from time to time, any county
rules, regulations, or ordinances in conflict with the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)



§ 91.06  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication according to law, and following its approval by the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to M.S. §
86B.205, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)



§ 91.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm, group, corporation or any other legal entity who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



(Ord. 90 (town), passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92: OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT



Section



   92.01   Purpose and intent



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Permit required



   92.04   Permit application requirements



   92.05   Investigation



   92.06   Permit conditions



   92.07   Permit fees



   92.08   Insurance



   92.09   Denial of application



   92.10   Exemption from permit



   92.11   Restrictions on outdoor entertainment events



   92.12   Noise regulation



   92.98   Violations



§ 92.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the public’s
health, safety and welfare through the issuance of permits for outdoor
entertainment activities conducted within the city.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person or organization who seeks an outdoor
entertainment permit to conduct or sponsor an outdoor entertainment event
within the city.



   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT. A specific event or activity held in the open
and not within an enclosed structure, including but not limited to events
held outdoors or in temporary structures such as tents, sound stages,
pavilions and amphitheaters during which sound waves are produced, either by
voice or instruments, amplified or acoustic.



      (1)   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT - COMMERCIAL. A specific outdoor
entertainment event or activity conducted or sponsored by a commercial entity
for profit or promotion of its business.



      (2)   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT - NONPROFIT. A specific outdoor
entertainment event or activity conducted or sponsored by a nonprofit
community organization or club for the purpose of raising funds for
charitable, educational, religious or other similar purposes.



      (3)   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT - PUBLIC. A specific outdoor
entertainment event or activity conducted or sponsored by the city or any of
its boards or agencies and any event or activity conducted or sponsored by a
public or private school.



      (4)   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT - PRIVATE. A specific outdoor
event or activity conducted or held on private property by the property owner
or the owner’s lessee such as a wedding reception, private party, or
similar family or social functions.



   PERMITTEE. A person to whom an outdoor entertainment permit is issued.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee,
association, or any body of persons whether incorporated or not. With respect
to acts prohibited or required herein, PERSON shall include employees and
licensees.



   SCHOOL. An institution or place for instruction or education where 25
or more persons receive a full course of educational instruction with an
organized body of teachers associated for pursuit and dissemination of
knowledge.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person desiring to conduct or sponsor an outdoor entertainment
activity in the city shall obtain a permit from the City Administrator.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.04  PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any person conducting or sponsoring an outdoor entertainment
activity shall make application for a permit by filing a completed
application with the City Administrator at least 30 days in advance of the
date on which the event is to occur.



   (B)   The application shall require the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the person or organization
conducting the event and the names and dates of birth of the persons or of
the managers and officers of the organization;



      (2)   The date, time, and place of the event to be held;



      (3)   Whether the persons conducting the event or the officers
of the organization sponsoring the event are over 18 years of age; and
whether such persons have been convicted of any crimes other than minor
traffic offenses;



      (4)   The approximate number of persons expected to attend the
event;



      (5)   A description of the type of outdoor entertainment to be
conducted;



      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the entity
providing the entertainment;



      (7)   Whether amplified or on-amplified music or singing will
be provided;



      (8)   The number of security personnel to be employed together
with their names and address;



      (9)   Such other information as the City Administrator shall
require.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.05  INVESTIGATION.



   The application shall be referred to the Public Safety Director of the
city for investigation into the contents of the application and for
recommendation as to matters of public safety.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.06  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   The City Administrator or the Administrator’s designee may issue the
permit with such conditions and requirements as are necessary to protect the
safety and rights of the public, including the requirement that private
security personnel be employed by the permittee in the conduct of the event.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.07  PERMIT FEES.



   A permit fee in an amount established by a duly adopted resolution of
the City Council shall be paid with the application.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.08  INSURANCE.



   As a condition of the granting of a permit for an outdoor entertainment
conducted on public property or public streets or parking lots, the permittee
shall provide to the city a public liability insurance policy naming the city
as an insured entity with limits of not less than 1 million dollars per
occurrence.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.09  DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   A permit may be denied based upon a determination that:



   (A)   The event would seriously endanger public safety;



   (B)   The event would seriously inconvenience the general public;



   (C)   The event would unreasonably infringe upon the rights of
abutting properties;



   (D)   The event would conflict with another proximate event or
interfere with construction or maintenance work;



   (E)   There is not sufficient safety personnel or other necessary
city staff to accommodate the event;



   (F)   The applicant failed to complete the application form after
being notified of the additional information required;



   (G)   The applicant cannot meet, or is unwilling to meet, all of the
requirements of this chapter;



   (H)   Other issues in the public interest were identified by the
City Administrator;



   (I)   Failure to prepay expenses.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.10  EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT.



   The city, its boards and agencies, and a school as defined herein,
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.11  RESTRICTIONS ON OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS.



   (A)   No outdoor entertainment - commercial employing the use of any
electronic or audio system for the purpose of amplifying sound shall be
conducted on 1 business site on more than 6 occasions in any 1 year. Not more
than 3 occasions shall be 1 day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., except that on and near to July 4 an occasion shall consist of such
number of days as may be permitted by the City Council in connection with
other permitted activities occurring each day during the annual 4th of July
celebration and except further that the hours of the activity on one or more
of such days included in said July 4th occasion may be extended at the
discretion of City Council. The remaining 3 occasions shall be 1 day between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. For any commercial entity not utilizing
the July 4th occasion, the City Council may, in its discretion, extend the
hours of an activity on one other permitted occasion.



   (B)   No outdoor entertainment - nonprofit employing the use or
operation of any electronic or audio system for the purpose of amplifying
sound shall be conducted by the nonprofit organization on more than 2 
occasions within any 1 year with an occasion being defined as 1 day from 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except that on or near to July 4, an occasion shall
consist of such number of consecutive days as may be permitted by the City
Council in connection with other activities occurring each day during the
annual 4th of July celebration and except further that the hours of the
activity on 1 or more such days may be extended at the discretion of City
Council.



   (C)   No outdoor entertainment - private shall occur on more than 1
occasion on any 1 site within the city in any 1 year. An occasion shall be 1
day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and midnight of the same day.



   (D)   No outdoor entertainment shall be held or conducted between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 539, passed 6-27-2005; Am. Ord. 571,
passed 12-10-2007; Am. Ord. 583, passed 6-22-2009)



§ 92.12  NOISE REGULATION.



   Each person who is issued an outdoor entertainment permit shall comply
in all respects with §§ 96.20et seq.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



§ 92.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to law.
Each act of violation and each day a violation occurs or continues
constitutes a separate offense. In all cases the city shall be entitled to
collect the costs of prosecution to the extent outlined by law, the Rules of
Criminal Procedure, and the Rules of Court.



(Ord. 527, passed 11-10-2003)



CHAPTER 93: ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Intrusion alarm systems



   93.04   Fire or emergency alarm systems



   93.05   Inspections



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage security and fire
alarm users and alarm businesses (including, but not limited to, sales,
installation, and/or monitoring) to maintain the operational reliability and
the proper use of alarm systems so as to limit unnecessary police, fire and
emergency medical responses to false alarms and alarm malfunctions.



   (B)   This chapter governs burglary, robbery, intrusion, and fire
alarms, provides for service fees for excessive false alarms, and provides
for issuance of citations in lieu of assessing the service fees.



(Ord. 100 (town), passed 9-13-1999)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SITE. A single premise or location, or a multi-tenant location,
served by an alarm system or systems.



   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical, electrical, or radio controlled device or
system which is designed to emit, transmit or relay a signal or message and
which, when activated, is intended to summon, or that would reasonably be
expected to summon, police, or fire services. Alarm systems does not include:



      (1)   An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is
permanently located at a site; or



      (2)   An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a
premise and which does not constitute a local alarm.



   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system signal or message which
elicits notification to and/or response by public safety personnel when there
is no evidence of a crime, fire, medical emergency or other activity which
warrants a call for immediate police, firefighting or emergency medical
assistance. This may include, but is not limited to, an alarm discovered by a
police officer or firefighter before notification of an alarm from a monitor
or from a local alarm system that is not monitored.



   FIRE OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL ALARM. A system or portion of a combination
system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and
annunciate the status of fire or medical emergency or supervisory signal
initiating devices which are intended to summon fire or emergency services of
public safety personnel.



   INTRUSION ALARM. A robbery, burglary, panic or other alarm intended to
summon the police, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a
person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion.



   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that
is audible or visible from the exterior of the structure.



   WARNING NOTICE. A notification provided to the owner or person in
charge of an alarm site by public safety personnel for false alarms due to
system malfunction or when no reason can be determined for the false alarm.
The warning notice will require that the alarm system be inspected and/or
serviced within 5 working days with written documentation submitted to the
notifying official that the system is in working order.



(Ord. 100 (town), passed 9-13-1999)



§ 93.03  INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Each time public safety personnel respond to a false intrusion
alarm due to system malfunction or when no reason can be determined for such
false alarm, the public safety personnel shall issue a false alarm warning
notice.



   (B)   A service fee for excessive false intrusion alarms shall be
charged as follows:



      (1)   No service fee shall be charged for the first 3 false
alarms occurring within a 12 month period, calculated from the date of the
first such alarm;



      (2)   Each false alarm in excess of 3 and up to and including
6 within a 12 month period shall result in a service fee of $50 per false
alarm;



      (3)   Each false alarm in excess of 6 within a 12 month period
shall result in a service fee of $100 per false alarm.



   (C)   No service fee shall be assessed, if the false alarm is:



      (1)   Caused by an electrical storm, tornado or other act of
God where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the alarm system;



      (2)   Caused by the intermittent disruption of telephone
circuits beyond the control of the alarm site owner;



      (3)   Caused by electrical power disruption or failure in
excess of 2 hours beyond the control of the alarm site owner;



      (4)   At a location where the public safety personnel have
installed the Varda or other similar alarms.



   (D)   All false alarm service fees are due and payable within 30
days from date of invoice. In the event that false alarm service fees are not
paid as required by this chapter, the public safety personnel may refer the
matter to the City Attorney for appropriate legal action.



   (E)   A person commits an offense in violation of this chapter if
the person suffers or permits false alarms in excess of 3 within a 12 month
period, each such false alarm constituting a separate violation.



(Ord. 100 (town), passed 9-13-1999)



§ 93.04  FIRE OR EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Each time public safety personnel respond to a false alarm due
to system malfunction or when no reason can be determined for the false
alarm, the responding official shall issue a warning notice.



   (B)   A service fee for excessive false alarms shall be charged as
follows:



      (1)   No service fee shall be charged for the first 3 false
alarms occurring within a 12 month period, calculated from the date of the
first such alarm;



      (2)   Each false alarm in excess of 3 and up to and including
6 within a 12 month period shall result in a service fee of $ 100 per false
alarm;



      (3)   Each false alarm in excess of 6 within a 12 month period
shall result in a service fee of $200 per false alarm.



   (C)   No service fee shall be assessed if the false alarm is:



      (1)   Caused by an electrical storm, tornado or other act of
God where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the alarm system;



      (2)   Caused by the intermittent disruption of telephone
circuits beyond the control of the alarm site owner;



      (3)   Caused by electrical power disruption or failure in
excess of 2 hours beyond the control of the alarm site owner.



   (D)   All false alarm service fees are due and payable within 30
days from date of invoice. In the event that false alarm service feed are not
paid as required by this chapter, the city may refer the matter to the City
Attorney for appropriate legal action.



   (E)   A person commits an offense in violation of this chapter if
the person suffers or permits false alarms in excess of 3 within a 12 month
period, each false alarm constituting a separate violation.



(Ord. 100 (town), passed - -)



§ 93.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   In order to ensure the health, safety and public welfare the
city shall conduct regular fire inspections of all commercial, retail and
industrial buildings and structures within the city.



   (B)   The owners or persons in control of any building or structure,
or part thereof, shall give access to all parts of the premises during
business hours for inspection.



   (C)   Inspections will be conducted no more than once each calendar
year unless the city is conducting a reinspection to determine whether
previously discovered violations have been remedied or has reasonable cause
to believe that a fire hazard or violation of any code requirements that may
post a fire hazard exists or is occurring on the premises.



   (D)   A fee shall be charged for each inspection in the amount
established in the fee ordinance of the city.



      (1)   The fee shall be due and payable within 30 days of the
date of delivery of an invoice to the owner or occupant of the building or
structure or any part thereof.



      (2)   Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of the
building or structure to pay the required fee, the city, in addition to any
other remedy it may have for collection of the amount owing, may certify the
same to the County Auditor of Washington County, Minnesota for collection in
the same manner as taxes and special assessments are collected.



(Ord. 578, passed 12-8-2008)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section



   94.01   Minnesota State Fire Code adopted



   94.02   Fireworks



§ 94.01  MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   The Minnesota State Fire Code, as may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference pursuant to M.S. Ch. 299F, and made a part of
this code as if set forth in full herein.



§ 94.02  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Fireworks are regulated by M.S. §§ 624.20 - 624.25, as it
may be amended from time to time. In addition to these state laws, all
display, sales, storage, and use of fireworks shall comply with this section.



   (B)   No person shall do any of the following without obtaining a
permit:



      (1)   Store or sell any fireworks;



      (2)   Make a public display of fireworks.



   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit to store or sell
fireworks shall be made to the City Administrator. A criminal record check of
all applicants will be performed. The Fire Chief or his or her designee will
inspect the proposed location for selling and/or storing fireworks to
determine if it is a suitable location. The Fire Chief or his or her designee
will also determine if the applicant is competent and trained to handle
fireworks.



      (2)   The application for a permit must include:



         (a)   A letter from the property owner granting
permission to the applicant to sell and/or store fireworks on the property;



         (b)   A floor plan designating the area where the
fireworks will be sold and/or stored;



         (c)   A list of fireworks that will be sold. The list
must include the name, weight and quantity of the fireworks, and Tier II
Material Safety Data Sheets.



   (D)   The fee for the permit shall be as provided by Council
resolution.



   (E)   A permit for the storage and/or retail sale of fireworks shall
be issued only upon the following terms and conditions:



      (1)   The applicant shall not have been convicted of a
“crime of violence” as defined by M.S. § 624.712, Subd. 5, as it may 
be amended from time to time, or any fire/fireworks related crime within the
last 5 years;



      (2)   The sale of fireworks shall occur only on property
located in “B” or “M” zones. No sale of fireworks shall occur on
property zoned residential or properties used for educational purposes or
assemblies. No sale of fireworks shall occur on required parking areas for
permanent commercial structures;



      (3)   The storage and/or retail sales of fireworks in a
nonpermanent structure shall be conducted in compliance with the City Code
except as otherwise provided herein;



      (4)   Fireworks sales and/or storage areas shall have “no
smoking” signs in red letters not less than 2 inches in height on white
background. All signs shall be maintained in legible condition. Signage must
be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee;



      (5)   The discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited within
100 feet of any location in which fireworks are being sold or stored;



      (6)   Each permit holder shall have at least 2 water-type or
equivalent fire extinguishers of not less than 2.5 gallon capacity in the
area where fireworks are sold or stored;



      (7)   There shall be at least 2 exits from all buildings where
fireworks are sold or stored;



      (8)   In buildings without an approved automatic sprinkler
system, fireworks sales displays and/or storage shall be limited to 50 lbs.
net pyrotechnic composition or 200 lbs. gross weight, if the pyrotechnic
composition weight is not known;



      (9)   In buildings with an approved automatic sprinkler
system, fireworks sales displays and/or storage shall be limited to 100 lbs.
net pyrotechnic composition or 400 lbs. gross weight, if the pyrotechnic
composition weight is not known;



      (10)   A list of all fireworks displayed for sale and stored
on the property must be posted in a conspicuous location near the
display/storage area. The list shall include the name, weight, and quantity
of the fireworks and be accompanied by the Tier II Material Safety Data
Sheets. Upon request, samples of the fireworks shall be made available to the
Fire Chief or his or her designee for testing;



      (11)   A permit granted pursuant to this section is not
transferable. It is valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful to do any of the following:



      (1)   To use or discharge any fireworks along a parade route
prior to, during, or after any parade, or at any place of public assembly,
park, or government property except such discharge of fireworks as may be
permitted in connection with an officially sanctioned public celebration or
event;



      (2)   To throw or toss any fireworks at any person, animal,
vehicle, or other thing or object;



      (3)   To discharge fireworks within 100 feet of any building
in which fireworks are sold or stored;



      (4)   To discharge fireworks in an area without a water source
connected to a hose, fire extinguisher, and/or other means of putting out a
fire that is acceptable to the Fire Chief or his or her designee;



      (5)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee may ban fireworks
for any period of time for any public safety reason;



      (6)   To sell, distribute or furnish any permitted consumer
fireworks to a person under the age of 18 years, any person who is obviously
intoxicated, chemically impaired or incompetent, or any person who fails to
present competent age identification in the form of a current, valid
Minnesota driver’s license, current, valid Minnesota identification card,
or current, valid photo driver’s license or photo identification issued by
another state.



   (G)   In addition, the City Council may suspend or revoke a permit
issued pursuant to this section on any of the following grounds:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in a license application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the permitted activity;



      (3)   Any violation of this section or state law;



      (4)   Conducting the permitted activity in an unlawful manner
or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;



      (5)   Any significant unauthorized deviation, enlargement or
alteration of the approved site plan for the storage and sales display areas
of the premises.



   (H)   All signage used or employed in connection with the display,
sale, storage and use of fireworks shall be in strict conformance with the
provisions of the Zoning Code and shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (I)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. Fireworks
materials that are kept, possessed or stored in violation of state statutes
or of this section may be confiscated and destroyed. The costs associated
with disposal shall be paid by the violator and/or be assessed back to the
property on which the fireworks are being stored, displayed or sold.



(Ord. 533, passed 3-22-2004)



CHAPTER 95:  POLLUTION CONTROL



Section




Air Pollution




   95.01   Air quality standards




Treatment and Disposal of Soil Contaminated with Petroleum Products




   95.20   Policy



   95.21   Purpose



   95.22   Definitions



   95.23   Prohibition



   95.24   Permit for treatment and disposal



   95.25   Violations



AIR POLLUTION



§ 95.01  AIR QUALITY STANDARDS.



   (A)   The ambient air quality standards and air pollution control
regulations as presently adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
are adopted by reference and the provisions thereof thus incorporated shall
be as much a part of this section as if they had been set forth in full
herein.



   (B)   Three copies of the ambient air quality standards and air
pollution control regulations as promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency shall be marked by the City Clerk as official copies and filed
for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of the ambient air
quality standards and air pollution control regulations herein shall be
punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 19.02)



TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF SOIL CONTAMINATED
WITH PETROLEUM PRODUCTS



§ 95.20  POLICY.



   It is the duty, responsibility, and policy of the city to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of those residing in, working in, or visiting the
city. The city believes that in order to fulfill its duties it must provide
regulations dealing with the treatment and disposal of soil contaminated with
petroleum products.



(Ord. 85 (town), passed 9-23-1991)



§ 95.21  PURPOSE.



   The city intends by this chapter to supplement the regulations imposed
by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (“MPCA”) and to work in
conjunction with that agency with regard to treatment and disposal of the
contaminated soil. The city is a unique and special place because of its open
spaces, woodlands, meadows, nature areas, and abundant lakes, rivers,
streams, and wetlands. The city’s clean and natural environment is its
major asset. Unless very carefully monitored and regulated, petroleum
contaminated soil treatment and/or disposal is incompatible with the clean
and natural environment that the city must preserve in order to ensure its
viability as a place to live, work and grow. The already existing sources of
petroleum related uses in the city provide a threat to the city’s
environment. Accordingly, it has been determined by the city that it is not
appropriate for contaminated soils to be treated and/or disposed of within
the city except pursuant to the terms and conditions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 85 (town), passed 9-23-1991)



§ 95.22  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTAMINATED SOIL. Soil material which has been contaminated by
petroleum products such as, but not limited to, gasoline, diesel fuel,
kerosene, home heating oil, fuel oil, motor oil, or jet fuel.



   CONTAMINATION.  Contamination in any way from petroleum products such
as direct spills or from the gradual leaking of storage tanks.



   DISPOSAL. Those methods of final handling of contaminated soil
neutralized by use of one of the MPCA authorized treatment methods,
including, but not limited to, placement, burial on-site, off-site removal,
or soil farming.



   MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   TREATMENT. Those methods of neutralizing contaminated soil authorized
for use by the MPCA.



(Ord. 85 (town), passed 9-23-1991)



§ 95.23  PROHIBITION.



   No contaminated soil may be stored, treated or disposed of within the
city without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 85 (town), passed 9-23-1991)



§ 95.24  PERMIT FOR TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL.



   Contaminated soil may be treated and disposed of within the city
pursuant to the following procedure.



   (A)   Application. Before any contaminated soil may be stored,
treated and/or disposed of in the city, the entity seeking to treat or
dispose of the contaminated soil, or its agent, shall complete and submit an
application for a permit to store, treat and/or dispose of the soil.
Application shall be made on a form approved by the city.



   (B)   Fee. At the time of application for a permit to treat and
dispose of contaminated soil, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee
equal to $1 per cubic yard of contaminated soil sought to be treated and/or
disposed of to the maximum of $300. In the event that the city determines
that it will be necessary for the city to retain an outside consultant to
provide technical review and monitoring, the applicant for the permit shall,
as a condition to receiving the permit, agree in writing to pay the city’s
cost of the outside consultant.



   (C)   Bond. Any applicant who applies for a permit must
contemporaneously supply to the city a bond payable to the city in the event
of a default by the applicant in any stage of the process of treating and/or
disposing of contaminated soil. The bond shall be in an amount equal or
greater to 125% of the total estimated cost of the treatment and/or disposal.



   (D)   Review. The city shall review the application in conjunction
with the MPCA’s review of the proposed contaminated soil treatment and/or
disposal. The review shall include examination, investigation, and comments
from such individuals as is deemed necessary and/or helpful by the city.



   (E)   Notice.  Notice of any City Council hearing at which the
permit will be considered will be given, in writing, to owners of record of
all properties within 350 feet of the property proposed for the treatment
and/or disposal of the contaminated soil. Published notice shall also be made
in the city’s legal newspaper. All notices  shall precede the hearing by
at least 2 weeks.



   (F)   Hearing. The City Council will hold a hearing on each
application for a permit to treat and/or dispose of contaminated soil. In
determining whether or not a permit shall be issued, the City Council may
prohibit such treatment and/or disposal within the city if it determines that
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the community will be
jeopardized by such treatment and/or disposal within the city. Any denial of
a permit application shall be accompanied by specific written findings
concerning the basis of the denial. In approving a permit application, the
City Council shall also include on the permit all reasonable conditions as
are necessary to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the community.



   (G)   Certification. No permit shall be considered by the city for
the treatment and/or disposal of any contaminated soil until the applicant
supplies to the city a certification from a qualified testing organization
attesting to the contents of the contaminated soil sought to be treated
and/or disposed of. The test shall be the broadest test possible and shall
test for all volatile organic chemicals, heavy metals, and other commonly
recognized hazardous materials. All costs associated with the testing shall
be borne by the applicant.



   (H)   Well testing. No permit shall be considered by the city for
the treatment and/or disposal of any contaminated soil until the applicant
supplies to the city a certification from a qualified testing organization
attesting to the quality of water in wells in the vicinity of the property
proposed. The specific wells to be tested shall be chosen by the city. The
tests shall test for such items and materials deemed necessary by the city.
All city decisions pursuant to this section shall be based upon the facts and
circumstances of each individual application. The city shall be guided in its
decisions by the City Engineer, County Health Department, and such other
individuals or entities as the city deems helpful. All costs associated with
the testing shall be borne by the applicant.



(Ord. 85 (town), passed 9-23-1991)



§ 95.25  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity which
violates any provision of this subchapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity which violates the
terms of a permit or any condition thereon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 85 (town), passed 9-23-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 96: NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Nuisances




   96.01   Definition



   96.02   Nuisances affecting health, safety, comfort or repose



   96.025   Noxious weeds and grasses



   96.03   Nuisances affecting morals and decency



   96.04   Nuisances affecting peace and safety



   96.05   Enforcement



   96.06   Powers of officers



   96.07   Abatement by City Council



   96.08   Junk yards



   96.09   Violations



   96.10   Trespass on public property



   96.11   Use of roller skates and skateboards



   96.12   Use of public rights-of-way to view public events




Noise Regulations




   96.20   Definitions



   96.21   Noises prohibited



   96.22   Hourly restriction on certain operations



   96.23   Receiving land use standards



   96.24   Air circulation devices



   96.25   Exemption for emergency work



   96.26   Exemption for community celebrations or functions



   96.27   Power and duties of Police Department



   96.28   Variances



   96.29   Enforcement



   96.30   Effective date



NUISANCE OFFENSES



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A thing, act or use of property which shall:



      (1)   Annoy, injure or endanger the health, safety, comfort or
repose of the public;



      (2)   Offend public decency;



      (3)   Unlawfully interfere with the use of or obstruct or tend
to obstruct or render dangerous for passage, a public water, park, square,
street, alley or highway;



      (4)   Depreciate the value of the property of the inhabitants
of the city or of a considerable number thereof; or



      (5)   In any way render the inhabitants of the city, or a
considerable number thereof, insecure in life or in use of property.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subds. 1, 2)



§ 96.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH, SAFETY, COMFORT OR REPOSE.



   The following are declared to be public nuisances, affecting health,
safety, comfort or repose:



   (A)   All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   Milk which is produced by cows which have not been tested and
found free of tuberculosis within the year previous to the offering of such
milk for sale to the public;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure or rubbish;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight;



   (G)   Dumping the contents of any cesspool , privy vault or garbage
can except at places authorized by law; or allowing any cesspool or
individual sewage disposal system to overflow in any manner;



   (H)   An accumulation of tin cans, bottles or trash or debris of any
nature or description; and the throwing, dumping, or disposing of any dead
animals, manure, garbage, waste, decaying matter, ground, sand, stones,
ashes, rubbish, tin cans, or other material or debris of any kind on private
property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   Offensive trades and businesses as defined by statute or the
laws of the city not licensed as provided by law;



   (K)   All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease;



   (L)   The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless the
samples are placed in the hands of an adult person by someone properly
licensed;



   (M)   All other acts, omission of acts, occupations and uses of
property which are deemed by the City Council and the City Health Officer to
be a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the city or a considerable
number thereof.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 3)  (Am. Ord. 606, passed 4-11-2011)



§ 96.025  NOXIOUS WEEDS AND GRASSES.



   (A)   Noxious weeds, tall grasses and other rank growths are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and include the following:



      (1)   Noxious weeds such as cocklebur, burdock, tumble
mustard, wild mustard, wild oats, Canadian thistle, Russian thistle, oxeye
daisy, quack grass, French weed and any other primary noxious weeds as
defined by state statute.



      (2)   Grass which has grown to a height of 8 or more inches or
which has gone to seed.



   (B)   A person owning or occupying land, or a person responsible for
the maintenance of public land shall destroy all noxious weeds on the land at
a time and in a manner ordered by the city weed inspector.



   (C)   Subject to division (D) below, in all zoning districts, except
the Conservancy, Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts, and except in
designated wetlands or wetland buffer areas, bluff lands, slopes of 3 feet
horizontal to 1 foot vertical or greater, drainage ways, undeveloped land
with an area of 5 or more acres, public open spaces, nature preserves, road
rights-of-way without curb and gutter, densely wooded areas, golf courses and
gardens, a person owning or occupying land shall not permit or allow grass
which has grown to a height of 8 or more inches or which has gone to seed.



   (D)   A person owning or occupying a platted lot of .5 acres or less
within the Rural Residential District shall be subject to the lawn
maintenance regulations described in division (C) above.



(Ord. 606, passed 4-11-2011)



§ 96.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting morals and
decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatuses used in such
occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold,
bartered or given away in violation of law, or where persons are permitted to
resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors as a beverage
contrary to law, or where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or
distribution in violation of law, and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars
and other property kept at and used for maintaining such a place;



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of
intoxicating liquor or any immoral purpose;



   (F)   All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines
and newspapers and billboards;



   (G)   The public use of profane or obscene language;



   (H)   The looking into or peeping through doors, windows, or
openings of private homes by methods of stealth and without proper authority
and by surreptitious methods, or what is commonly known as “window
peeping”;



   (I)   All other things, acts, omissions or occupations that may be
considered detrimental to the moral well being of the inhabitants of the city
or a considerable number thereof.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 4)



§ 96.04  NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 12 hours
after the snow and ice have ceased to be deposited thereon;



   (B)   All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface
of any public street or alley;



   (C)   All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been
damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding ½ of their
original value or which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the
public;



   (D)   All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous
substances or materials stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount
other than that provided by law;



   (E)   All use of display or fireworks except as provided by law;



   (F)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;



   (G)   All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected
in violation of fire ordinances and building codes concerning manner and
materials and construction;



   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use of the
public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such
conditions as are provided by law, and any other excavation left unprotected
or uncovered indefinitely or allowed to exist in such manner as to attract
minor children;



   (I)   Radio aerials strung or erected in any manner except that
provided by law;



   (J)   The piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, wrecked,
junked, or inoperative vehicles, and other junk or debris;



   (K)   The use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk,
or any use of a public street or sidewalk, which causes large crowds of
people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of public streets or
sidewalks;



   (L)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
public streets or sidewalks or so situated as to endanger public safety, not
constructed or maintained as provided by law or without proper permit;



   (M)   The allowing of rain, water, ice or snow to fall from any
building on any public street or sidewalk or to flow across any public
sidewalk;



   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery, equipment or other
property in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property
so as to attract minor children;



   (O)   Throwing, dropping, or releasing printed matter, paper, or any
other material or objects over and upon the city from an airplane, balloon or
other aircraft or in such a manner as to cause such materials to fall on land
in the city;



   (P)   Placing entrance culverts or doing any act which may alter or
affect the drainage of public streets or alleys or the surface or grade of
public streets, alleys, or sidewalks without proper permit;



   (Q)   Making repairs to motor vehicles, or tires in public streets
or alleys excepting only emergency repairs when it will not unduly impede or
interfere with traffic;



   (R)   Throwing, placing, depositing or burning leaves, trash, lawn
clippings, weeds, grass, or other materials in the streets, alleys or gutters;



   (S)   Erecting, painting or placing of unauthorized traffic signs or
advertising signs in streets or alleys or on sidewalks;



   (T)   All unnecessary interferences and disturbance of radios or TV
sets caused by defective electrical appliances and equipment or improper
operation thereof;



   (U)   Driving motorized scooters, bicycles, motorcycles, or any type
of motorized vehicle on any sidewalk, walkway or private property of others,
and the driving of the vehicles in a loud, noisy or unsafe manner or in
groups of more than 2 on any public street, alley or roadway;



   (V)   To operate any private parking lot without keeping the same
reasonably free from dust;



   (W)   To operate any artificial lighting devices upon any
residential, commercial or industrial premises so as to cause a distraction
to passing motorists or to operate artificial lighting devices upon any
residential, commercial or industrial premises without some effective device
so as to protect adjacent premises from being adversely affected thereby;



   (X)   The maintenance of any tree or shrub, the roots of which are
causing damage to any public sewer, sidewalk, pavement or other public
property, or setting out or planting any tree or bush in the public street or
any portion thereof;



   (Y)   All other conditions, acts, or things which are liable to
cause injury to the person or property of another;



   (Z)   All unnecessary noises which tend to disturb the peace and
repose of neighboring property owners;



   (AA)   Any use of the public beach or public accesses to Forest Lake
after the hour of 10:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 5)



§ 96.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the City Council by and through the City Police
Department to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, and the City Council
may by resolution delegate to such other officers or agencies power to
enforce particular provisions of this subchapter, including the power to
inspect private premises and the officers charged with enforcement of this
chapter shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and
maintenance of public nuisances.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 6)



§ 96.06  POWERS OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   Whenever in the judgment of the officer charged with
enforcement, it is determined upon investigation that a public nuisance is
being maintained or exists within the city, the officer shall notify in
writing the person committing or maintaining the nuisance and require him or
her to terminate and abate the nuisance and to remove the conditions or
remedy the defects. The written notice shall be served upon the person
committing or maintaining the nuisance in person or by registered mail. If
the premises are not occupied and the address of the owner is unknown,
service on the owner may be had by posting a copy of the notice on the
premises. The notice shall require the owner or occupant of the premises, or
both, to take reasonable steps within a reasonable time to abate and remove
the nuisance, the steps and time to be designated in the notice, but the
maximum time for the removal of the nuisance after service of the notice
shall not in any event exceed 30 days. Service of notice may be proved by
filing an affidavit of service with the City Clerk setting forth the manner
and time thereof.



   (B)   When an order so given is not complied with, the noncompliance
shall be reported forthwith to the City Council for such action as may be
necessary and deemed advisable in the name of the city to abate and enjoin
the further continuation of the nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 7)



§ 96.07  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY COUNCIL.



   If, after the service of notice, the person served fails to abate the
nuisance or make the necessary repairs, alterations or changes in accordance
with the direction of the City Council, the City Council may cause the
nuisance to be abated at the expense of the city and recover the expenditure,
plus an additional 25% of the expenditure, by civil action against the person
or persons served; or, if service has been had upon the owner or occupant, by
ordering the Clerk to extend such sum, plus 25% thereof, as a special tax
against the property upon which the nuisance existed and to certify the same
to the County Auditor of Washington County, Minnesota, for collection in the
same manner as taxes and special assessments are certified and collected.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 8)



§ 96.08  JUNK YARDS.



   (A)   A junk yard within the meaning of this section shall be
considered as any premises or place within the city at, upon, or within which
there shall be handled, bought, sold, kept or stored quantities of junk,
including but not limited to: scrap iron; worn-out, cast-off or obsolete
machinery, furniture, household goods, automobiles, trucks or other motor
vehicles or the parts thereof; bones or other parts of the carcasses of dead
animals not usable for human consumption; and any other cast-off article or
material chiefly usable as junk.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful from and after the first day of September
1946 for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain or operate a junk
yard within a distance of 500 feet of any building or premises used for
business, residential or religious purposes.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the
provisions of division (B) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to law; and each
and every day of such violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



   (D)   It is further declared that the keeping, maintaining or
operating of a junk yard in violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a public nuisance and the same may be abated by injunction or
other appropriate legal proceedings.



(Prior Code, § 19.04) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.09  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who shall cause or create a nuisance or permit any nuisance
to be created or placed upon, or to remain upon any premises owned or
occupied by him, and any person who shall fail to comply with any order made
under the provisions of this subchapter upon conviction thereof shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 19.01, Subd. 8)



§ 96.10  TRESPASS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to enter upon any public property within the city
upon which no trespassing signs have been erected. Any violation of this
section is a petty misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 15.11)  (Ord. 334, passed 7-12-1982) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.11  USE OF ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ROLLER SKATE. A shoe with wheels attached or a device with wheels
which is designed to be attached to a shoe and shall include roller skates,
roller blades or roller skis.



      SKATEBOARD. A wheeled self-propelled device designed to transport
a rider in a standing position which device is not otherwise secured to a
rider’s feet or shoes.



   (B)   Use of skateboards and roller skates on private property. No
person shall ride a skateboard or use roller skates on any private property
within the city without the prior permission of the owner or occupant of the
private property.



   (C)   Use of skateboards and roller skates on public property.  No
person shall ride a skateboard or use roller skates on any of the following
public property situated in the city: City Hall - Library property; Forest
Lake Fire Department property; Forest Lake Sr. Center property; Forest Lake
Maintenance Building property; Municipal Parking Lot located upon Lots 1
through 11, inclusive, Block 26, Forest Lake; and Lakeside Park.



   (D)   Use in a careless, reckless or negligent manner. No person
shall ride a skateboard or use roller skates in the city in any careless,
reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, the
safety of any person or property of any other person.



   (E)   Yielding right-of-way. The operator of a skateboard or roller
skates emerging from an alley, driveway or building upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching the sidewalk or sidewalk area and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.



   (F)   Attaching skateboard or roller skates to motor vehicle. No
person operating a skateboard or roller skates shall attach the same or the
person of the operator to any motor vehicle upon a roadway.



   (G)   Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. In addition, any peace
officer who observes any person violating any of the provisions of this
section is authorized to seize the offender’s skate board or roller skates
and to hold the same at the police station. In the event of the seizure, the
offender, if an adult, may secure the return of the article seized after 24
hours have elapsed since the seizure. In the case of a minor, the article
seized shall be returned only to the parent or guardian of the minor offender
after 24 hours have elapsed since the seizure.



(Prior Code, § 15.13)  (Ord. 417, passed 5-4-1990; Am. Ord. 556, passed
9-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.12  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY TO VIEW PUBLIC EVENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any tarpaulin,
chair, apparatus or other property on any sidewalk, boulevard, trail or other
public way or public property to view or participate in any parade or event
provided that such tarpaulin, chair, apparatus or other property may be
placed on boulevards or other public property, excluding sidewalks and
trails, for the purpose of reserving viewing space no earlier than sunrise on
the day of such parade or event and provided  further that such property is
removed on the same day no later than 1 hour after the conclusion of such
parade or event.



   (B)   Any tarpaulin, chair, apparatus or other property placed on
any public way or property contrary to the provisions of division (A) above
may be removed by the City Police department or Public Works Department and,
if not claimed by the owner thereof within 10 days, may be disposed of by the
city in any manner it deems appropriate.



   (C)   Any person violating a provision of this section shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished
according to § 10.99



(Ord. 569, passed 8-13-2007)



NOISE REGULATIONS



§ 96.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Any other word or phrase used in this subchapter, and defined in regulations
of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise Pollution Control, Minn.
Rules, Ch. 7030, as it may be amended from time to time, has the meaning
given in those regulations.



   AIR CIRCULATION DEVICE. A mechanism designed and used for the
controlled flow of air used in ventilation, cooling, or conditioning,
including, but not limited to, central and window air conditioning units.



   L10. The sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 10%
of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American
National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the Police
Department.



   L50. The sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 50%
of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American
National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the Police
Department.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation, trustee,
association, the state and its agencies and subdivisions or any body of
persons, whether incorporated or not. With respect to acts prohibited or
required herein, PERSON shall include employees and licensees.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 1)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.21  NOISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   General. No person shall make or cause to be made any
distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare
of any persons or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific
restrictions of the following subdivisions.



   (B)   Motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the
city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



   (C)   Horns, audible signaling devices, and the like. No person
shall sound any signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of
danger, as required by M.S. § 169.68, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Exhaust. No person shall discharge the exhaust, or permit the
discharge of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, or snowmobile except through a muffler or
other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and
complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (E)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle
so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, or other noise.



   (F)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud and
excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.



   (G)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. No person
shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device
for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly
audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any
person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or
other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner
as to be plainly audible at the property line of the stricture or building in
which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance
of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



   (H)   Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall
participate to any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise,
unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. When a
police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise
disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner
or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse
immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police
officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of the premises who has knowledge of
the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped.



   (I)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, and the like. No
person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound on a
street or other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any commercial establishment or
vehicle.



   (J)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. No person shall
create any excessive noise on a street, alley, or public grounds adjacent to
any schools, institution of learning, church, or hospital when the noise
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or
unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate
the presence of the institution.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 2)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.22  HOURLY RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN OPERATIONS.



   (A)   Recreational vehicles. No person shall, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., drive or operate any minibike, or other
recreational vehicle (not including snowmobiles which are regulated by §
71.04) not licensed for travel on public highways.



   (B)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill,
or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this
provision.



   (C)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 3)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.23  RECEIVING LAND USE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Maximum noise levels by receiving land use districts. No
person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of noise in
such a manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in Table 1
for the receiving land use category specified when measured at a point of
normal human activity of the receiving land use.



Table 1. Sound levels by Receiving Land Use Districts



 


Land Use Districts

 

Day (7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.)

 

Night (10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.)




L10

 

L50

 

L10

 

L50



Residential
 

65

 

60

 

55

 

50



Commercial
 

70

 

65

 

70

 

65



Industrial
 

80

 

75

 

80

 

75




 



   (B)   Exemptions. The levels prescribed in division (A) of this
section do not apply to noise originating on public streets and alleys, but
the noise shall be subject to other applicable sections of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 4)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26- 1999)



§ 96.24  AIR CIRCULATION DEVICES.



   No person shall permanently install or place any air circulation
device, except a window air conditioning unit, in any outdoor location until
the Building Inspector determines that the device in that location will
comply with the noise level standards prescribed in § 96.23 and issues a
permit for the installation. The noise produced by any window unit and by any
existing air circulation device shall be attenuated by means deemed
appropriate by the Building Inspector, including, but not limited to,
relocation of the device, if the noise results in or contributes to a
violation of § 96.23.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 5)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.25  EXEMPTION FOR EMERGENCY WORK.



   Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to
preserve the public health, safety, or welfare, or in the performance of
emergency work necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public
hazard, shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter for a period
not to exceed 24 hours after the work is commenced. Persons responsible for
the work shall inform the Building Inspector of the need to initiate the work
or, if the work is commenced during nonbusiness hours of the city, at the
beginning of business hours of the first business day thereafter. Any person
responsible for the emergency work shall take all reasonable actions to
minimize the amount of noise.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 6)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.26  EXEMPTION FOR COMMUNITY CELEBRATIONS OR FUNCTIONS.



   Noise created by a community celebration or community function having a
valid permit issued by the City Administrator shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 7)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.27  POWER AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Administering officer.   The noise control program
established by this section shall be administered by the Police Department.



   (B)   Testing procedures. The Chief of Police shall adopt guidelines
establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used in enforcing
the provisions of § 96.23 imposing noise standards. A copy of the guidelines
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and shall be
available to the public for reference during office hours.



   (C)   Studies and the like. The Police Department shall conduct such
research, monitoring, and other studies related to sound as are necessary or
useful in enforcing this section and reducing noise in the city. He or she
shall make such investigations and inspections in accordance with law as
required in applying the requirements of this section.



   (D)   Noise impact statements. The Chief of Police may require any
person applying to the city for a change in zoning classifications or a
permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation, or
alteration, or project that may be considered a potential noise source to
submit a noise impact statement on a form prescribed by the officer. He or
she shall evaluate each such statement and make appropriate recommendations
to the Council or other agency or officer authorized to take the action or
approve the license or permit applied for.



   (E)   Other powers and duties. The Police Department shall exercise
such other powers and perform such other duties as are reasonable and
necessary to enforce this section.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 8)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.28  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authority. The City Council shall have authority, consistent
with this section, to grant variances from the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Application. Any person seeking a variance shall file an
application with the City Administrator on a form prescribed by the City
Administrator. The application shall state the dates during which the
variance is proposed, the location of the noise source and times of
operation, the nature of the noise source, reasons why the variance is
sought, steps taken to minimize the noise level, and such other information
as is required by the City Administrator. If the application is for a
variance for more than 3 days, the City Administrator shall give mailed
notice of the requested variance to all property owners within 500 feet of
the noise source. Any person claiming to be adversely affected by the
variance applied for may, within 10 days of mailing of the notice, file a
statement with the City Administrator in support of his or her claim.



   (C)   Action on application. If the City Administrator finds that
sufficient controversy exists regarding the proposed variance, he or she may
refer the proposal to the City Council which shall hold a public hearing on
the proposal at which all persons affected shall be given an opportunity to
be heard. The City Council shall also hold such a hearing upon request of the
applicant or any person claiming to be adversely affected by the variance
applied for. Within 90 days of receipt of the application, the City
Administrator, or City Council if there is a hearing, shall approve or deny
the application. It may be approved only if the City Administrator or City
Council finds that full compliance with requirements of this section would
constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on other persons or on
the community. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the
City Administrator or City Council shall balance the hardship to the
applicant against the adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of
the persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other
adverse effects of granting the variance. The variance may be granted subject
to conditions, including a time limit which shall be clearly stated.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 9)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.29  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Notice of certain violations. When the Police Department
determines that a noise exceeds the maximum sound level permitted under §
96.23, he or she shall give written notice of the violation to the owner or
occupant of the premises where the noise originates and order the person to
correct or remove each specified violation within such reasonable time as is
described in the notice. The failure to remove or correct any such violation
within the time so prescribed constitutes a violation of this section.



   (B)   Civil remedies. This section may be enforced by injunction,
action for abatement, or other appropriate civil remedy.



   (C)   Criminal penalties. Any violation of this subchapter involving
the operation of a motor vehicle is a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
the violator shall be punished according to law. Every person who violates
any other provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction, be punished according to law. In all cases the city shall be
entitled to collect the costs of prosecution to the extent outlined by law,
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and the Rules of Court. Each act of violation
and each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 10)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



§ 96.30  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The ordinance set forth in this subchapter became effective upon
passage and publication as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 19.065, Subd. 12)  (Ord. 491, passed 4-26-1999)



CHAPTER 97:  TREES



Section



   97.01   Epidemic diseases of shade trees



   97.02   Control of disease in trees



§ 97.01  EPIDEMIC DISEASES OF SHADE TREE.



   (A)   Adoption of model regulations. The September 5, 1972
Resolutions of the Board of County Commissioners of Washington County,
Minnesota, setting forth regulations to prevent, control and eliminate
epidemic diseases of shade trees is adopted by reference in its entirety
except as hereinafter modified; not less than 3 copies thereof are on file in
the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Modifications. Wherever used in the Model Regulations, the
words “County” or “County of Washington” shall mean the City of
Forest Lake, and the words “County Board” shall mean the City Council of
the City of Forest Lake, insofar as may be necessary to effectuate the policy
of this section, which is declared to be to cooperate with and participate in
the program of the County of Washington to prevent, control, and eliminate
epidemic diseases of shade trees.



(Prior Code, § 19.03)



§ 97.02  CONTROL OF DISEASE IN TREES.



   (A)   Sections 1.0109 through 1.0111 of 3 Minnesota Code of Agency
Rules, Department of Agriculture, Shade Tree Program (1978 Edition), together
with amendments thereof to date, are adopted by reference and made a part of
this chapter as if set out in full, except as hereinafter provided. A copy of
the Agency Rules herewith incorporated is on file in the office of the City
Clerk.



   (B)   The stockpiling of bark bearing elm wood within the city
limits shall be permitted during the period from September 15 through April 1
of any given year. Any such wood not utilized by April 1 of any year must
then be removed and disposed of as provided by this chapter and the
regulations incorporated thereby.



   (C)   Where the provisions of this section conflict or are
inconsistent with any other regulation of the city, the provisions of this
section shall supercede except in instances where one regulation is more
restrictive than another, in which case the more restrictive shall apply and
control.



   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 23.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 98:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section



   98.01   Findings, purpose, and intent



   98.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way



   98.03   Definitions



   98.04   Administration



   98.05   General regulation of the public rights-of-way



   98.06   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   98.07   Registration information



   98.08   Reporting obligations



   98.09   Permit requirement



   98.10   Permit applications



   98.11   Issuance of permit; conditions



   98.12   Small wireless facility permit applications



   98.13   Permit fees



   98.14   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   98.15   Joint applications



   98.16   Supplemental applications



   98.17   Other obligations



   98.18   Denial or revocation of permit



   98.19   Installation requirements



   98.20   Inspection



   98.21   Work done without a permit



   98.22   Supplementary notification



   98.23   Revocation of permits



   98.24   Mapping data



   98.25   Location and relocation of facilities



   98.26   Pre-excavation facilities location



   98.27   Damage to other facilities



   98.28   Right-of-way vacation



   98.29   Indemnification and liability



   98.30   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   98.31   Appeal



   98.32   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



   98.33   Construction of sidewalks, trails, and streets; assessment
therefor



   98.34   Load weight restrictions



   98.35   Undergrounding of facilities



   98.36   Severability; franchise agreement



§ 98.01  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its
citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use
of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state
of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.



   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this chapter of Forest
Lake City Code relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This
chapter imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of
facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed
therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory
roles of state and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating
and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for
their work. Finally, this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and
projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and 2017 Minn.
Laws, Ch. 94, art. 9, amending the Act, and the other laws governing
applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter
shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules, Parts 7819.0050
through 7819.9950 and Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560 where possible. To the extent any
provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the
Minnesota Rules, the interpretation most consistent with the Act and other
applicable statutes and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.02  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant
to M.S. § 237.163 Subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED FACILITY.  A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.



   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY.  The City of Forest Lake, Minnesota. For purposes of § 98.28,
city also means the city's elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.



   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION.  To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent
to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned
privately or by the city or other governmental unit.



   COMMISSION.  The State Public Utilities Commission.



   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, over a
continuous length in excess of 500 feet.



   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND.  Any of the following forms of security
provided at the permittee's option:



      (1)   Individual project bond;



      (2)   Cash deposit;



      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73, Subd. 3;



      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; or



      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to
the city.



   DEGRADATION.  A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST.  Subject to Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1100, means the
cost to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time
the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in Plates 1
to 13, set forth in Minn. Rules, Parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE.  The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Forest Lake Department of Public Works.



   DELAY PENALTY.  The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in the permitted work within the right-of-way, including construction,
excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by a permit.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to
life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or requires immediate
repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove, physically disturb, or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   EXCAVATION, MAJOR. To dig into or in any way remove, physically
disturb, or penetrate any part of a right-of-way greater than a depth of 7
inches below existing grade and more than 10 square feet of surface area.



   EXCAVATION, MINOR.  To physically disturb ground or vegetation up to a
depth of 7 inches below existing grade and no more than 10 square feet of
surface area with no impact to existing public infrastructure and no removal
of or damage to existing paved surfaces, including sidewalks, trails, or
roads.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may conduct a major excavation in a right-of-way.
An EXCAVATION PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the
right-of-way described in such permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT, MINOR.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter,
must be obtained before a person may conduct MINOR EXCAVATION in a
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A MINOR EXCAVATION PERMIT allows the holder to disturb that
part of the RIGHT-OF-WAY described in such permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 98.13.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.



   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN.  Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next 5 years.



   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR.  A designated portion of the public
right-of-way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having
multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and install
facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.



   HOLE.  An excavation in the right-of-way having a length that is equal
to or less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement of the
right-of-way for the section of the roadway where the work is occurring.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
chapter.



   MANAGEMENT COSTS.  The actual costs the city incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including but not limited to: costs associated with
registering applicants seeking permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small
wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration
projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities
during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way
restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and
the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small
wireless facility permits. MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payments by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by
the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to
the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123, M.S. §§
237.162 or 237.163, or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the
city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to § 98.30 of this
chapter.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY.  A small wireless facility that is no larger
than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior
antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches.



   OBSTRUCT.  To place any tangible object upon a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   PATCH or PATCHING.  A method of pavement replacement that is temporary
in nature. A patch consists of the compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base, and the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of
2 feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's
5-year project plan.



   PAVEMENT.  Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.



   PERMIT.  Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in M.S. §
237.162.



   PERMITTEE or PERMIT HOLDER.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate
or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.



   PERSON.  An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or
political.



   REGISTRANT.  Any person who has or seeks to have its equipment or
facilities located in any right-of-way, or in any way occupies or uses, or
seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment
in the right-of-way.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before
excavation.



   RESTORATION COST.  The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to achieve the level of restoration according to Plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules set forth in Minn. Rules, Parts 7819.9900
to 7819.9950.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in
which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for
travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not
include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other
non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  The EXCAVATION PERMIT or MINOR EXCAVATION
PERMIT, depending on the context, required by this chapter.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4; or



      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.  Includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6;



      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information;



      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in
M.S. Ch. 238;



      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by a governmental unit;



      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association
organized under M.S. Ch. 308A; and



      (6)   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam,
cooling, or heating services.



   SERVICE LATERAL.  An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a
common source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer's premises.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.



      (1)   A WIRELESS FACILITY that meets both of the following
qualifications:



         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within
an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.



      (2)   A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY shall also include a MICRO
WIRELESS FACILITY as defined in this section.



   SUPERINTENDENT or PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works, or his or her designee.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or controlling
a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in
the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing
wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, and telecommunication activities
related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public
utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or
power agency organized under M.S. Ch. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric
association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, are not telecommunications
right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter except to the extent such
entity is offering wireless service.



   TEMPORARY SURFACE.  The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's 2-year project plan, in which case it is
considered full restoration.



   TRENCH.  An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.



   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN.  A plan which shows projects adopted by the
city for construction within the next 2 years.



   UTILITY POLE.  A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.



   WIRELESS FACILITY.  Equipment at a fixed location that enables the
provision of WIRELESS SERVICES between user equipment and a wireless service
network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio
transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and a SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, but not including wireless support
structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and
directly associated with a specific antenna.



   WIRELESS SERVICE.  Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  A new or existing structure in a
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting SMALL WIRELESS
FACILITIES, as determined by the city.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.04  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Public Works Superintendent is the principal city official
responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way
permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The Superintendent may delegate
any or all of the duties hereunder.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.05  GENERAL REGULATION OF THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Use, occupation, and obstruction of streets and sidewalks. No
person shall use, occupy, or obstruct, or cause to be used, occupied, or
obstructed any street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way or ground
within this city with any tangible item so as to hinder free and open passage
over the specified portion of that right-of-way unless the person, firm, or
corporation shall have first obtained a permit to do so from the city in the
manner herein provided.



   (B)   Maintenance  of grass  in  public  rights-of-way 
abutting  private property. Notwithstanding the exceptions noted in §
96.025(C) and (D), property owners whose land abuts a public right-of-way
shall be responsible for maintaining the grass in compliance with § 96.025,
which prohibits noxious weeds and grass over 8 inches in height or grass
which has gone to seed.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.06  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF- WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Right-of-way occupancy. No privately owned structure, sign, or
improvement shall be located within a public right-of-way with the exception
of:



      (1)   A mailbox for the use of receiving mail from the United
States Postal Service or a newspaper delivery;



      (2)   Private driveways, driveway culverts, and existing
boulevard plantings or gardens, provided the city is not required to maintain
these site improvements;



      (3)   The city may, at its discretion, conduct maintenance on
private improvements in the public right-of-way in order to address issues
related to safety and proper functioning of public infrastructure; and/or



      (4)   Structures used by a telecommunications right-of-way
user to support small wireless facilities.



   (B)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on
the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the
city. Registration will consist of providing application information.



   (C)   Registration prior to work. No person shall construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work, or use any
facilities or any part thereof, within any right-of-way without first being
registered with the city. Such registration shall be made on a form provided
by the city and shall be accompanied by the required registration fee. A
person seeking to install a new wireless support structure for the siting of
a small wireless facility in a right-of-way shall comply with all
requirements for such facilities, including obtaining a Conditional Use
Permit if necessary, found in Chapter 153 of this code.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.07  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at
the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to, the following.



      (1)   Each registrant's name, telephone number, facsimile
number, address, e-mail, and Gopher One Call registration certificate number,
if applicable.



      (2)   The name, address, email address, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how
to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the
time of registration.



      (3)   A certificate of insurance from a company licensed or
authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed or authorized to do
business in the state of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to
the city;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the:



            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees; and



            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment
in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and
permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability
arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and
collapse of property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all such coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage
term;



         (e)   Indicating insurance coverage in the following
minimum amounts:



            1.   General liability:



               a.    Public liability, including premises,
products and complete operations;



               b.    Bodily injury liability: $1,000,000
each person, $3,000,000 each occurrence; and



               c.    Property damage liability: $3,000,000
each occurrence.



            2.    Comprehensive:



               a.    Automobile liability insurance,
including owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles;



               b.    Bodily injury liability: $1,000,000
each person; $3,000,000 each occurrence; and



               c.    Property damage liability: $3,000,000
each occurrence.



         (f)   Workers' compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter;



         (g)   The city may require a copy of the actual
insurance policies;



         (h)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate is required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06 as recorded and
certified to by the Secretary of State;



         (i)   A copy of the person's order granting a
certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or
other authorization or approval from the applicable state or federal agency
to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval from said Commission or other state or federal
agency; and



         (j)   Such other information as the city may require on
its registration application.



   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.08  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration
and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance
plan for underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted
using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information
determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and
reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:



      (1)   The locations and the estimated beginning and ending
dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this
section, a "next-year project"); and



      (2)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the 5
years following the next calendar year (in this section, a "five-year
project").



   (B)   The term "project" in this section shall include both
next-year projects and 5-year projects.



   (C)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for
inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects of which the
city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible
for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.



   (D)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any
project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all
other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (E)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure
to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has
used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.09  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may disturb, obstruct, or excavate any right-of-way, or install or
place facilities in the right-of-way, without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.



      (1)   Minor excavation permit. A minor excavation permit is
required by a registrant to perform a minor excavation and disturb that part
of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.



      (2)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a
registrant to perform a major excavation and excavate that part of the
right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage
over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.



      (3)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless
facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless
support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise
install a small wireless facility in the specified portion or the
right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit
shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless
lawfully revoked.



   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless such
person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit
before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit
extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1000,
Subp. 3, and notwithstanding § 98.08(B), the city shall establish and impose
a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.



   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.10  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Right-of-way permit applications shall be made to the city and shall
contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with, the
requirements of the following provisions.



   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area
of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.



   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:



      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other
management costs;



      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; and



      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.



   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security
or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the
amount owing.



   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond
for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to
install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.11  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare, or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with
all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including, but not
limited to M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation
Notice System) and Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560.



   (C)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division
(B) and the relevant provisions of Chapter 153 of this code, the erection or
installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small
wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in the
right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on
the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment
specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit
application.



      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the
right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit and general standards for use for towers consistent
with all applicable provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the
city's zoning ordinance.



      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above
its wireless support structure.



      (4)   No signage may be located on small wireless facilities
unless required to protect public safety.



      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative
wireless support structure, sign, or other structure not intended to support
small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to
accommodate the particular design, appearance, or intended purpose of such
structure.



      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless
support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.



   (D)   Small wireless facility collocation agreement. A small
wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small wireless support
structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the
right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless
facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation
agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small
wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be
additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate.
Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter, or
affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.12  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small
wireless facility permit application within 90 days after the filing of such
application. The small wireless facility permit and any associated building
permit application shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within the review periods established in this section.



   (B)   Consolidated applications.



      (1)   An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless
facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15
small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local
government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:



         (a)   Are located within a 2-mile radius;



         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and



         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless
support structures.



      (2)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit
application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny
others, but may not use denial of 1 or more permits as a basis to deny all
small wireless facilities in the application.



   (C)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:



      (1)   The city receives applications from 1 or more applicants
seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within
a 7-day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of
such extension;



      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or
information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant within 30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of
additional documents or information, the city shall have 10 days to notify
the applicant in writing of any still-missing information; or



      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree
in writing to toll the review period.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.13  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (B)   Minor excavation permit fee. The city shall impose a minor
excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management
costs.



   (C)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a
small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover its:



      (1)   Management costs; and



      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs
associated with collocation of small wireless facilities directly caused by
the applicant.



   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No permit shall be issued without
payment of the required fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees
within 30 days of billing. All permit fees shall be as adopted by the city
Schedule of Fees.



   (E)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 98.22 are not refundable.



   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from, and in addition
to, the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.14  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee, or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
98.17.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way,
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If,
following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with correcting the defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions
of Minn. Rules, Part 7819.3000.



      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and
the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation,
backfilling, patching, and restoration according to the standards and with
the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules, Part
7819.1100.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The
permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work
to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work
shall be completed within 5 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonable or unreasonable under § 98.16.



   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee
shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the
right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise
its rights under the construction performance bond.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.15  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a
joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.



   (C)   City projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction
or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application
by 2 or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.16  SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any
work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater
area:



      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby; and



      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.17  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority, and to pay all fees required by the city or other
applicable rule, law, or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to
M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System)
and Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is
responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit,
regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval
of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private
vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or
next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking
regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within
the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.



   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable
permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but
not limited to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements
set forth in M.S. Ch. 216D and Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560, and shall require
potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before
excavating, as determined by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.18  DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to
meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city
determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its
current use.



   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit
must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city
must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within 3 business
days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied,
the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the
city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within
30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee
shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application
within 30 days after submission.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.19  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules, Parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements,
in so far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and
237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance
with Minn. Rules, Ch. 7560, and this code. Service lateral installation is
further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in
the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in § 98.22(B).



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.20  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in
accordance Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1300.



   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available
to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Superintendent.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Superintendent may order
the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Superintendent may issue an order to the permittee
for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other
applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that
failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit.
Within 10 days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof
to the Superintendent that the violation has been corrected. If such proof
has not been presented within the required time, the Superintendent may
revoke the permit pursuant to § 98.22.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.21  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Superintendent of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be
an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher One
Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement.
Within 2 business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant
shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and
fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into
compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the
emergency.



      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected or potentially affected by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty,
pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees
required by this code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.22  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.23  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner,
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; and/or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
98.20.



   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the
city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation.
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at
its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 72 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan to
cure the breach which must be approved by the city. Permittee's failure to so
contact the city, permittee's failure to timely submit a plan, or permittee's
failure to reasonably implement an approved plan, shall be cause for
immediate revocation of the permit.



   (D)   Revocation. If a permittee commits a breach as outlined above
and fails to cure such breach within 30 days of the date from which notice is
sent to the permittee of the breach, unless the cure cannot reasonably be
completed within such time and the permittee has prepared a plan acceptable
to the city to cure the breach, permittee's permit will automatically be
revoked.



   (E)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.24  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn.
Rules, Parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of
any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the superintendent
accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all
equipment installed, owned, and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and
drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic
mapping system, when practical, or as a condition imposed by the
Superintendent. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this section
shall be grounds for denying the permit application.



   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn.
Rules, Part 7560.0150, Subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of
appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed
service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases
where the Superintendent reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall submit to the Superintendent evidence satisfactory to
the Superintendent of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance
with this division and with the applicable Gopher One Call law and Minnesota
Rules governing service laterals installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall be a
condition of any city approval necessary for:



      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project, including those under M.S. Ch. 429; and



      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other
subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462. The Superintendent
shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such
information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information
on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit
issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or its
subcontractors.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.25  LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities. The
location of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law,
and with Minn. Rules, Parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the
extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or
other agreement between the applicable right-of-way user and the city, all
facilities shall be placed underground in accordance with the provisions of
all applicable city ordinances.



   (C)   Corridors.



      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facility that is, or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be, located within the right-of-way. All excavation or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.



      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in
a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no
later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area
where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the
city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs, and hardship to the registrant.



   (D)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any
facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or
taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a
useable condition.



   (E)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its
current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement
of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such
decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all
existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided
primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for
the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time
of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing
facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements
and development projects which have been determined to be in the public
interest.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.26  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each
registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall
mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any
registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or
asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor
to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for
excavation.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.27  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its
facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during
the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's
facilities.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.28  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed
by Minn. Rules, Part 7819.3200.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.29  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in
accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1250.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.30  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for
its facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.



   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way, if required, in
conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction,
unless this requirement is waived by the city.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.31  APPEAL.



   A right-of-way user that: has been denied registration;  has been
denied a permit; has had a permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are
not in conformity with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6; or disputes a determination
of the superintendent regarding § 98.23(B), may have the denial, revocation,
fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City
Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its
appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A
decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing
the reasonableness of the decision.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.32  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of
the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.33  CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, AND STREETS; ASSESSMENT
THEREFOR.



   (A)   All sidewalks, trails, and streets in the city hereafter built
or rebuilt shall be constructed in accordance with city engineering standards
or as stated within an executed site improvement agreement.



   (B)   All sidewalks, trails, and streets to be built or rebuilt in
public right-of-way shall be constructed according to approved plans and
adopted city engineering standards.



   (C)   All sidewalks, trails, and streets constructed by the city
shall be built at the expense of the abutting property owner in accordance
with the Assessment Policy for Public Streets adopted on July 22, 2013, as
amended.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.34  LOAD WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. M.S. § 169.87, as it may be amended from time to
time, is incorporated by reference as if laid out in full.



   (B)   Weight restrictions.



      (1)   Axle weight limits are restricted on certain streets
within the city to protect these streets from damage when road and weather
conditions warrant, in accordance with state and city regulations.



      (2)   All city streets will be posted and limited to a 5 ton
axle per axle weight limit. Residents are encouraged to plan ahead for moving
or construction projects during the spring thaw season since weight
restrictions will be enforced and large trucks will not be allowed on
restricted streets.



   (C)   Dates. Weight restrictions take effect during the spring thaw
season, which is usually March 1 to May 15, dependent upon the weather. The
city follows the seasonal load limits established by the State of Minnesota.



   (D)   Exemptions. No exemptions or permits are given during this
time period, except for emergency vehicles and utility company service
vehicles.



   (E)   Streets regulated.



      (1)   The city places these seasonal weight restrictions only
on streets within city rights-of-way.



      (2)   All county roads are regulated by Washington County and
all highways are regulated by the State of Minnesota.



      (3)   Private roads are not regulated by the city, but by the
homeowners associations or designated responsible party. The city does not
maintain any information on contracts for private roads.



   (F)   Road authority map. The Superintendent shall maintain a
detailed map containing road authority information.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.35  UNDERGROUNDING OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Purpose of undergrounding requirements. The purpose of this
section is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public,
and is intended to foster safe travel over the right-of-way, safety around
homes and buildings where overhead feeds are connected, and orderly
development in the city consistent with its Comprehensive Plan. Location and
relocation, installation and reinstallation of facilities in the right of way
or in or on other public ground must be made in accordance with this section
and is intended to be enforced consistently with state and federal law
regulating right-of-way users, to the fullest extent of the city's statutory
and common law authority.



   (B)   Undergrounding of facilities. All facilities newly installed,
constructed, or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way, or in other
public property held in common for public use, must be located and maintained
underground pursuant to the terms and conditions of this section and in
accordance with applicable construction standards, subject to the exceptions
below. Above-ground installation, construction, modification, or replacement
of existing meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount
switches, capacitor banks, re-closers, small wireless facilities, and service
connection pedestals shall be allowed, in addition to above-ground placement
of new small wireless facilities in compliance with M.S. § 237.163 and
properly permitted by the city. These requirements shall apply equally
outside of the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction
of platting, subdivision regulation, or comprehensive planning as may now or
in the future be allowed by law.



   (C)   Undergrounding of permanent replacement, relocated, or
reconstructed facilities. If the city finds that 1 or more of the purposes
set forth in this section would be promoted, the city may require a permanent
replacement, relocation, or reconstruction of a facility to be located and
maintained underground, with due regard for seasonal working conditions. For
purposes of this division, reconstruction means any substantial repair of, or
any improvement to, existing facilities. Undergrounding may be required,
whether a replacement, relocation, or reconstruction is initiated by the
right-of-way user owning or operating the facilities, or by the city in
connection with the present or future use by the city or other local
government unit of the right-of-way or other public ground for a public
project, the public health or safety, or the safety and convenience of travel
over the right-of-way. Subject to division (D) below, all relocations from
previously placed underground facilities shall be to another underground
location.



   (D)   Exceptions to undergrounding. The following exceptions to the
strict application of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions
stated.



      (1)   Technical feasibility; Promotion of policy. Above-ground
installation, construction, or placement of facilities shall be allowed in
residential, commercial, and industrial areas where the Council, following
consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that:



         (a)   Underground placement is not technically feasible
due to topographical, subsoil, or other existing conditions which
significantly and adversely affect underground facilities placement; or



         (b)   Failure to promote the purposes of undergrounding.
The right-of-way user clearly and convincingly demonstrates that none of the
purposes under this section would be advanced by underground placement of
facilities on the project in question, or the city determines on its own
review that undergrounding is not warranted based on the circumstances of the
proposed undergrounding.



      (2)   Temporary service. Above-ground installation,
construction, or placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed:



         (a)   During new construction of any project for a
period not to exceed 3 months;



         (b)   During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or
property within the city;



         (c)   For a period of not more than 7 months when soil
conditions make excavation impractical.



      (3)   Facilities subject to preemptive Public Utilities
Commission siting and routing jurisdiction. Facilities that are subject to
certificate of need and siting and routing requirements of the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission are exempted from this section, to the extent
that the city's undergrounding authority is pre-empted by law.



      (4)   Collocation of small cell wireless facilities.
Collocation of small wireless facilities and installation of wireless support
structures, approved by the city and in compliance with M.S. §§ 237.162 an
237.163, are exempted from this section.



   (E)   Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers
are responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and
prior to final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to the
Director written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way users showing
that all necessary arrangements with said users for installation of such
facilities have been made.



(Ord. 679, passed - -2018)



§ 98.36  SEVERABILITY; FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.



   (A)   If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from requiring a
franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to the
requirements set forth in herein.



(Ord. 679, - -2018)



CHAPTER 99:  ANIMALS



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Licensing



   99.03   Tag and collar



   99.04   Restraint of dogs



   99.05   Confinement of certain dogs



   99.06   Keeping of nuisance dogs prohibited



   99.07   Dog pound



   99.08   Police assistants



   99.09   Impounding dogs



   99.10   Dogs which cannot be impounded



   99.11   Redemption of impounded dogs



   99.12   Cruelty to dogs and investigation



   99.13   Exemptions



   99.14   Bite cases



   99.15   Protection for dogs



   99.16   Riding of horses



   99.17   Animal waste



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AT LARGE.  A dog shall be termed to be at large when it is not under
restraint as defined in this section.



   DOG POUND.  The animal shelter of the city.



   OWNER. Any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring a dog or dogs. The “harborer” of a dog shall mean any person
who has custody of any dog or permits the same to be kept or to stay on or
about his or her premises.



   POLICE OFFICERS or POLICE.  The police officers of the city and/or any
firm, agency or company hired by the city to assist the police in the
performance of their duties with regard to enforcement of this section.



   RESTRAINT.  A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this
section if it is controlled by a leash not exceeding 6 feet in length; if it
is under a voice or signal command of a competent person providing that the
dog will obey immediately that person's voice or signal command; if it is
within a vehicle being driven or parked on the public streets; if it is
within the limits of its owner's premises.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.1) 



§ 99.02  LICENSING.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 99.13, no owner of a dog shall own,
keep, or harbor any dog within the city limits unless the dog is licensed as
herein provided. Written application for the license shall be made at the
City Clerk’s office and shall state the name and address of the owner and
the name, breed, color, age, and sex of the dog. The license fee shall be
paid at the time of making the application. The Clerk shall execute a receipt
in duplicate and shall deliver the original receipt to the applicant.



   (B)   The license fee for each dog over the age of 6 months shall be
as established by adopted city fee schedule.



   (C)   No license shall be required for new-born dogs up to the age
of 6 months.



   (D)   All dog licenses shall be issued for a period of 3 years or
until the expiration of the dog’s rabies vaccination certificate, whichever
shall occur first. Any owner who acquires a dog shall be allowed 30 days
after acquiring such dog to secure a license and, in connection therewith,
shall file an affidavit identifying the dog and stating the date of its
acquisition.



   (E)   Any owner upon first becoming a resident of the city shall be
allowed 30 days from such time within which to obtain a dog license. Any dog
which may be impounded for violations of this section within such 30-day
period may be reclaimed by the owner without paying the impounding fee, but
the owner shall be responsible for paying the cost of keeping the dog during
its impounding.



   (F)   In the event that the metallic license tag issued for a dog
shall be lost or stolen, the owner may obtain a duplicate tag by surrendering
the receipt issued for the lost or stolen tag and upon the payment of $2.50.



   (G)   The Clerk shall change the design of the metallic tags issued
under this section each year.



   (H)   No license shall be granted for a dog which has not been
vaccinated against rabies during the 24-month period immediately preceding
the application. An applicant for a dog license shall present a certificate
of vaccination from a doctor qualified to practice veterinary medicine in the
state in which the dog is vaccinated, or other evidence of vaccination.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.2)  (Am. Ord. 614, passed 1-9-2012)



§ 99.03  TAG AND COLLAR.



   (A)   Upon complying with the provisions of this section, there
shall be issued to the owner a metallic tag stamped with a number and the
year in which issued.



   (B)   Every owner is required to keep a valid tag securely fastened
to the dog's choke chain, collar or harness, which must be worn by the dog at
all times.



   (C)   No person shall make, sell, purchase, or shall place or allow
to be placed on his or her dog any metallic tag of the same form, shape, or
intended to be like the official tag, or shall attempt in any way to
counterfeit the design adopted for the official dog tag.



   (D)   Dog tags shall not be transferrable and no refund shall be
made on any dog license fee to anyone who leaves the city or in the event the
dog dies before the expiration of the license.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.3)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.04  RESTRAINT OF DOGS.



   No owner of a dog shall permit his or her dog to be at large in this
city but shall keep the dog under restraint at all times.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.4)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.05  CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS.



   (A)   The owner of a dog shall confine within a building or secure
enclosure every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog and not permit the dog out
of such enclosure unless the dog is securely muzzled and in the control of a
competent person.



   (B)   Every female dog in heat shall be confined in such a manner
that the female dog cannot come in contact with another dog except for
breeding purposes.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.5)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.06  KEEPING OF NUISANCE DOGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor a dog which is considered a
barking dog. A barking dog is any dog that barks, bays, cries, howls, or
makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10
minutes or barks intermittently for 30 minutes or more at any time either day
or night. Any such dog is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



   (B)   A dog shall not be deemed a barking dog if, at the time the
dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon the private property upon which the dog is
situated or when the dog is teased or provoked.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.6)  (Ord. 421, passed 8-13-1990) Penalty, see §
99.99



§ 99.07  DOG POUND.



   The City Council may designate as the animal shelter of the city a
suitable kennel or other animal facility, either within or without the city
limits.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.3)



§ 99.08  POLICE ASSISTANTS.



   The City Council may designate such persons as it may deem necessary to
aid and assist the police in the performance of their duties with regard to
enforcement of this chapter. All police or police officers, as defined in
this chapter, shall be deemed to have all police powers necessary to enforce
this chapter and to cite owners of dogs for violations of this section in
addition to the powers of impounding dogs.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.8)



§ 99.09  IMPOUNDING DOGS.



   (A)   The police, as defined in this chapter, may take up and
impound any dog found not to be kept, confined or restrained in the manner
required by this section.



   (B)   To enforce this chapter, the police may enter upon the private
premises where it appears or where there is reasonable cause to believe that
a dog is not being kept, confined, or restrained as herein required.



   (C)   Any owner shall produce for the inspection of the police his
or her dog's tag or a receipt indicating payment of the license fee when
requested by such official.



   (D)   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the police or
any of their assistants in the performance of their duties hereunder, or
attempt to release any animal from the city animal shelter except as herein
provided.



   (E)   Any dog so impounded under this section shall be confined in
the city animal shelter in a humane manner for a period of not less than 72
hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, if not claimed prior
thereto by its owner. Thereafter, the dog shall become the property of the
city and may be disposed of in a humane manner or may be sold to or placed in
the custody of some other suitable person. If a dog is destroyed pursuant to
this section, the license of the dog shall expire.



   (F)   Immediately upon the impounding of a dog wearing a current
license tag, the police shall make every reasonable effort to notify the
owner of the impoundment and of the conditions whereby the owner may regain
custody of the dog. Any verbal notices shall immediately be confirmed in
writing by the police.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.9)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.10  DOGS WHICH CANNOT BE IMPOUNDED.



   If a dog is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid or exposed to rabies,
and the dog cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort or cannot be
impounded without serious risk to the persons attempting to impound, such dog
may be immediately killed.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.10)



§ 99.11  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS.



   Any dog impounded hereunder not being held for suspected disease may be
reclaimed by the owner within 72 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, or
holidays, upon payment by the owner to the City Clerk or his or her
designated agent, with an impounding fee of $20 if the dog has affixed to it
a current city license, or $25 if the dog has no license, plus an additional
sum equal to the cost to the city of keeping the dog in the City Animal
Shelter. If the dog so reclaimed requires a current license, the City Clerk
shall, upon notification, issue such license without further cost.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.3)  (Ord. 317, passed 1-12-1981)



§ 99.12  CRUELTY TO DOGS AND INVESTIGATION.



   For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this section and
to enforce its provisions, the police of the city are empowered to enter upon
the premises upon which a dog is kept or harbored and to demand the
exhibition by the owner of the dog. The police may take possession of the dog
which is, in his or her opinion, being kept in a cruel or inhumane manner or
when it is necessary to impound such dog as herein provided by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.12)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.13  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Hospitals, clinics or other premises operated by licensed
veterinarians exclusively for the care and treatment of animals are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter except where such duties are expressly
stated.



   (B)   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
any dog belonging to a non-resident of the city and kept within the city for
not longer than 30 days provided that all dogs, shall, at all times while
within the city, be kept under restraint.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.13)



§ 99.14  BITE CASES.



   It shall be the duty of every physician or any other person to report
to the police the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted
by animals within the city, together with such other information as will be
helpful in rabies control.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.14)



§ 99.15  PROTECTION FOR DOGS.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to place upon the ground or in any
other manner, any poison, bait or ground glass intended to harm a dog.



(Prior Code, § 20.01, Subd.15)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.16  RIDING OF HORSES.



   (A)   No person or persons shall race or immoderaty ride or drive
any horse or horses, mare, gelding or mule through the highways and streets
of the city nor shall any person ride or drive or cause to be driven any
horse, mare, gelding or mule through the highways or streets faster than at
the rate of 5 miles per hour, or in a manner as to endanger or unnecessarily
incommode any person.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any
animal, cart, wagon or automobile along or across any sidewalk in the city,
except where the same is intersected by streets or alleys.



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 20.02)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.17  ANIMAL WASTE.



   (A)   The owner of any dog or person having the custody or control
of any dog shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and
disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner whether on the person's own
property, on the property of others or on public property.



   (B)   Except on public property, this section shall not apply in the
Conservancy, Agricultural or Rural Residential Districts.



(Ord. 546, passed 4-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter which no other penalty is set forth shall be punished as set
forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 99.17 shall be punishable by a fine of
$10 or 5 hours of public lands fecal clean-up. Any person who is found guilty
of subsequent violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of at
least $25 but not more than $50.



(Ord. 546, passed 4-24-2006)



CHAPTER 100:  LAWN FERTILIZER AND
PESTICIDE APPLICATION CONTROL



Section



   100.01   Purpose



   100.02   Definitions



   100.03   Regulations for commercial lawn fertilizer applicators



   100.04   Regulations for property owners



   100.05   General regulations



   100.06   Exempt



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  PURPOSE.



   The city and the Forest Lake Watershed Management Organization have
conducted studies and have reviewed existing data to determine the current
and projected water qualities of the city. The data indicates that lake water
quality of the city may be maintained and improved if the city is able to
regulate the amount of lawn fertilizer and other chemicals entering the lake
as a result of storm water runoff or other causes. The purpose of this
chapter is to define regulations which will aid the city in maintaining and
improving lake resources which are enjoyed by its residents and other users.
The purpose of this chapter is further to protect the public health by
regulating the application of pesticides and herbicides and to provide for
warnings indicating the use of same.



(Prior Code, § 31.010)



§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR.  A person who has a commercial applicator
license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture.



   NONCOMMERCIAL APPLICATOR.  A person with a noncommercial applicator
license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture.



   PEST.  An insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed, terrestrial or
aquatic plant, animal life, virus, bacteria or other organism designated by
rule as a pest, except a virus, bacteria or other microorganism on or in
living humans or other living animals.



   PESTICIDE.  A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel, or mitigate a pest, and a substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant.



   PLANT REGULATOR.  A substance or mixture of substances intended
through physiological action to accelerate or retard the rate of growth or
rate of maturation of a plant, or to otherwise alter the behavior of
ornamental or crop plants or the produce of the plants. PLANT REGULATOR does
not include substances to the extent that they are intended as plant
nutrients, trace elements, nutritional chemicals, plant inoculants or soil
amendments.



(Prior Code, § 31.015)



§ 100.03  REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL LAWN FERTILIZER APPLICATORS.



   (A)   License required. No person, firm, corporation or franchise
shall engage in the business of commercial lawn fertilizer applicator within
the city unless a license has been obtained from the City Administrator as
provided herein.



   (B)   License application procedure.



      (1)   Applications for a commercial lawn fertilizer applicator
license shall be submitted to the City Administrator. The application shall
consist of the following:



         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant
and any individuals authorized to represent the applicant.



         (b)   Description of lawn fertilizer formula proposed to
be applied on lawns within the city.



         (c)   A time schedule for application of lawn fertilizer
and identification of weather conditions acceptable for lawn fertilizer
application.



         (d)   Copy of state license.



      (2)   License fee. The license fee shall be in an amount
established from time to time by ordinance passed by City Council. A license
and permit bond in the amount of $1,000 shall be submitted with the
application form. The bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with the
city’s regulations. Actions to collect bond proceeds shall not prevent the
city from filing criminal complaints for ordinance violations.



   (C)   Conditions of license. Commercial lawn fertilizer applicator
licenses shall be issued subject to the following conditions which shall be
specified on the license form:



      (1)   Random sampling. Commercial lawn fertilizer applicators
shall permit the city to sample any commercial lawn fertilizer application to
be applied within the city at any time after issuance of the initial license.



      (2)   Possession of license. The commercial lawn fertilizer
application license or a copy thereof shall be in the possession of any party
employed by the commercial lawn fertilizer applicator when making lawn
fertilizer applications within the city.



      (3)   State regulations. Licensee shall comply with the
provisions of the Minnesota Fertilizer and Soil Conditioner Law as contained
in M.S. §§ 17.711 through 17.729, as amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 31.020) (Ord. 416, passed 4-9-1990; Am. Ord. 457, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 563, passed 3-12-2007)



§ 100.04  REGULATIONS FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Random sampling. Upon the city's request, the property owner
shall provide the city with samples of lawn fertilizer to be applied by
property owners. The quantity of the sample shall be large enough to permit
laboratory testing.



   (B)   Use of impervious surfaces. Property owners shall not dispose
of leaves or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces or within
storm water drainage systems or natural drainage ways.



   (C)   Unimproved land areas. Except for driveways, sidewalks,
patios, areas occupied by structures, or areas which have been improved by
landscaping or gardens, all residential land areas shall be covered by plants
or vegetative growth.



(Prior Code, § 31.030)



§ 100.05  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Time of application. Lawn fertilizer applications shall not be
applied when the ground is frozen or between November 15 and April 15 of the
succeeding year.



   (B)   Sample analysis cost. The cost of analyzing fertilizer samples
taken from commercial applicators or property owners shall be paid by the
commercial applicators or property owners if the sample analysis indicates
that the phosphorus content exceeds the levels authorized herein.



   (C)   Fertilizer content. No person, firm, corporation or franchise
shall apply liquid fertilizer within the city which contains more than ½% by
weight of phosphate expressed as P205, or granular fertilizer which contains
more than 3% by weight of phosphate expressed as P205, unless a single
application is less than or equal to .05 pounds of phosphate expressed as
P205 per 1,000 square feet. Annual application amounts shall not exceed .10
pounds of phosphate expressed as P205 per 1,000 square feet of lawn area.



   (D)   Impervious surfaces. No person shall apply fertilizer to
impervious surfaces, or to the areas within drainage ditches or waterways.



   (E)   Buffer zone. Fertilizer applications shall not be made within
10 feet of any wetland or water resource.



   (F)   Water fowl. No person shall place feed for water fowl on, in
or within 50 feet of a wetland, pond, lake or water resource.



   (G)   Warning signs  for pesticide application. All  commercial or
noncommercial applicators who apply pesticides to turf areas must post or
affix warning signs  to the property where the pesticides  are applied. 
The warning signs shall comply with the following criteria and contain the
following information:



      (1)   The warning signs must project at least 18 inches above
the top of the grass line. The warning signs must be of a material that is
rain resistant for at least a 48- hour period and must remain in place up to
48 hours from the time of initial application.



      (2)   The following information must be printed on the warning
signs in contrasting colors and capitalized letters measuring at least
1/2-inch, or in another format approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Agriculture. The signs must provide the following information:



         (a)   The name of the business entity, or person
applying the pesticide; and



         (b)   The following language: “This area is chemically
treated. Keep children and pets off until (date of safe entry)“ or a
universally accepted symbol and text approved by the Minnesota Commissioner
of Agriculture as recognized as having the same meaning or intent as
specified in this subparagraph. The warning signs may include the name of the
pesticide used.



      (3)   The warning signs must be posted on a lawn or yard
between 2 feet and 5 feet from the sidewalk or street. For parks, golf
courses, athletic fields, playgrounds or other similar recreational property,
the warning signs must be posted immediately adjacent to areas within the
property where pesticides have been applied or at or near the entrances to
the property.



(Prior Code, § 31.030)  (Ord. 416, passed 4-9-1990)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.06  EXEMPT.



   Newly established turf areas shall not be limited by this chapter on
the quantity of phosphorus for the first growing season.



(Prior Code, § 31.050) 



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or franchisee who is convicted of a
violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $100.



(Prior Code, § 31.060) 



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   [RESERVED]



      111.   AMUSEMENTS LICENSING AND REGULATION



      112.   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      113.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      114.   PAWNBROKERS



      115.   REGULATION OF MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES



      116.   GAMBLING



      117.   TAXICABS; LIMOUSINES



      118.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



      119.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      120.   CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS



CHAPTER 110: [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 111:  AMUSEMENTS LICENSING AND REGULATION



Section



   111.01   Shows, circuses, carnivals and exhibitions



 



   111.98   Violations



§ 111.01  SHOWS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND EXHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person or persons may conduct any carnival, tent show,
circus, performance or exhibition whatsoever within the city, unless a
license to do so is first obtained as hereafter provided. This section shall
not apply to a motion picture theater showing regularly scheduled films.



   (B)   Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license for a
carnival or show within the city shall apply for same with the City Clerk
upon a form prescribed by the City Administrator and shall pay a license fee;
provided, however, that when the entertainment is given by amateurs or unpaid
performers or is given for the benefit of any school, church, veterans
organization or benevolent institution, the Council shall waive the license
fee requirement. The license granted hereunder shall be subject to the
approval of the city, Chief of Police and Fire Marshal, and in granting the
approval, they shall require that the license holder provide adequate toilet
facilities, adequate parking facilities, and if rides, booths or other
temporary structures are to be erected, they shall be erected in such a
manner as not to endanger the public safety.



   (C)   The city, Chief of Police and Building Inspector may impose
such other conditions as they, in their discretion, shall deem necessary for
the protection of the public health, welfare and safety, and any license
granted hereunder shall be subject to immediate revocation if the conditions
under which a license is granted are not followed.



   (D)   No gambling or games of chance shall be permitted to be
carried on in connection with any entertainment except legally operated bingo
games. In connection with the operation of games of skill, the games must
have the prior approval of the Chief of Police and shall not offer any cash
prizes or display any cash money in connection with their operation.



   (E)   Every application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied
by a cash or corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Administrator
in the amount of not less than $2,000 conditioned that the licensee will not
damage any street or other public property, will promptly and fully repay or
repair any damages so done, and will clean up and remove any debris remaining
upon city property used by the licensee after the conclusion of the licensee
period.



   (F)   No license or renewal shall be granted, nor shall the same be
effective, until the applicant shall file with the City Clerk proof of a
public liability insurance policy covering all operations of the applicant
under this section for the sum of at least $500,000 against liability for
bodily injuries or death for each person, for the sum of at least $1,500,000
against liability for bodily injuries or death to more than one person from
one accident and for at least $500,000 against liability for damage or
destruction of property. The policy shall provide that it may not be canceled
by the insurer except after 10 days written notice to the city, and if the
insurance is canceled and the licensee shall fail to replace the same with
another policy conforming to the provisions of this chapter, the license
shall be automatically suspended until the insurance shall have been replaced.



(Prior Code, § 11.08)  (Am. Ord. 375, passed 2-10-1986; Am. Ord. 585,
passed 9-28-2009)



§ 111.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter, or failing to obey a lawful order of the Fire Marshal or Chief of
Police given hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 11.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   112.01   Purpose and intent



   112.02   Provisions not applicable to or restrictive of content of
materials



   112.03   Definitions



   112.04   Application



   112.05   Location



   112.06   Hours of operation



   112.07   Operation



   112.08   Licenses



   112.09   License fees



   112.10   Inspection



   112.11   Expiration and renewal



   112.12   Suspension



   112.13   Revocation



   112.14   Transfer of license



   112.15   Nonconforming uses



   112.16   Enforcement



§ 112.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult- oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to:



   (A)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the city;



   (B)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent
adverse effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;



   (C)   Locate adult-oriented businesses away from residential areas,
schools, churches, parks and playgrounds;



   (D)   Prevent concentration of adult-oriented businesses within
certain areas of the city.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.02  PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO OR RESTRICTIVE OF CONTENT OF
MATERIALS.



   The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult- oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
adult- oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, nor to deny
access by distributors and exhibitors of adult- oriented entertainment to
their intended market.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS. An adult establishment is any establishment in
which an adult use comprises more than 10% of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located or which comprises more than 20% of the
gross receipts of the entire business operation.



   ADULT USE. Any of the activities and businesses described below:



      ADULT USES. Include adult bookstores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult
steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments,
adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets,
adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling
studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other
premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or
all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen by
members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by M.S. §
617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not included.



      ADULT USE - BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business
which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether
transparent or nontransparent, to the body of a patron when the body is
wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - BOOKSTORE. A building or portion of a building used
for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter,
pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if
the building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but
only to 1 or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of
age, and if a substantial or significant portion of the items are
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - CABARET. A building or portion of a building for
providing dancing or other live entertainment, if the building or portion of
a building excludes minors by virtue of age and if the dancing or other live
entertainment is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if the service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A conversation/rap parlor
which excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if the service
is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club which excludes
minors by reason of age, if the club is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors
are specifically excluded from patronage and where material is presented
which is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



      ADULT USE - MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or
health club which restricts minors, by reason or age, and which provides the
services of massage, if the service is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of
a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material if the material is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - MODELING STUDIO. An establishment whose major
business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided
with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to
such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display
specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such
customers.



      ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public
is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to 5 or fewer persons per machine at any 1 time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or portion of a
building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
if the building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes
minors by reason of age and if the material is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
for observation by patrons therein.



      ADULT USE - NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business which has as a principal
activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which
are designed for sexual stimulation.



      ADULT USE - SAUNA. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of
age, and which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT USE - STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion
of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or
hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if the building or portion
of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service provided
by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:



         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region, or public hair;



         (b)   Buttock; and



         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the
tope of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even
if opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of
a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or
conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or



      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or



      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or



      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast(s); or



      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom
are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who
are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of the persons; or



      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually
oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or
anal irrigation.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.04  APPLICATION.



   Except as in this chapter specifically provided, no structure shall be
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no structure or
land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in
conformity with this chapter. No adult- oriented business shall engage in any
activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in or about the establishment which is prohibited by any ordinance of
the city, the laws of the state of Minnesota, or the United States of
America. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing or
permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or
ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting
the exhibition, sale, or distribution of obscene material generally, or the
exhibition, sale, or distribution of specified materials to minors.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.05  LOCATION.



   No adult-oriented business shall be located in other than a Business,
Commercial or Industrial Zone. No adult- oriented businesses shall be located
less than 750 feet from any residential zoning district boundary or site used
for residential purposes, nor less than 750 feet from any church site, from
any school site, from any day care facility, nor from any park. In addition,
no adult-oriented business may be located within 750 feet of another
adult-oriented business. For purposes of this Chapter, this distance shall be
a horizontal measurement from the nearest existing residential district
boundary or site used for residential purposes, church site, school site, day
care site, park site, or another adult-oriented business site to the nearest
boundary of the proposed adult-oriented business site.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.06  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult-oriented site shall be open to the public from the hours of
11:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.07  OPERATION.



   (A)   Off-site viewing. An establishment operating as an
adult-oriented business shall prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise
which, if viewed by a minor, would be in violation M.S. Ch. 617, as it may be
amended from time to time, or other applicable federal or state statutes or
local ordinances.



   (B)   Entrances. All entrances to the business, with the exception
of emergency fire exits which are not useable by patrons to enter the
business, shall be usable from a public right-of-way.



   (C)   Layout. The layout of the display areas shall be designed so
that the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the store can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale or viewing, including but not limited to books,
magazines, photographs, video tapes, or any other material.



   (D)   Illumination. Illumination of the premises’ exterior shall
be adequate to observe the location and activities of all persons on the
exterior of the premises.



   (E)   Signs. Signs for adult-oriented businesses shall comply with
the city’s sign regulations, and, in addition, signs for adult-oriented
businesses shall not contain representational depiction of an adult nature or
graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operation. All signs shall be
wall signs. No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on
the premises shall be displayed in window areas or in any area where they can
be viewed from a public street or sidewalk.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.08  LICENSES.



   (A)   Licenses required. All establishments, including any business
operating at the time this chapter becomes effective, operating or intending
to operate an adult-oriented business, shall apply for and obtain a license
from the city. A person is in violation of the City Code if he or she
operates an adult-oriented business without a valid license issued by the
city.



   (B)   Applications. An application for a license must be made on a
form provided by the city.



      (1)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus 6 inches.



      (2)   The applicant must be qualified according to the
provisions of this section and the premises must be inspected and found to be
in compliance with the appropriate state, county, and local law and codes by
the health official, Fire Marshal, and Building Official.



      (3)   Application for a license shall contain the address and
legal description of the property to be used; the names, addresses, phone
numbers and dates of birth of the owner, lessee, if any, the operator or
manager, and all employees; the name, address, and phone number of 2 persons
who shall be residents of the state of Minnesota and who may be called upon
to attest to the applicant’s, manager’s, or operator’s character;
whether the applicant, manager, or operator has ever been convicted of a
crime or offense other than a traffic offense and, if so, complete and
accurate information as to the disposition thereof, the names and addresses
of all creditors of the applicant, owner, lessee, or manager who have
extended credit for the purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining,
operating, or furnishing or acquiring the premises, personal effects,
equipment, or anything incident to the establishment, maintenance and
operation of the business.



      (4)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation,
joint business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business
association, it shall submit along with its application, accurate and
complete business records showing the names, addresses, and date of birth of
all individuals having an interest in the business, including partners,
officers, owners, board of directors and creditors furnishing credit for the
establishment, acquisition, maintenance, and furnishing of the business.



      (5)   All applicants shall furnish to the city, along with
their applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the
interest of the applicant and any other person having an interest in the
premises upon which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings
thereof, personal property thereof, or the operation or maintenance thereof.
Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for deed,
mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the
applicant or any other person in the operation, acquisition or maintenance of
the enterprise.



   (C)   The Chief of Police and City Clerk may recommend approval of
the issuance of a license by the city to an applicant within 45 days after
receipt of an application unless they find 1 or more of the following to be
true:



      (1)   Applicant(s) or manager is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   Applicant(s) or an applicant’s spouse is overdue or
delinquent, or subject to a penalty imposed by law for the late payment in
their payment to the city, county, or state of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against them or imposed upon them in relation to an adult
only entertainment business;



      (3)   Applicant(s) has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (4)   Applicant(s) or an applicant’s spouse has been
convicted of a violation of a provision of this section, other than the
offense of operating an adult only entertainment business without a license
within 2 years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect;



      (5)   Applicant(s) is residing with a person who has been
denied a license by the city or any other Minnesota municipal corporation to
operate an adult only entertainment business within the preceding 12 months,
or residing with a person whose license to operate an adult only
entertainment business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;



      (6)   The premises to be used for the adult only entertainment
business has not been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department, and
the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances; the inspections shall be completed within 30 days from the date
the application was submitted, provided that the application contains all of
the information required by this chapter. If the application is deficient,
the inspections shall be completed within 30 days from the date the
deficiency has been corrected;



      (7)   An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving any
of the following offenses:



         (a)   Any sex crimes as defined by M.S. §§ 609.29
through 609.352 inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, or as
defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;



         (b)   Any obscenity crime as defined by M.S. §§ 617.23
through 617.299 inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, or as
defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith; for which:



            1.   Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony
offense; or



            3.   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of 2 or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24 month period.



         (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on disqualification of the applicant or applicants spouse;



      (8)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.



   (D)   Requalification. An applicant who has been convicted of an
offense listed in subsection (C)(7) may qualify for an adult-oriented
business license only when the time period required by subsection (C)(7) has
elapsed.



   (E)   Posting. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and
the address of the adult- oriented business. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult- oriented business so
that it may be read at any time.



   (F)   Council action. The City Council shall act to approve or
disapprove the license application within 60 days from the date the
application was submitted, provided that the application contains all
information required by this chapter. If the application is deficient, the
Council shall act on the application within 60 days from the date that the
deficiency has been corrected.



   (G)   Appeals. Within 30 days after the decision by the Council, the
applicant may appeal to the District Court by serving a notice upon the Mayor
or Clerk of the city.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.09  LICENSE FEES.



   License fees shall be set by city resolution.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.10  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health
officials, representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and
Building Inspection Division to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented
business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it
is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   Refusal to permit inspections. A person who operates an
adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if
he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health
officials, representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department and
Building Inspection Division at any time it is occupied or open for business.
Refusal to permit inspections may result in the suspension of the license as
provided in § 112.12.



   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to
areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for
use as a permanent or temporary habitation.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.11  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Expiration. Each license shall expire at the end of the
calendar year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in §
112.08(A). Application for renewal must be made at least 60 days before the
expiration date, and when made less that 60 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   Denial of renewal. When the city denies renewal of a license,
the applicant shall not be issued a license for 1 year from the date of
denial. If, subsequent to denial the city finds that the basis for denial of
the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial
became final.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.12  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Causes of suspension. The city may suspend a license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee
of a licensee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of
this chapter;



      (2)   Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages while on the
adult-oriented business premises other than at an adult hotel or motel;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult- oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
adult-oriented business premises;



      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an
adult-oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   Notice. A suspension by the city shall be proceeded by written
notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least
10 days notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the
nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the
licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises
with the person in charge thereof.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.13  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Suspended licenses. The city may revoke a license if a cause
of suspension in § 112.12 occurs and the license has been suspended within
the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   Causes of revocation. The city shall revoke a license if it
determines that: 



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the city during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
adult-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license
was suspended;



      (5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
112.08(C)(7), for which the time period required in § 112.08(C)(7) has not
elapsed;



      (6)   On 2 or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime listed in § 112.08(C)(7) for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the adult- oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed;



      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or
on the licensed premises. Subdivision 3. Appeals. The fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Exceptions. Subdivision (B)(7) does not apply to adult motels
as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee
knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public
view.



   (E)   Granting a license after revocation. When the city revokes a
license, the revocation shall continue for 1 year and the licensee shall not
be issued an adult-oriented business license for 1 year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection
(B)(3), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate
number of years required under § 112.08(C)(8) has elapsed.



   (F)   Notice. A revocation by the city shall be proceeded by written
notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least
10 days notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the
nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the
licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the
person in charge thereof.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.14  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer this license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.15  NONCONFORMING USES.



   Any adult use existing in the city that is not in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter as of the effective date of this chapter shall be
deemed a nonconforming use and shall become unlawful 3 years after the date
of enactment.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



§ 112.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   Violation of any section of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Each
day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense. The city
may enforce any provision of this chapter by mandamus, injunction or any
other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 529, passed 1-12-2004)



CHAPTER 113:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Exceptions to definitions



   113.03   Licensing; exemptions



   113.04   License ineligibility



   113.05   Group licenses



   113.06   License suspension and revocation



   113.07   License transferability



   113.08   Registration



   113.09   Prohibited activities



   113.10   Exclusion by placard



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door
for the primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or
other ideological beliefs. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
“door-to-door advocate” shall fall under the term SOLICITOR and include
door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering intended for non-commercial
purposes.



   PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place
movement, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for
sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale,
the goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting. For the purpose of this
chapter, the term PEDDLER shall have the same common meaning as the term
“hawker.”



   PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or similar association.



   PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person, including a corporation or other
entity, who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services
for a religious, political, social, or other charitable organization.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the City Hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state
law shall not be considered regular business days.



   SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place
movement, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for
goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, or services
of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be
described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or
performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs
shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual
purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders
as described above. For purposes of this chapter, the term SOLICITOR shall
include the term “canvasser.”



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a
vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, or other portable shelter, for the purpose of
exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and
delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property
and who does not remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR,
and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to:



      (1)   Non-commercial door-to-door advocates. Nothing within
this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict non-commercial
door-to-door advocates. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not
be required to register as a solicitor under § 113.08.



      (2)   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale
any goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a
retail seller of the items being sold by the wholesaler.



      (3)   Any person who makes initial contacts with other people
for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer
delivery route for the delivery of food and dairy products, such as
groceries, baked goods or milk.



      (4)   Any person making deliveries of perishable food and
dairy products to the customers on his or her established delivery route.



      (5)   Any person making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters,
or other similar publications on an established customer delivery route, when
attempting to establish a regular delivery route, or when publications are
delivered to the community at large.



      (6)   Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales.



      (7)   Any person participating in an organized multi-person
bazaar or flea market.



      (8)   Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer.



      (9)   Any person selling in season produce, such as fruits and
vegetables grown by the person in a garden or on a farm, from a roadside
stand, vehicle, or other temporary structure.



      (10)   Any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered
sale.



   (B)   Exemption from these definitions shall not, for the scope of
this chapter, excuse any person from complying with any other applicable
statutory provision or requirement provided by another city regulation.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate license from Washington County as may
be required by M.S. Ch. 329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the
county issues a license for the activity.



   (B)   City license required. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, no person shall conduct business within the city as a peddler or a
transient merchant without first obtaining a city license. Solicitors need
not be licensed, but are required to register with the city pursuant to §
113.08.



   (C)   Public parks or property. Peddlers and transient merchants
conducting activities on or in public parks or other public property which
are sanctioned or promoted by the city or any of its boards or agencies shall
be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Application. An application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting a business
operation within the city. Application for a license shall be made on a form
furnished by the City Clerk. All applications shall be signed by the
applicant. All applications shall include the following information:



      (1)   The applicant's full legal name.



      (2)   Any and all other names under which the applicant has
conducted or does conduct business, or to which the applicant will officially
answer.



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, any distinguishing marks or features, and the like)
together with a recent photograph of the applicant not less than 2 inches by
2 inches in size.



      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed, or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or an agent.



      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business,
if any exists.



      (8)   Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the
applicant, including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license.



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
daily license.



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business. If the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of
days he or she will be conducting business within the city, with a maximum of
14 consecutive days.



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including
the location where a transient merchant intends to set up his or her business.



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last 5 years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor for violating any state or federal statute or local ordinance,
other than minor traffic offenses.



      (14)   A list of 3 most recent locations where the applicant
has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.



      (15)   Proof of any required county license.



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner's agent for any location to be used by a transient merchant.



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided.



      (18)   Any and all additional information as may be deemed
necessary by the City Council.



      (19)   The applicant's driver's license number or other
acceptable form of identification.



      (20)   The license plate number, registration information,
vehicle identification number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle
to be used in conjunction with the licensed business operation.



      (21)   An investigation fee in the amount established by the
city’s fee schedule as it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall
be accompanied by the license fee established in the city fee schedule as it
may be amended from time to time.



   (F)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the
license fee, the City Clerk will, within 2 regular business days, determine
if the application is complete. An application will be considered complete if
all required information is provided. If the City Clerk determines that the
application is incomplete, the City Clerk shall inform the applicant of the
required, necessary information that is missing. If the application is
complete, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police
who shall immediately institute the investigation of the applicant's business
and moral character as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the
public good and shall endorse on the application his or her approval within
72 hours after it has been filed by the applicant with the City Clerk and
return the application to the City Clerk. In the case of transient merchants,
a copy of each application shall be submitted to the Fire Chief who shall
inspect the premises proposed to be licensed for compliance with all
applicable fire safety codes, and shall endorse the application in the manner
prescribed in this section within 10 days after it has been filed by the
applicant with the City Clerk. If as a result of the investigation, the
premises are found to be unsatisfactory and not in compliance with applicable
codes, the Fire Chief shall endorse on such application his or her
disapproval, his or her reasons for the same and shall specify, if
applicable, what alterations are to be made to bring this premises into
compliance with the applicable codes. The Fire Chief shall return the
application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his or her
application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. If as a result
of the investigation, the premises are found to be in compliance with all
applicable fire safety codes, the Fire Chief shall endorse on the application
his or her approval and return the application to the City Clerk.



   (G)   Professional fundraisers not exempt. A professional fundraiser
working on behalf of an otherwise exempt group or person shall not be exempt
from the licensing requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a peddler or transient
merchant license:



   (A)   The failure of an applicant to obtain and demonstrate proof of
having obtained any required county license.



   (B)   The failure of an applicant to truthfully provide any
information requested by the city as part of the application process.



   (C)   The failure of an applicant to sign the license application.



   (D)   The failure of an applicant to pay the required investigation
fee and license fee at the time of application.



   (E)   The failure of an applicant for a transient merchant license
to obtain permission from the property owner of the property on which the
applicant's activities will be conducted and furnish proof thereof to the
city.



   (F)   A conviction within the past 5 years of the date of
application for a violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or
of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects upon the person's ability to
conduct the business for which the license is being sought in a professional,
honest and legal manner. Such violations shall include, but are not limited
to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices,
and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.



   (G)   The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued
to an applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant.



   (H)   When an applicant has an adverse business reputation. Evidence
of an adverse business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the
existence of more than 3 complaints against an applicant with the Better
Business Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General or other state
attorney general's office, or other similar business or consumer rights
office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or 3 complaints filed with
the city against an applicant within the preceding 5 years.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.05  GROUP LICENSES.



   (A)   Any nonprofit organization, society, association or
corporation desiring to engage in activities defined in § 113.01, for the
promotion of a civic event or for a business promotion or for fund raising
activities in furtherance of the organization's purposes and in connection
therewith, to use public or private property for the sale of goods, wares,
food and merchandise by or through peddlers and transient merchants, must
first secure a special group license to include all participating persons or
businesses by making a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished
by the City Clerk which shall give the following information:



      (1)   Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization;



      (2)   Specific date or dates upon which the group license is
sought;



      (3)   Specific location or locations upon which the activity
is to be conducted. If any part of the activity is to be conducted on private
property, the written consent of the owner of the property must be obtained
and attached to the application;



      (4)   Evidence of the nonprofit status of the organization;



      (5)   Full name and address of each person or business to be
covered by the group license.



   (B)   Upon being satisfied that the organization is nonprofit and
qualifies for a group license hereunder, a special group license shall be
issued upon payment of a fee in the amount established by the city’s fee
schedule as it may be amended from time to time; provided, however, that if
the City Clerk deems it necessary for the protection of the public health,
welfare, and safety, he or she may refer the application to the Chief of
Police and Fire Chief for investigation as set forth herein and the license
shall not be issued until favorable recommendations are received from the
Police Chief and Fire Chief.



   (C)   The above mentioned license fee shall be in addition to any
rental fee which may be required by the city for the use of its public
parking lot or other public property.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.06  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of
any of the following:



      (1)   Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud,
misrepresentation or incorrect statements provided by an applicant on the
application form.



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during
the course of the licensed activity.



      (3)   Subsequent conviction of any offense to which the
granting of the license could have been denied under § 113.04.



      (4)   Engaging in any prohibited activity as provided under §
113.09 of this chapter.



      (5)   Violation of any other provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Multiple persons under 1 license. The suspension or revocation
of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to
conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee
shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's
authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of
the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued
under this chapter, the city shall provide a license holder with written
notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right
to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or
by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address
provided on the license application.



   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division
(C) of this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public
hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within 10
days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the
suspension or revocation. For the purpose of a mailed notice, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request for the public hearing.
Within 3 regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify
the licensee of its decision.



   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent
harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions
of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City
Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of
the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C)
of this section.



   (F)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the the City
Clerk in denying a permit may appeal to the Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after notice of the action
complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal
and notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner
as provided in § 113.06 for notice of hearing on revocation.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.07  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.08  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   All solicitors and any person exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter under § 113.03 shall be required to register
with the city prior to engaging in those activities. Registration shall be
made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be
required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of
the registration. Certificates of the registration shall be non-transferable.



   (B)   Individuals that will be engaging in non-commercial
door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.09  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door
advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall conduct
business in any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or the items to be
sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out,
or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure.



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or
pedestrian, on any street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of any specific individual or the general public.



   (D)   Failing to provide proof of license, or registration, and
identification when requested.



   (E)   Using the license or registration of another person.



   (F)   Making false or misleading statements about the products or
services being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person.



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave.



   (H)   Conducting business before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.



   (I)   Otherwise operating the business in any manner that a
reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.10  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   (A)   Unless specifically invited by the property owner or tenant,
no peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door
advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall enter
onto the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a
peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate,
or similar activity when the property is marked with a sign or placard:



      (1)   At least 4 inches long.



      (2)   At least 4 inches wide.



      (3)   With print of at least 48 point in size.



      (4)   Stating "No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient
Merchants," "Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited," or
other comparable statement.



   (B)   No person other than the property owner or tenant shall
remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this
section.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
set forth in § 10.99.



(Ord. 588, passed 12-14-2009)



CHAPTER 114:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   License required



   114.03   License application, fee, term



   114.04   Required records



   114.05   Daily reports to police



   114.06   Receipt required



   114.07   Redemption period



   114.08   Holding period



   114.09   Police order to hold property



   114.10   Inspection of items



   114.11   Label required



   114.12   Prohibited acts



   114.13   Denial, suspension or revocation



   114.14   Hours of operation



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker is a billable transaction except renewals, redemptions or
extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in
the licensee's possession, voided transactions, and confiscations.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person who loans money on deposit of or pledge for
personal property or other valuable things, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling same back
again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgages
on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof
so mortgaged.  To the extent that a pawnbroker’s business includes buying
personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on
consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.



   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION.  Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker
in which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or
trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, or for which a
unique transaction number or identifier is generated by its point-of-sale
software, or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable except:



      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established
permanent place of business, and the retail sale of the merchandise, provided
the pawnbroker must maintain a record of the purchase or consignment which
describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to
that transaction record.



      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally
received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.



      (3)   Items purchased from a Minnesota city, county or other
political subdivision's law enforcement agency as an alternative to disposing
of unclaimed, impounded, seized or confiscated items through public auction
or sale, as allowed by state statute or local ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 33.1)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, partnership, or corporation shall engage in or
carry on the business of a pawnbroker without a license issued by the city
for each and every separate office or place of business operated by the
licensee in the city.



   (B)   A license under this chapter shall authorize the licensee to
carry on business only at the permanent place of business designated in the
license. No license may be transferred to a different location or different
licensee. However, upon written request, the Chief of Police, or Chief's
designee, may approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The
licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with §
114.04(E). All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping and
reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in
compliance with all provisions of the city code. The licensee must either own
the building in which the business is conducted, and any approved off-site
storage facility, or have a lease on the business premise that extends for
more than 6 months.



(Prior Code, § 33.2)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.03  LICENSE APPLICATION, FEE, TERM.



   (A)   Every application for a license to maintain, operate or
conduct a pawnbroker business shall file a complete application under oath
with the city upon a form provided by the city and shall pay a nonrefundable
application fee in an amount set by resolution. The application, once
accepted, shall be referred to the Forest Take Police Department for
investigation. Copies of this application shall be forwarded to such other
city departments as the City Council shall deem necessary for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Chief of
Police and such other department heads shall make written recommendations to
the City Council as to the issuance or nonissuance of the license within 30
days of the filing of the application.



   (B)   (1)   The billable transaction license fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Council and shall reflect the cost of processing
transactions from the licensee and other related regulatory expenses as
determined by the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if
necessary, at least every 6 months. Licensees shall be notified in writing 30
days before any adjustment is implemented. The billable transaction fee for
modem transactions shall not exceed the billable transaction fee for manual
transactions. Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due
and payable within 30 days. Failure to make a payment within 30 days is a
violation of this chapter.



      (2)   All licenses shall expire at the end of each calendar
year. A new application fee shall be required whenever there is a change in
the facts presented by the application other than the date, applicant's home
address or building owner's address, or in the case of any license not
renewed prior to its expiration.



   (C)   All applicants requesting a license pursuant to this chapter
may be required to submit to a background investigation, including, but not
limited to a criminal history check. The complete application form shall
contain all information indicated, including:



      (1)   Full name, place, date of birth, and street residence of
the applicant;



      (2)   The business address of the applicant;



      (3)   A statement as to whether within the preceding 5 years,
the applicant has been convicted of any felony and/or the violation of any
law relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled
substance, or the operation of any business; the nature of any such offense
and the penalty assessed;



      (4)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation
or partnership:



         (a)   If the applicant is a corporation, the state of
incorporation and the full names and addresses of all officers and directors;



         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the full names
and addresses of all partners;



      (5)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker,
precious metal dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other
governmental unit.



      (6)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had
revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand
dealer license from any other governmental unit.



      (7)   The location of the business premises.



      (8)   If the applicant does not own the business premises, a
true and complete copy of the executed lease.



      (9)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed.



      (10)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes
that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and
if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.



      (11)   The full name of the manager or proprietor of the
business.



   (D)   Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount
of $5,000, executed by a corporation authorized to do business in this state
and conditioned that in conducting the business the licensee will observe all
laws in relation to pawnbrokers and will conduct business in conformity
thereto and that the licensee will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled any goods which have come into the licensee’s hand through
the licensee’s business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the
reasonable value in money to the person.



   (E)   The bond shall be maintained for so long as the pawnbroker
does business as such for the benefit of the city or any person who shall
suffer any damage through the act of the pawnbroker and shall not be
terminable without the bond company giving written notice 30 days in advance
of termination to the City Clerk.



   (F)   If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be
signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by the agent authorized
to sign; if a partnership, by a partner.



   (G)   No person shall make any material false statement in the
application. In addition to other penalties, the licensee’s license may be
revoked by the City Council for giving false information on the application.



(Prior Code, § 33.3)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.04  REQUIRED RECORDS.



   (A)   At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals,
extensions, redemptions or confiscations, every licensee must immediately
record in English the following information by using ink or other indelible
medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Police Department:



      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item
including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial
number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.



      (2)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or
pledged therefore.



      (3)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.



      (4)   Date, time and place the item of property was received
by the licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier
that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's records.



      (5)   Full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, date of birth and accurate description of the person from
whom the item of the property was received, including: sex, height, weight,
race, color of eyes and color of hair.



      (6)   The identification number and state of issue from any of
the following forms of identification of the seller:



         (a)   Current valid Minnesota driver's license.



         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card.



         (c)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state or province of Canada.



      (7)   The signature of the person identified in the
transaction.



   (B)   (1)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by
the Police Department of acceptable video standards, the licensee must also
take a color photograph or color video recording of:



         (a)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction.



         (b)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a
unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.



      (2)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least 2 inches
in length by 2 inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that
the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records
of the transaction to which it relates. The photographs must be available to
the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon request. The major
portion of the photograph must include an identifiable facial image of the
person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately
depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being
photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place
in the premises. If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must focus
on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable
image of that person's face. Items photographed by video must be accurately
depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and
date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of
the transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person
that he or she is being videotaped by displaying a sign of sufficient size in
a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed
videotape for 3 months.



   (C)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police
Department, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in §
114.04(C) by submitting them as digital images, in a format specified by the
issuing authority, electronically cross- referenced to the reportable
transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital images may
be captured from required video recordings, this provision does not alter or
amend the requirements in § 114.04(C).



   (D)   For renewals, extensions, redemptions and confiscations the
licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the
current transaction, and the type of transaction.



   (E)   The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection
by the Police Department or Department of Licenses. Data entries shall be
retained for at least 3 years from the date of transaction. Entries of
required digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.



(Prior Code, § 33.4)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.05  DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.



   (A)   Effective no later than 60 days after the Police Department
provides licensees with the current version of the Automated Pawn System
Interchange File Specification, licensees must submit every reportable
transaction to the Police Department daily in the following manner: licensees
must provide to the Police Department all reportable transaction information
by transferring it from their computer to the Automated Pawn System via modem
using the current version of the Automated Pawn System Interchange File
Specification. All required records must be transmitted completely and
accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards
and procedures established by the issuing authority. Any transaction that
does not meet the Automated Pawn System Interchange File Specification must
be corrected and resubmitted the next business day. The licensee must display
a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which
informs patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department
daily.



   (B)   Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction
reported to the Police Department.



      (1)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the
required reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Police Department,
upon request, printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the
video tape(s) for that date, by noon the next business day;



      (2)   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's
system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following
the failure, the licensee must continue to provide the required reports as
detailed in this section, and shall be charged a $100 reporting failure
penalty daily until the error is corrected;



      (3)   If the problem is determined to be outside the
licensee's system, the licensee must continue to provide the required reports
in this section, and resubmit all transactions via modem when the error is
corrected;



      (4)   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit
the photographs required in § 114.04(D), the licensee must immediately take
all required photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the photographs
to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to the police
department upon request;



      (5)   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical
problems that prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable
transactions, upon correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every
reportable transaction from every business day the problem had existed;



      (6)   Section 114.05(B), (1) through (3) notwithstanding, the
Police Department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay
the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.



(Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.06  RECEIPT REQUIRED.



   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for 3
years. The receipt must include at least the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed
business.



   (B)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.



   (C)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the
transaction.



   (D)   An accurate description of each item received including, but
not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model
number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.



   (E)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee
that conducted the transaction.



   (F)   The amount advanced or paid.



   (G)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees
and charges.



   (H)   The last regular day of business by which the item must be
redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.



   (I)   The full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller.



   (J)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:



      (1)   Current valid Minnesota driver's license.



      (2)   Current valid Minnesota identification card.



      (3)   Current valid photo driver's license or identification
card issued by another state or province of Canada.



   (K)   Description of the pledger or seller including approximate
sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.



   (L)   The signature of the pledger or seller.



   (M)   All printed statements as required by M.S. § 325J.04, Sub. 2,
or any other applicable statutes.



(Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.07  REDEMPTION PERIOD.



   Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must
have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the
item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 60-day holding period,
items may not be removed from the licensed location. Licensees are prohibited
from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt
was issued or, to any person identified in a written and notarized
authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a
person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledger, or with approval of the Chief of
Police, or Chief's designee. Written authorization for release of property to
persons other than the original pledger must be maintained along with
original transaction record in accordance with § 114.04.



(Prior Code, § 33.6)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.08  HOLDING PERIOD.



   Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold
or otherwise transferred for 30 days from the date of the transaction. An
individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was received on
deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.



(Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)  Penalty, § 114.99



§ 114.09  POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.



   (A)   Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from
any agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold
or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in
writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect
for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative
order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant
to § 114.09(B), whichever comes first.



   (B)   Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s
designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold
or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the
Chief or the Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from
the date it is placed unless the Chief of Police or the chiefs designee
determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.



   (C)   Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or
evidence in a criminal case, the Chief or Chief’s designee may:



      (1)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop,
pursuant to a written order from the Chief or the Chief’s designee; or



      (2)   (a)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as
provided in this section, and leave it in the shop.



         (b)   When an item is confiscated, the person doing so
shall provide identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide
the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and
investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.



         (c)   When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer
necessary, the Chief of Police, or Chief’s designee shall so notify the
licensee.



(Prior Code, § 33.5)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  INSPECTION OF ITEMS.



   At all times during the term of the license, the licensee must allow
law enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed business
is located, during normal business hours, except in an emergency, for the
purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the items, wares and
merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with this chapter or
other applicable laws.



(Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.11  LABEL REQUIRED.



   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction.
Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies
the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the name of the
item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as
reported to the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused.



(Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.12  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or
attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive
any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound
mind or from an intoxicated person.



   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a valid driver's license, a valid state
identification card, or current valid photo driver's license or
identification card issued by the state or province of residency of the
person from whom the item was received.



   (D)   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an
altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number or
any item of property that has had its serial number removed.



   (E)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit
any article of property not the person's own; nor shall any person pawn,
pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether
with permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security
interest; with any licensee.



   (F)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or
deposit any article of property with any licensee shall give a false or
fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of
date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered
identification, or the identification of another to any licensee.



(Prior Code, § 33.7)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.13  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for
1 or more of the following reasons:



   (A)   The proposed use does not comply with the applicable zoning
code.



   (B)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance or other provisions of the city code or state law.



   (C)   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with 1 or more
provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a
background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of
information.



   (E)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a
license.



   (F)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the
application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's
business.



   (G)   Violation within the preceding 5 years, of any law relating to
theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or
operation of a business.



   (H)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 33.9)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.14  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No property shall be received as a pledge or purchase by any
pawnbroker, nor shall any property be sold by a pawnbroker from 9:00 p.m.
Saturday to 7:00 a.m. Monday, nor on any other day before 7:00 a.m., or after
9:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 33.8)  (Ord. 542, passed 3-13-2006)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in
§ 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 33.11)



CHAPTER 115:  REGULATION OF MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES



Section



   115.01   Statement of policy



   115.02   M.S. Ch. 146A adopted by reference



   115.03   Definitions



   115.04   Massage distinguished



   115.05   Massage business location license requirement



   115.06   Contents of application for massage business location
license



   115.07   Massage business location license fee, license
investigation fee and license year



   115.08   Granting or denial of licenses



   115.09   Conditions governing issuance of a massage business
location license



   115.10   Massage business location construction and maintenance
requirements



   115.11   Massage therapy license required



   115.12   Contents of application for a massage therapist license



   115.13   Massage therapist license fees



   115.14   Investigation of massage therapy license application



   115.15   Conditions governing issuance of massage  therapy license



   115.16   Restrictions and regulations



   115.17   Health and disease control



   115.18   Denial, revocation, suspension or non-renewal of massage
business location license or massage therapy license



§ 115.01  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   The City Council of the City of Forest Lake deems it necessary to
provide for the special and express regulation of businesses or commercial
enterprises which operate massage businesses and similar oriented services
operating under different names in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare and to guard against the inception and transmission of contagious
disease.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.02  M.S. CH. 146A ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   M.S. Ch. 146A, known as "Complementary and Alternative Health Care
Practices", as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated
herein and adopted by reference.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or the
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating, or
rolling of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the
aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or
devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniment, antiseptic, oil powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other similar
preparations.



   MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE. A license issued by the city authorizing the
practice of administering massage on premises within the City of Forest Lake.



   MASSAGE LOCATION. Any premises at or in which massage is performed.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST. An individual who practices or administers massage
to the public who can demonstrate to the city that he or she:



      (1)   Is affiliated with, employed by, or owns a therapeutic
massage enterprise licensed by the city; and



      (2)   Has completed 600 hours of certified therapeutic massage
training from a bona fide school that has been properly accredited, or has 1
year of experience practicing massage therapy as established by an affidavit
and can document within 2 years of obtaining the license that he or she has
completed 600 hours of certified therapeutic massage training from a bona
fide school. If no such documentation can be established at the time of
license renewal, the license shall not be renewed and the person who received
the license based upon experience is precluded from receiving a license in
the future unless the person has the requisite certified hours.



   MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE. A license issued by the city to a massage
therapist authorizing the holder thereof to practice or administer massage in
the City of Forest Lake at a licensed massage business location.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.04  MASSAGE DISTINGUISHED.



   (A)   The practice of massage is hereby declared to be distinct from
the practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical
therapy, or podiatry and persons duly licensed in this state to practice
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry
and nurses who work solely under the direction of such persons, are hereby
expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter. Beauty culturists and
barbers who do not give, or hold themselves out to give, massage treatments,
as defined herein, other than is customarily given in such shops or places of
business, for the purpose of beautification only shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Athletic directors and trainers who perform massages in the
course of any athletic program or event which is sponsored by a local unit of
government, bona fide educational institution complying with state or local
regulations, bona fide churches, synagogues or institutions of organized
religion or bona fide, non-profit civic organizations are expressly excluded
from the requirements of this chapter provided that the performing of
massages is subsidiary to the performing of other services and tasks.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.05  MASSAGE BUSINESS LOCATION LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of operating a massage
business location either exclusively or in connection with any other business
enterprise without obtaining a business license as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever any business location ceases to be licensed as a
massage establishment, whether through the suspension, cancellation,
revocation, non-renewal or lapse of its license, its owners shall immediately
remove from public view any sign or display which identifies the business as
being a massage business location or as offering massage services.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.06  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE BUSINESS LOCATION LICENSE.



   Application for a business location license shall be made only on the
forms provided by the City Clerk. One complete application shall be furnished
to the office of the City Clerk containing the following information:



   (A)   Business name, address and legal description of the premises
to be used;



   (B)   The names, addresses, dates of birth and phone number of the
owner, lessee, if any, and the operator or manager;



   (C)   Whether the applicant, manager or operator has ever been
convicted of a crime or offense other than a traffic offense and, if so,
complete and accurate information as to the time, place and nature of such
crime or offense including the disposition thereof and whether the applicant,
manager, or operator has had an interest in, as an individual or as a part of
a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm, a
massage business or massage therapist license that has been denied, revoked,
or suspended within the past 5 years;



   (D)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, joint
business venture, partnership or any legally constituted business
association, it shall submit along with its application, accurate and
complete business records showing the names and addresses of all individuals
having an interest in the business, including partners, officers, owners,
managers, and members of the Board of Directors;



   (E)   The application shall also contain blueprints, diagrams,
plans, layouts and the like showing the construction, revision, remodeling,
alteration or additions of or to the premises and specifically showing the
layout, design and arrangement of the restroom facilities and the site and
facilities to be used.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



§ 115.07  MASSAGE BUSINESS LOCATION LICENSE  FEE, LICENSE INVESTIGATION
FEE AND LICENSE YEAR.



   The investigation fee and first annual license fee for a new business
license shall be in the amount established from time to time by city
ordinance. A license, unless revoked, is for the calendar year, or a part
thereof, for which it has been issued and shall not be prorated. The
investigation fee and annual license fee shall be paid when the application
is filed. In the event that the application is denied or the license, once
issued, is revoked, canceled or surrendered, no part of the annual
investigation and license fee shall be returned to the applicant unless by
express action of the City Council. A separate license shall be obtained each
year for each place of business. The fee for the annual renewal of the
business license shall be in the amount established from time to time by city
ordinance. The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place in the
licensed premises at all times. A license for the operation of a massage
business location is nontransferable.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.08  GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSES.



   License applications shall be reviewed by the City Clerk, Police
Department, Fire Department, Building Department and any other departments
that the City Clerk shall deem necessary to determine whether the premises
conforms to all applicable code requirements. Following completion of the
required background investigation, the City Council shall approve or deny the
license.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



§ 115.09  CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF A MASSAGE BUSINESS LOCATION
LICENSE.



   (A)   No massage business location license shall be issued if the
applicant or any of its owners is a person of bad repute or has been
convicted of criminal prostitution, similar sex offenses, or other crimes
directly related to the offering of massage therapy services or the running
of a massage business, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities
of a licensee as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3.



   (B)   A massage business location license shall be issued only to
applicants who have not, within 1 year prior to the date of application, been
denied licensure or had a massage business license denied or revoked by any
political subdivision, municipality, or by the State of Minnesota.



   (C)   A massage business location license shall be issued only to
applicants who have answered fully all of the information requested in the
application, have paid the full license fee and have cooperated with the city
in review of the application.



   (D)   A massage business location license shall not be granted to an
applicant who is under the age of 18 years.



   (E)   A massage business location license may be granted only for
locations within business zones allowing similar activities.



   (F)   A massage business location license may be granted only to
business locations which meet safety, sanitary, and Building Code
requirements of the city.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



§ 115.10  MASSAGE BUSINESS LOCATION CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A licensed massage business shall be equipped with adequate
and conveniently located toilet rooms for the accommodation of its employees
and patrons. The toilet room shall be well ventilated by natural or
mechanical methods and be enclosed with a door. The toilet room shall be kept
clean and in good repair and shall be adequately lighted.



   (B)   Floor, walls and equipment in massage rooms, restrooms and
bathrooms must be kept in a state of good repair and sanitary condition at
all times. Linens and other materials shall be stored at least 12 inches off
the floor or in an enclosed cabinet.



   (C)   Each licensed premise shall provide adequate refuse
receptacles, which shall be emptied as often as required.



   (D)   The doors to the individual massage rooms shall not be
equipped with any locking device nor shall they be locked or obstructed from
either side of the door. Each individual massage room shall contain a private
dressing area. Clean towels, wash cloths and linens must be available for
each customer.



   (E)   Main entrance doors to the premises shall be unlocked at all
times during business hours.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.11  MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall perform massage services within the city without
obtaining a massage therapist license as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.12  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR A MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE.



   An application for a massage therapist license shall be made only on
forms provided by the city. The application shall contain the following
information together with any other information the city may require:



   (A)   Evidence of the applicant’s educational qualifications,
including original or certified copies of degrees, diplomas or certificates,
if any, including proof of receiving at least 600 hours of certified
therapeutic massage training recognized and accepted by the State of
Minnesota or a national professional therapeutic massage organization.



   (B)   Evidence of applicant’s practical qualifications to practice
massage.



   (C)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or
offense other than a traffic offense and, if so, information as to the time,
place and nature of such crime or offense and whether the applicant has had
an interest in, as an individual or as part of a corporation, partnership,
association, enterprise, business, or firm, a massage business or massage
therapist license that has been denied, revoked, or suspended within the past
5 years.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



§ 115.13  MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE FEES.



   The annual new massage therapy license fee shall be in an amount
established from time to time by city ordinance. The license year shall be
the calendar year and a license shall be valid for the remainder of the
calendar year in which it is issued and shall not be prorated. The
investigation fee and first annual license fee for the issuance of a license
shall be paid when the application is filed. In the event that the
application is denied or that the license, once issued, is revoked, canceled
or surrendered, no part of the annual license and investigation fee for the
issuance of said license shall be returned to the applicant unless by express
action of the City Council. A license shall be obtained each calendar year.
The annual renewal fee shall be in an amount established from time to time by
city ordinance, and shall be accompanied by a completed application. The
license holder shall display the license in a prominent place in the licensed
location at all times. A license permitting the holder thereof to practice
massage therapy is nontransferable.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.14  INVESTIGATION OF MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Massage therapy license applications shall be reviewed by the Police
Department, which shall furnish written recommendations to the City Clerk
following completion of the required background investigation. The City
Council shall approve or deny the license.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



§ 115.15  CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF A MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE.



   (A)   The license shall be issued only to persons who have received
and can furnish proof of receiving at least 600 hours of certified
therapeutic massage training recognized and accepted by the State of
Minnesota or a national professional therapeutic massage organization.



   (B)   The license shall be issued only to persons of good moral
character and repute.



   (C)   No massage therapist license shall be issued to an applicant
who has been convicted of criminal prostitution, similar sex offenses, or
other crimes directly related to the offering of massage therapy services or
the running of a massage business, and has not shown competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties and
responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3.



   (D)   The license shall not be issued to persons who have, within 1
year prior to the date of application, been denied licensure or have had a
massage therapist or massage business license denied or revoked by any
political subdivision, municipality or by the State of Minnesota.



   (E)   The license shall be issued only to applicants who have fully
and truthfully answered all of the information requested in the application
and have paid the full license and investigation fee.



   (F)   The license shall be issued only to persons 18 years of age or
older.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



§ 115.16  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No massage business location licensee shall employ any person
as a massage therapist without first insuring that said employee possesses a
valid license for the administration or practice of massage in the City of
Forest Lake. The license shall be prominently and openly displayed on the
premises.



   (B)   The licensed location shall not be open or in operation
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the succeeding day nor shall
any person engaged in the practice of massage be on said premises or perform
any massage or administer any such services between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. on the succeeding day.



   (C)   The licensee, massage therapist and any persons in their
employ or agents or officers thereof and any and all persons with interest in
said business shall comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations and
laws of the City of Forest Lake, the State of Minnesota and the United States
of America.



   (D)   If the licensee is a partnership or corporation, the licensee
shall designate a person to be manager and in responsible charge of the
business. Such person shall remain responsible for conduct of the business
until the licensee has designated another suitable person in writing. The
licensee shall promptly notify the City of Forest Lake in writing of any
change in manager indicating the name, address, date of birth and home
telephone number of the new manager and the effective date of such change.



   (E)   Every licensee shall permit and allow an examination and
inspection of every part of the premises by a police, fire or other authority
of the city during normal business hours. Refusal to allow such inspection or
to answer the request of city police, fire, or other authority to be admitted
to a licensed premises shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of all
licenses.



   (F)   Any person acting as a massage therapist shall have his or her
license displayed in a prominent place at his or her place of employment and,
upon demand by any police officer or other authorized officer or agent of the
city of Forest Lake, any person engaged in practicing massage shall identify
himself or herself giving his or her true legal name, correct address, date
of birth and home telephone number.



   (G)   No person under 18 years of age shall serve in or be employed
in any location licensed under the provisions of this chapter except in a
clerical, receptionist or other non-massage capacity.



   (H)   Any person practicing massage therapy within the City of
Forest Lake shall initially advise the city of his or her full legal name,
address, date of birth, home telephone number and shall advise the city of
any changes in address or telephone number within 30 days of such change.



   (I)   Any person practicing massage within the city may do so only
at business locations which are licensed for the conduct of such business as
herein provided and further, any person practicing massage shall inform the
city of any changes in employment or the location of his or her employment
within the city within 7 days after such change.



   (J)   Every person to whom a massage therapy license is issued shall
provide and allow copying of the person’s photograph for identification
purposes.



   (K)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in
the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.



   (L)   In addition to the license restrictions set forth in this
section, any advertising by a licensee of any potential unlawful or erotic
conduct at the licensed establishment or by a licensed massage therapist
shall be prohibited. A licensee under this chapter shall be strictly
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated in compliance with
all applicable laws and ordinances, including the actions of any employee or
agent of the licensee on the licensed premises.



   (M)   The licensee shall require that the person who is receiving
the massage shall at all times have his or her genitals covered with non-
transparent material or clothing. At no time shall the massage therapist
intentionally massage or offer to massage the genital area of any other
person, or the breasts of a female person.



   (N)   Any therapist performing massage shall at all times be dressed
professionally and at no time shall the therapist fail to remain fully
clothed while performing massage services.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 586, passed 10-12-2009; Am. Ord. 675,
passed - -2018)



§ 115.17  HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL.



   No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form or
while a carrier of such disease or wounds, sores or any acute respiratory
infection shall work in or use the services of any public massage room and no
person known or suspected of being afflicted with any such disease or
condition shall be employed or permitted in such area or capacity.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009)



§ 115.18  DENIAL, REVOCATION,  SUSPENSION  OR NON-RENEWAL  OF MASSAGE
BUSINESS LOCATION LICENSE OR MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE.



   (A)   In addition to the grounds found elsewhere in this code, the
following reasons are grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a
massage business location license or a massage therapist license.



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of criminal
prostitution, similar sex offenses, or other crimes directly related to the
offering of massage therapy services or the running of a massage business and
has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3.



      (2)   A material variance in the actual plan and design of the
premises from the plans submitted.



      (3)   There is any fraud, deception, or misstatement on the
license application.



      (4)   The owner, manager, lessee, or their employees, or any
massage therapist, are convicted of any ordinance violation or crime
occurring on the licensed premises.



      (5)   The licensed premises are not located in an approved
zoning district or otherwise do not meet the health and safety standards
found within this code for the licensed premises.



      (6)   The applicant is delinquent upon its payment to the city
of taxes, fines, or penalties assessed or imposed against the applicant.



      (7)   The licensed activity is conducted in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace, a menace to the health, safety, or
welfare of the public, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of the
residents of the city, upon recommendation of the Police Chief or an
appropriate city official.



      (8)   The licensee fails to continuously comply with all
conditions required as precedent to approval of the license and all
provisions of this chapter.



      (9)   Based on the findings of the background investigation,
granting a license would be a menace to the safety, health, morals, or
welfare of the public.



      (10)   The applicant or licensee is not of good moral
character.



   (B)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a massage therapist or
massage business license following provision of written notice to the
licensee and a hearing. Notice shall be provided to the license holder in
writing at least 7 days prior to the hearing and shall state the nature of
the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be mailed by regular mail
to the licensee at the most recent address listed on the license application.



(Ord. 584, passed 9-14-2009; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -2018)



CHAPTER 116:  GAMBLING



Section



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Adoption of state law by reference



   116.03   City may be more restrictive than state law



   116.04   Definitions



   116.05   Applicability



   116.06   Lawful gambling permitted



   116.07   Authorized organizations



   116.08   Qualifications



   116.09   Location criteria for premises permits and bingo hall
license



   116.10   Application and local approval of premises permits



   116.11   Local permits, excluded or exempted gambling



   116.12   License and permit display



   116.13   Notification of material changes to application



   116.14   Designated trade area



   116.15   Records and reporting



   116.16   Hours of operation



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the
city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of
operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful
purposes.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.02  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch.349, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter
as if set out in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future
amendments of M.S. Ch. 349 are hereby adopted by reference as if they had
been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.03  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained
in M.S. Ch.349, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.04  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. Ch.349.12, for the
purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BOARD.  The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.



   LICENSED ORGANIZATION.  An organization licensed by the Board.



   LOCAL PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city.



   TRADE AREA.  This city, each city and township contiguous to this
city, and any additional area situated within the boundaries of Independent
School District No. 831.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful
gambling within the city.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.06  LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.



   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the Council, by
resolution adopted by a majority of its members, authorizes lawful gambling
to occur, provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75
through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S.
§§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to
time and this chapter.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.07  AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATIONS.



   An organization shall not be eligible to conduct lawful gambling in the
city unless it meets the qualifications in M.S. § 349.16(2), and also meets
at least one of the following conditions:



   (A)   The organization has at least 30 members who are residents of
the city; or



   (B)   The physical site for the organization’s headquarters or the
registered business office of the organization is located within the city or
a municipality contiguous to the city and has been located within the city or
a municipality contiguous to the city for at least 2 years immediately
preceding application for a license; or



   (C)   The organization owns real property within the city and the
lawful gambling is conducted on the property owned by the organization within
the city; or



   (D)   The physical site where the organization regularly holds its
meetings and conducts its activities, other than lawful gambling and fund
raising, is within the city or an adjacent city and has been located within
the city or adjacent city for at least 2 years immediately preceding
application for a license; or



   (E)   The organization is a fire relief organization that provides
fire protection services to the city.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.08  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The City Council shall not adopt a resolution approving a premises
permit or bingo hall license from any applicant:



   (A)   Which has an officer, director or other person in a
supervisory or management position, who:



      (1)   Has ever been convicted of a felony;



      (2)   Has ever been convicted of a crime involving gambling;



      (3)   Is not of good moral character and repute;



      (4)   Has ever been convicted of:



         (a)   Assault;



         (b)   A criminal violation involving the use of a
firearm; or



         (c)   Making terroristic threats; or



   (B)   Which owes or which has an officer, director or other person
in a supervisory or management position, who owes delinquent local, state or
federal taxes, or is delinquent on any other city bill.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.09  LOCATION CRITERIA FOR PREMISES PERMITS AND BINGO HALL LICENSES.



   All organizations applying for a premises permit or license must meet
criteria set forth herein relating to location of lawful gambling activities.



   (A)   An organization may conduct lawful gambling only on premises
it owns or leases, except as authorized by M.S. § 349.18.



   (B)   Lawful gambling in the city may be conducted only in the
licensed organization’s facility where it has its regular meetings or in a
licensed on-sale liquor, wine, and beer establishment.



   (C)   No location shall be approved unless it complies with the
applicable zoning, building, fire and health codes of the city and other
regulations contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.10  APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling in the
city shall complete the city’s investigation form, submit copies of all
state gambling application forms, all records and reports required to be
filed with the Board in connection with gambling activities conducted within
the city pursuant to M.S. Ch.349, and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder, and submit any additional information required by the city.



   (B)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or
license or renewal of a premises permit or license from the Board shall file
with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate application together with
all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as filed with the
Board. The application and accompanying exhibits and documents shall be filed
not later than 3 days after they have been filed with the Board.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a
premises permit or license, the City Clerk shall transmit the application to
the City Police Department for review and recommendation.



   (D)   The City Police Department shall investigate the matter and
make a review and recommendation to the City Council as soon as possible, but
in no event later than 45 days following receipt of the notification by the
city.



   (E)   Organizations applying for a state-issued premises permit or
license shall pay the city a $100 investigation fee for each site for which a
permit or license is sought. This fee shall be refunded if the application is
withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.



   (F)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on
which the Council will consider the recommendation.



   (G)    The Council shall receive the City Police Department’s
report and consider the application within 45 days of the date the
application was submitted to the City Clerk.



   (H)   The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within 60 days of receipt of the application.



   (I)   The Council may disapprove an application for issuance or
renewal of a premises permit for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state
statute, state rule or city regulation relating to gambling within the last 3
years;



      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organisation
leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city
regulation relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled
substances, suppression of vice and protection of public safety within the
last 3 years;



      (3)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other
than those for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued;



      (4)   More than one licensed organization would be permitted
to conduct lawful gambling activities at one premise;



      (5)   Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee
provided by division (E) of this section within the prescribed time limit; or



      (6)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental
to health, safety and welfare of the community.



   (J)   Any organization leasing premises for the conduct of lawful
gambling shall, upon request of the city, file with the city a copy of the
lease within 1 week after execution of the lease. Lease provisions for rental
payments shall be in strict compliance with the requirements of M.S. §
349.18, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.11  LOCAL PERMITS, EXCLUDED OR EXEMPTED GAMBLING.



   (A)   No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or
exempted from state licensure requirements by M.S. § 349.166, as it may be
amended from time to time, without a valid local permit.



   (B)   Applications for issuance of a local permit shall be on a form
prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Name and address of the organization requesting the
permit;



      (2)   Name(s) and address(es) of the officers and persons
accounting for receipts, expenses and profits for the event;



      (3)   Date of gambling occasion for which permit is requested;



      (4)   Address of premises where event will occur;



      (5)   Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected
with the event, including rental to be charged to organization; and



      (6)   Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.



   (C)   The fee for a local permit shall be $50. The fee shall be
submitted with the application for a local permit.



   (D)   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on
which the Council will consider the issuance of the local permit.



   (E)   The Council may disapprove an application for issuance of a
local permit for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Violation by the organization of any state statute,
state rule or city regulation relating to gambling within the last 3 years;



      (2)   Violation by the establishment leasing its premises for
gambling of any state statute, state rule or city regulation relating to the
operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to, laws relating
to the operation of the establishment, laws relating to alcoholic beverages,
gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice and protection of public
safety within the last 3 years;



      (3)   The organization has not been in existence in the city
for at least 3 consecutive years prior to the date of application;



      (4)   The organization does not have at least 15 active
members;



      (5)   More than 1 licensed, qualified organization would be
conducting exempted or excluded lawful gambling activities at any 1 premise;



      (6)   Failure of the applicant to pay the permit fee provided
by division (C) above within the prescribed time limit; or



      (7)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental
to the health, safety, and welfare of the community.



   (F)   Local permits shall be valid for only the occasion or
occasions they are issued.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.12  LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.



   All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently
displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.13  NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.



   An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local
permit shall notify the city in writing whenever any material change in the
information submitted in the application occurs within 10 days of the change.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.14  DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city
shall expend 75% of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes
conducted within the city’s trade area.



   (B)   This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures
derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city’s
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.15  RECORDS AND REPORTING.



   (A)   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the
City Clerk 1 copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the
Board, pursuant to M.S. Ch.349, as it may be amended from time to time, and
rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The
records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to
be filed with the Board.



   (B)   Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with
the city proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed
by § 116.14. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and
shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.16  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Neither lawful gambling nor exempt or excluded gambling shall be
conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates:



      (1)   Any provision of this chapter;



      (2)   M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may
be amended from time to time; or



      (3)   M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.21, as they may be amended
from time to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as they may
be amended from time to time; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



   (B)   A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a
violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule, or
city regulation relating to gambling. Additionally, a violation of this
chapter may result in a recommendation by the city to disapprove or not renew
a license or premises permit. The city may also revoke a premises permit for
any violation of this chapter which is not corrected within 10 days of notice
of such violation from the city.



   (C)   A license shall not be revoked or suspended until notice and
an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted
organization. The notice shall be personally served and shall state the
provision reasonably believed to be violated. The notice shall also state
that the permitted organization may demand a hearing on the matter, in which
case the permit will not be suspended until after the hearing is held. If the
permitted organization requests a hearing, the Council shall hold a hearing
on the matter at least 1 week after the date on which the request is made.
If, as a result of the hearing, the Council finds that violation exists, then
the Council may suspend or revoke the permit.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the city
to undertake any responsibility for enforcing compliance with M.S. Ch.349
other than those provisions related to the issuance of premises permits as
required in M.S. § 349.213 as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 564, passed 5-21-2007)



CHAPTER 117:  TAXICABS; LIMOUSINES



Section



   117.01   Operation and use of taxicabs



   117.02   Operation and use of limousines



§ 117.01  OPERATION AND USE OF TAXICABS.



   (A)   Every person, fine or corporation hereafter engaged in the
operation and use of taxicabs within the city and upon the streets and
highways thereof, for the transportation of persons for hire, shall first
secure from the City Council a license so to do.



   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation so engaged in the operation
or use of taxicabs within the city shall pay as and for a license fee to the
city the sum of $25 per vehicle per year.



   (C)   Every such licensee, and every person or employee actually
engaged in the operation and driving of any such taxicab shall, at all times,
be of good moral character and shall comply with all of the laws of the state
relating to the use and operation of motor vehicles carrying passengers for
hire.



   (D)   No license or renewal shall be granted, nor shall the same be
effective, until the applicant shall file with the City Clerk proof of a
public liability insurance policy covering all operations of the applicant
under this section for the sum of at least $100,000 against liability for
bodily injuries or death for each person, for the sum of at least $300,000
against liability for bodily injuries or death to more than 1 person from 1
accident and for at least $50,000 against liability for damage or destruction
of property. The policy shall provide that it may not be canceled by the
insurer except after 10 days written notice to the city, and if the insurance
is canceled and the licensee shall fail to replace the same with another
policy conforming to the provisions of this chapter, the license shall be
automatically suspended until the insurance shall have been replaced.



   (E)   The City Council, upon notice to licensee and after a hearing,
may revoke or suspend any license granted hereunder for cause shown or for
failure to comply with any of the provisions hereof; and every person, firm
or corporation operating a taxicab in violation of the provisions hereof
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.09)  (Am. Ord. 321, passed 4-13-1981; Am. Ord. —,
passed 5-13-1985;  Am. Ord. 375, passed 2-10-1986)



§ 117.02  OPERATION AND USE OF LIMOUSINES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly in dictates or requires a
different meaning.



      LIMOUSINE. An unmarked, luxury class automobile which carries
passengers for hire, which is driven by a chauffeur, which is subject to call
only from its own garage or central place of business, and the use of which
results in customers being billed at an hourly, daily, or trip rate. The term
shall not include any vehicle licensed as a common carrier by the Minnesota
Department of Transportation.



      LIMOUSINE SERVICE. The service regularly rendered to the public
by furnishing transportation for hire, not over fixed hours, by means of
limousines.



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   No person shall operate a limousine service in the city
without having obtained a license pursuant to the provisions of this section.



      (2)   No person shall advertise or represent to the public
that he or she operates a limousine service in the city unless the person has
first obtained a license as provided in this section to operate such a
service.



   (C)   Application. An application for a limousine license shall be
filed with the City Clerk. The application shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The name and business address of the applicant and
garage location for all limousines;



      (2)   The experience of the applicant and the transportation
of passengers for hire;



      (3)   The description of each vehicle to be used as a
limousine;



      (4)   Such further information as the Police Department may
reasonably require;



      (5)   The name, address, and date of birth of each chauffeur
employed or expected to be employed by applicant.



   (D)   Licenses; issuance, terms, fees, insurance.



      (1)   Before a limousine license is issued to any person by
the City Clerk, the application shall first be submitted to the Police
Department for investigation.



      (2)   The fee for each limousine license shall be $25 per year
for each limousine used. Licenses are not transferable and must be renewed
each year.



      (3)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 in each year.



      (4)   No license shall be issued until the applicant has
submitted insurance covering each limousine used and meeting the requirements
of division (C) of this section.



      (5)   Before putting any different or additional limousines
into service during a license year, the licensee shall submit a complete
description of the vehicle to the City Clerk and pay a fee of $25.



   (E)   Chauffeurs; qualifications.



      (1)   No person shall drive a limousine and no person holding
a limousine license shall permit any limousine operated under the license to
be driven unless the driver of the limousine shall:



         (a)   Have then in force a valid driver’s license
issued by the state;



         (b)   Have at least 2 years experience as a licensed
driver;



         (c)   Have not been convicted of sex or narcotics
crimes, driving under the influence of alcohol, reckless driving or careless
driving for a 3 year period.



      (2)   During the term of the license, each licensee shall
notify the Chief of Police of the name, address and date of birth of any new
chauffeur hired at least 3 days before the chauffeur is to begin work.



   (F)   Penalty. The City Council, upon notice to licensee and after a
hearing, may revoke or suspend any license granted hereunder for cause shown
or for failure to comply with any of the provisions hereof; and every person,
firm or corporation operating a motor vehicle for hire in violation of the
provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 15.095)



CHAPTER 118:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   118.01   Purpose



   118.02   Definitions and interpretations



   118.03   License



   118.04   License restrictions



   118.05   Basis for denial, suspension, or revocation of license



   118.06   Prohibited sales



   118.07   Vending machines



   118.08   Tobacco display, storage, and sampling



   118.09   Responsibility



   118.10   Compliance checks and inspections



   118.11   Other illegal acts



   118.12   Minimum penalties



   118.13   Hearings



   118.14   Exceptions and defenses



 



   118.98   Violations



§ 118.01  PURPOSE.



   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
may purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, and tobacco related devices, and such sales, possession and use are
violations of both state and federal laws, and because smoking has been shown
to be the cause of several severe health problems which subsequently place a
financial burden on all levels of government, this chapter is intended to
regulate the sale, possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine,
and tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering
existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with
the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, and tobacco-related
devices and to further the official public policy of the state to prevent
young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. § 144.391.



(Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, and
tobacco related devices are following and complying with the requirements of
this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may involve the use of minors as authorized
by this chapter.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette
packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or
other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging
containing 5 or more single packs or other containers as described in this
chapter shall not be considered individually packaged.



   INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50%
of the combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the
perimeter of the area. A wall includes a retractable divider, garage door, or
other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent.



   LOOSIES.  The common terms used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.



   MINOR.  Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.



   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.



   NICOTINE. Any product containing nicotine. Nicotine does not include
any product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a
tobacco-dependance product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed
and sold for such an approved purpose.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the
general public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS shall include, but not be limited to,
grocery stores, convenience stores, drug stores, restaurants, and bars.



   SALE.  Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products
or tobacco related devices packaged in packages of 4 or fewer individually
wrapped containers which are accessible to the public without the
intervention of an employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include
vending machines.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any product containing, made, or derived
from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other
means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies;
periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobacco; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco or
tobacco related products excludes any tobacco product that has been approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.



   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling
papers or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a
manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, smoking or other consumption,
whether by inhalation, ingestion, or any other method of consumption of
tobacco or tobacco products.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic or other type
of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly
into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.03  LICENSE.



    No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license
to do so from the city.



   (A)   Applications.



      (1)   An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form
provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers, the names of the business for which the license is sought and any
additional information the city deems necessary.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a new
tobacco license, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the Police
Department for a background investigation. Upon successful completion of a
background check, new license applications that do not meet the criteria
outlined in § 118.03(I) shall be submitted to Council for action at its next
regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the Clerk shall determine that an
application is incomplete, application shall be returned to the applicant
with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.



   (B)   Action.  The Council may either approve or deny the license,
or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as is necessary to
complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems
necessary. If the Council approves the license, the Clerk shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the
denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s
right to appeal the Council’s decision.



   (C)   License fee. The applicant shall submit the license fee
required by the city’s fee schedule at time of submission of application.



   (D)   Investigations.



      (1)   For all new applicants, a background investigation will
be conducted on the applicant listed on the application. If more than 1
background investigation is required, the applicant shall pay a background
investigation fee for each background investigation conducted. For renewal
applications, in lieu of a full background investigation, city staff shall
complete a compliance review prior to issuance of a renewal license. For
applicants who have an existing tobacco license who want to add an additional
location at any time other than annual renewal, a background investigation
will be required.



      (2)   For applicants who are applying for a license for more
than 1 location, only 1 background investigation and background investigation
fee shall be required.



   (E)   Term. The licensing term is for 1 year, beginning on January 1
of the year and terminating on December 31 of the same year.



   (F)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this
section may be revoked or suspended as provided in § 118.98.



   (G)   Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a
movable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible
to be licensed under this section.



   (H)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain
view of the general public on the licensed premises.



   (I)   Renewals. At least 30 days before a license expires, an
application for renewal shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such renewal
application may be approved administratively by city staff if there is no
change to the ownership of the licensee, and there have been no reported
violations of the license or written complaints filed with the city regarding
the operation of the premises or business for which the license has been
granted in the last year. All other renewal applications shall be brought to
the City Council for a hearing. No licensee has a right to have a license
renewed.



   (J)   Changes in ownership. A license is non-transferable. If there
is a change in the ownership of the retail establishment, a new license is
required and the applicant shall be required to submit to a background
investigation as a new applicant. A license shall only be valid for the
premises for which it is issued, and any change in location of the premises
shall require reapplication by the applicant for a license for the new
premises.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.04  LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.



   A license shall be issued subject to the following restrictions.



   (A)   No license shall be issued to any applicant for the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices at any place
other than the applicant’s established place of business.



   (B)   No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices at a moveable place of
business.



   (C)   No license shall be issued for the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices at more than one place of
business.



   (D)   No person shall sell or dispense any tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices through the use of a vending
machine except as provided in § 118.07.



   (E)   No individually packaged tobacco product shall be offered for
sale by means of self-service merchandising.



   (F)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of its
employees while on the licensed premises and any sale or other disposition of
tobacco products by an employee to a person under 18 years of age shall be
considered an act of the licensee for purposes of imposing an administrative
fine, license suspension or revocation.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.05  BASIS FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or
renewal of a license under this chapter:



      (1)   The proposed use does not comply with the zoning
ordinance.



      (2)   The proposed use does not comply with a health,
building, maintenance, or other provision of the city code or state law.



      (3)   The applicant has failed to pay all of the appropriate
fees related to the license, or is delinquent on any other city fees.



      (4)   The applicant has made fraudulent statements,
misrepresentations, or false statements in the application or investigation
for or in the course of the applicant’s business.



      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime or offense
in the previous 5 years involving or related to the business that is licensed
or the type of licensed activity and failed to show competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the
business.



      (6)   The licensed activity is conducted in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace, a menace to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort to the
residents of the city, upon recommendation of the Police Chief or appropriate
city official.



      (7)   Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance or
failure to notify the city within a reasonable time of changes in terms of
the insurance or the carriers.



      (8)   The licensee has acted in an unauthorized manner or
beyond the scope of the license granted.



      (9)   The applicant’s license has been denied, revoked, or
suspended by the city, the state, or another government unit.



      (10)   Failure to allow inspections of the licensed premises,
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.



      (11)   Failure to continuously comply with all conditions
required as precedent to the approval of the license.



      (12)   Real estate taxes, personal property taxes, or special
assessments on the business premises or the real property where the business
is located have become delinquent or are unpaid and the property owner and
the applicant are the same person or entity, or have any common ownership
between the property owner and the applicant where they are a different
person or entity.



      (13)   Violation of any regulation or provision of the city
code or zoning ordinance applicable to the activity for which the license has
been granted, or any regulation or state law that may be applicable.



      (14)   The applicant or licensee has been found guilty of
professional misconduct, either criminally or civilly.



      (15)   Based on the findings of a background investigation,
granting a license would be a menace to the safety, health, morals and
welfare of the public.



      (16)   The applicant or licensee is not of good moral
character.



      (17)   The activity has been conducted without a license.



      (18)   Other good cause.



   (B)   Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of
any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the
license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed it shall be revoked
upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this
chapter.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.06  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to
allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, or tobacco-related
devices:



   (A)   To any person under the age of 18 years;



   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine, except as may
otherwise be provided in this chapter;



   (C)   By means of self-service merchandising, as defined in §
118.02, whereby the customer is not required to make a verbal or written
request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to receive the
tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device;



   (D)   By means of loosies, as defined in § 118.02;



   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other type of deleterious, hallucinogenic,
or toxic or controlled substance except nicotine and not naturally found in
tobacco or tobacco products;



   (F)   From a moveable place of business, such as but not limited to,
any motorized vehicle, a kiosk, a trailer, a transportable shelter, or table,
or any other movable structure; or



   (G)   By any other means, or to any other person prohibited by
federal, state or other local law, ordinance, provision or other regulation.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.07  VENDING MACHINES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, or tobacco related devices by
means of a vending machine unless the vending machine was used and in
operation at a retail establishment licensed prior to January 1, 1997.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 118.08  TOBACCO DISPLAY, STORAGE, AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   All individually packaged tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices as defined in § 118.02 shall be stored behind a
counter or other area not freely accessible to customers or in a case or
other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any
retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, or tobacco related
devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with this section
with 90 days.



   (B)   The sampling of tobacco and tobacco- related devices is
permitted within the indoor area of a retail establishment only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.09  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions
of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises and the sale of
such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also
subjecting the employee to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
chapter, state law or other applicable law or regulation.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.10  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   All retail establishments shall be open to inspection by the Police
Department or other delegated law enforcement officers or agencies during
regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, a law
enforcement officer shall conduct compliance checks to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Compliance checks shall utilize, with the
written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15
years, but less than 18 years, to enter the retail establishments to attempt
to purchase tobacco or tobacco-related devices. Minors used for the purpose
of compliance checks shall be supervised by designated law enforcement
officers. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of the
unlawful purchase or attempted purchase, or the unlawful possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, or tobacco-related devices when such
items are obtained as part of a compliance check. No minor used in compliance
checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the
minor’s age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall
truthfully answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee
or employee thereof and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for
which he or she is asked. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit other
compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational,
research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a
particular state or federal law.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.11  OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of
this section.



   (A)   Illegal sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or
otherwise provide tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, or tobacco related
devices to any minor.



   (B)   Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to have in the minor’s possession any tobacco, tobacco
product, nicotine, or tobacco related device. This subdivision shall not
apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of the city
or who have only temporary possession during a legal sales transaction.



   (C)   Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
minor to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product,
nicotine, or tobacco related device.



   (D)   Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any
tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device. It shall be a violation
of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on
behalf of a minor. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, nicotine, or tobacco
related device to any minor or to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to
illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product,
nicotine, or tobacco related device. This subdivision shall not apply to
minors lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of the city.



   (E)   Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any minor to attempt to disguise the minor’s true age by the
use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of
another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or
altered, to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 118.12  MINIMUM PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any violation of the restrictions attached to a tobacco
license shall be cause for a fine and/or suspension or revocation of the
license. The following minimum penalties are deemed appropriate for a
licensee’s failure to comply with an applicable statute, rule, ordinance,
or term of the license. However, the level and order of the penalties shall
be at the sole discretion of the City Council, based on the nature of the
infraction and the City Council may suspend or revoke a license for any
violation of this chapter or any applicable law. When appropriate, the City
Council may impose penalties exceeding those stated below or impose other
conditions deemed appropriate:



      (1)   The first violation shall result in an administrative
fine of $250 to the license holder, payable to the city. Failure to pay the
fine within 30 days from the date of invoice shall result in a 2 day license
suspension.



      (2)   A second violation within 24 months shall result in an
administrative fine of $550 payable to the city and result in a 5 day license
suspension. Failure to pay the fine within 30 days from the date of the
invoice shall result in a 10 day license suspension.



      (3)   A third violation within 24 months, or for sales during
a license suspension, shall result in a license revocation.



   (B)   Licensees whose licenses have been revoked shall not be
eligible for another tobacco product license for one year from the date of
revocation. The City Council may attach reasonable conditions to the
reinstatement of a suspended or revoked license.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.13  HEARINGS.



   (A)   Revocation or suspension of a license shall be preceded by a
hearing before the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to
the license holder via certified mail or personal service at least 10 days
prior to the hearing. The notice shall include the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charge against the licensee. A
hearing for consideration of issuing, suspending, or revoking a license will
be conducted before the City Council or its designee. At the hearing, the
applicant or licensee has the right to be represented by counsel, the right
to respond to the charges or information provided to the Council, and the
right to present evidence through witnesses under oath. It is not necessary
that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination of a
license violation, nor does the dismissal or acquittal of such a criminal
charge operate as a bar to adverse license actions under this section.



   (B)   Following the hearing, the Council may deny, revoke, suspend,
or not renew the license for the retail establishment or may grant or
continue the license upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable
and necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. The decision by the
City Council following a hearing is final.



   (C)   Enforcement actions provided in this section are not exclusive
and the Council may take any action with respect to a license, employee, or
retail establishment as is authorized by city code, state, or federal law.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.14  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, or tobacco related device to a minor as part of a
lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)



§ 118.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to
law.



(Ord. 480, passed 11-25-1996; Am. Ord. 662, passed 11-28-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 119:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   119.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   119.02   License required



   119.03   Types of licenses



   119.04   Number of licenses



   119.05   Term and expiration of licenses



   119.06   Restrictions on issuance



   119.07   Application for license



   119.08   Applications for renewal



   119.09   License fees



   119.10   Transfer of license



   119.11   Investigation



   119.12   Hearing and issuance



   119.13   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited



   119.14   Consumption in public places



   119.15   Raffles, silent auctions and fund raising events for
charitable purposes of wine, beer or intoxicating liquors



   119.16   Conditions of license



   119.17   Hours and days of sale



   119.18   Restrictions on consumption, exhibition, and display



   119.19   Minors on premises



   119.20   Temporary extension of premises



   119.21   Temporary on-sale licenses for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in city parks



   119.22   License suspension and revocation



   119.23   Penalties for violation



   119.24   Administrative penalties




Social Hosts




   119.60   Social hosts



   119.61   Definitions



   119.62   Prohibited acts



   119.63   Exceptions



   119.64   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 119.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, application for license,
granting of license, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption,
provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining
to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic beverages are
hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out
in full, except as modified herein. Whenever there is an inconsistency
between the provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A and the provisions of this Chapter,
the more restrictive shall control. It is the intention of the City Council
that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A are hereby adopted by reference
or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this Ordinance is
adopted.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall, directly or indirectly upon any pretense or by any
device, manufacture, import, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or keep for
sale any alcoholic beverage without first having obtained a license or permit
therefore as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 119.23



§ 119.03  TYPES OF LICENSES.



   (A)   There shall be the following types of liquor  licenses and
permits.



      (1)   On-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (2)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (3)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (4)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



      (5)   On-sale wine license.



      (6)   Temporary off-sale wine license.



      (7)   Culinary class limited on-sale license.



      (8)   On-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license.



      (9)   Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license.



      (10)   Temporary on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license.



      (11)   Consumption and display permit.



      (12)   One day consumption and display permit.



      (13)   On-sale brew pub license.



      (14)   Off-sale brew pub license.



      (15)   Microdistillery cocktail room license.



      (16)   On-sale brewer taproom license.



      (17)   Off-sale small brewer license.



      (18)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license for
micro-brewers or microdistilleries.



      (19)   Microdistillery off-sale license.



   (B)   Liquor licenses and permits may be issued as follows:



      (1)   On-sale intoxicating liquor license. On-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to hotels, clubs or
congressionally chartered veterans’ organizations with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, theaters, bowling centers, restaurants and
exclusive liquor stores and shall permit the on-sale of alcoholic beverages.
The Council may authorize a holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
issued by the city to dispense intoxicating liquor off premises at a
community festival held within the city. The authorization shall specify the
area in which the intoxicating liquor must be dispensed and consumed, and
shall not be



issued unless the licensee demonstrates that it has liability insurance as
prescribed by M.S. § 340A.409 to cover the event.



      (2)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor license. Off-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to exclusive liquor stores with
the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall permit the
off-sale of alcoholic beverages.



      (3)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license. A
restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with a seating capacity for at
least 30 persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may
be issued a Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license which permits the sale
of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with
the sale of food between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sundays and 2:00 a.m. on
Mondays.



      (4)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license. Temporary
on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued to a club, charitable,
religious, or other nonprofit organizations in existence for at least three
years, a political committee registered under M.S. § 10A.14, or a state
university in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the
licensee. No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the
city shall issue no more than 12 days’ worth of temporary licenses to any
one organization or for one location in one calendar year.



      (5)   On-sale wine license. On-sale wine licenses may be
issued to theaters and restaurants having facilities for seating at least 25
guests at one time and shall permit only the sale of wine not exceeding 24%
alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only. On-sale
wine licenses may also be issued, with the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Safety, to a licensed bed and breakfast facility. The holder of an
on-sale wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor on-sale
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.411 and this chapter may also sell intoxicating malt
liquor on-sale without an additional license.



      (6)   Temporary off-sale wine license. Temporary off-sale wine
licenses may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. A temporary off-sale wine
license authorizes the sale of only vintage wine that is at least five years
old and is of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale
by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of
wine for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600
cases of wine are sold at any auction.



      (7)   Culinary class limited on-sale license. A limited
on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be issued to a business
establishment: a) not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license; and b) that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking
classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation
required. The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant
in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of
six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as
part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only.



      (8)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. On-sale 3.2% malt
liquor licenses may be issued to drugstores, restaurants, hotels, clubs,
bowling centers, golf courses, and establishments used exclusively for the
sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor
for consumption on the premises only.



      (9)   Off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license. Off-sale 3.2%
malt liquor licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2% malt liquor at retail in
the original package for consumption off the premises only.



      (10)   Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. Temporary
on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses may be issued to clubs, charitable,
religious, and nonprofit organizations.



      (11)   Consumption and display permit. A consumption and
display permit may be issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety to an
organization that complies with the requirements of M.S. § 340A.414 and may
be approved by the City Council.



      (12)   One day consumption and display permit. One day permits
for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor may be issued to
nonprofit organizations, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety, in conjunction with a social activity in the city.



      (13)   On-sale brew pub license. A brewer licensed under M.S.
Ch. 340A may be issued an on-sale intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
license for a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture.



      (14)   Off-sale brew pub license. A brewer who holds an
on-sale brew pub license may, with the permission of the Commissioner of
Public Safety, be issued a license for the off-sale of malt liquor produced
and packaged on the licensed premises.



      (15)   Microdistillery cocktail room license. Microdistillery
cocktail room licenses may be issued to the holder of a microdistillery
license under M.S. Ch. 340A. A microdistillery cocktail room license shall
permit the on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the distiller for
consumption on the premises of or adjacent to a distillery owned by the
distiller.



      (16)   On-sale brewer taproom license. On-sale brewer taproom
licenses may be issued to the holder of a brewer’s license under M.S. Ch.
340A and shall permit the sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for
consumption on the premises of or adjacent to a brewery location owned by the
brewer.



      (17)   Off-sale small brewer license. Off-sale small brewer
licenses may be issued to a brewer licensed under M.S. Ch. 340A and shall
permit the off-sale of malt liquor at the brewer’s licensed premises.



      (18)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license for
micro-brewers and microdistilleries. A brewer who manufactures fewer than
3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year or a microdistillery may be issued,
with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, a temporary license
for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event
within the city sponsored by the brewer or microdistillery.



      (19)   Microdistillery off-sale license. A microdistillery may
be issued a license for the off-sale of distilled spirits. The license may
allow the sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of product
manufactured on-site, subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   Off-sale hours of sale must conform to hours of
sale for retail off-sale licensees in the licensing municipality; and



         (b)   No brand may be sold at the microdistillery unless
it is also available for distribution by wholesalers.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.04  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   Licenses and permits issued or approved by the city under this chapter
may be issued in any number allowed by state statute, except that no more
than ten off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued. The Council is
not required to issue the full number of licenses that it is authorized to
issue.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.05  TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   All licenses and permits except temporary licenses and permits
shall be issued for a period of one year and shall expire on the last day of
January of each year, except that if a portion of the year has elapsed when
application for a license is made, a license may be issued for the remainder
of the license year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired
fraction of a month shall be counted as one month. Temporary licenses and
permits expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits
issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety and the accompanying City consent
to the permits shall expire on March 31st of each year.



   (B)   Licenses issued to corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies, or other entities shall become invalid if there is a
change in the officers, directors, governors, partners, charter, articles,
bylaws, membership interests, or ownership of the entity unless said change
is only a change to the titles of the officers, directors, governors, or
partners without any change to the officers, directors, or partners
themselves or any other change which is approved by the Council.
Corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, and other entities
holding licenses under this Chapter shall submit written notice to the City
Clerk of any of the changes listed in this section on or before 30 days prior
to the effective date of any such change. The licensee shall notify the City
Clerk when a person not listed in the application acquires an interest which,
together with that of a spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child, exceeds
5%, and shall give all information about said person which is required of a
person applying for a license.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.06  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.



   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly
issued within the city to any one person except as otherwise specifically
provided for in the liquor act.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



   (D)   No license or permit shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for a license under state or federal law or the
provisions of the City Code.



   (E)   No license, except a temporary license or permit, shall be
granted for a premises or location located within 500 feet of any school or
church building. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the
church or school to the closest side of the structure or location on the
premises where alcoholic beverages are to be sold.



   (F)   No license shall be issued to any person who is under 21 years
of age, who is not of good moral character and repute, who is not a citizen
of the United States or resident alien, or who has been convicted of a felony
or of a willful violation of the laws of the United States, the State of
Minnesota, or of any local ordinance with regard to the manufacture, sale,
distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of liquor, nor to any
person whose license under the liquor act has been revoked for any willful
violation of such laws or ordinances.



   (G)   No license or permit shall be issued to any person in
connection with the premises of another to whom no license could be issued
under the provisions of the liquor act; provided that this subdivision shall
not prevent the granting of a license to a proper lessee by reason of the
fact that he/she has leased the premises of a minor or a person who has been
convicted of a crime other than a violation of the liquor act.



   (H)   No license shall be granted to an individual who, in the
judgment of the Council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial
owner of the business operated or to be operated under the license.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.07  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form. Every application for a license or permit issued under
this chapter shall be on a form provided or required by the city. Every
application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s age,
representations as to the applicant’s character, with references as the
Council may require, the type of license applied for, the business in
connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a
description of the compact and contiguous premises where alcoholic beverages
may be dispensed and consumed, which may not include any parking lot or
sidewalk, whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business,
how long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other
information as the Council may require from time to time. Applications shall
be verified and filed with the City Clerk and no person shall make a false
statement in an application.



   (B)   Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license
or permit under this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of
financial responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409 with regard to
liability under M.S. § 340A.801 unless such financial responsibility is not
required for the particular license or permit sought pursuant to state
statute. Required surety bonds of insurance policies shall be subject to the
approval of the City clerk. This proof must be filed with the City and the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Applicants claiming an exemption to the
financial responsibility requirement based on application of M.S. §
340A.409, subd. 4, shall file an affidavit with the City Clerk claiming such
exemption. Compliance with the financial responsibility requirements of state
law and this subdivision is a continuing condition of any license or permit,
and failure to have insurance coverage or a bond as required by this section
shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license.



   (C)   Fees. Applications for licenses and permits shall be
accompanied by the required fee for the license or permit.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.08  APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.



   At least 90 days before a license or permit expires, an application for
renewal shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such renewal application may be
approved administratively by city staff if there is no change to the
ownership of the licensee or permittee and there have been no reported
violations of the license or permit or written complaints filed with the city
regarding the operation of the premises or business for which the license or
permit has been granted in the last year. All other renewal applications
shall be brought to the City Council for a hearing. No licensee has a right
to have a license renewed.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.09  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   The annual fees for the different types of licenses and
permits issued under this chapter shall be established by resolution of the
City Council. All license fees shall be paid in full at the time an
application is filed with the city and shall be paid into the general fund of
the city. If the application is denied or withdrawn, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant. No license shall be granted unless the fee has
been first paid to the city. The fee for all licenses or permits, except
temporary licenses or permits, granted after the commencement of the license
year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. No part of the fee paid for any
license or permit shall be refunded except as authorized by M.S. § 340A.408,
subd. 5.



   (B)   When the license is for a premises where the building is not
yet ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee
for the initial license period shall be the date the building is ready for
occupancy or the date specified by the Council at the time the license is
granted, whichever is sooner.



   (C)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor license applicants may request a
reduction in their annual license fee by the amount specified in M.S. §
340A.408 if the licensee provides proof of compliance with the requirements
of M.S. § 340A.408 at the time of license application.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.10  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the
approval of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee,
partnership interest in a partnership, or membership interest in a limited
liability company shall be deemed to be a transfer of the license, and such
transfer without prior Council approval is grounds for revocation of the
license. An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same as an
application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this chapter
applying to applications for a license shall apply.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 119.23



§ 119.11  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. Upon an
initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, a preliminary
background and financial investigation of the applicant shall be completed.
The police department shall cause to be made an investigation of the written
information found in the application materials and shall make a written
recommendation to the City Council including relevant information obtained as
a result of the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application
an investigation fee which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the
cost of the preliminary investigation is less than investigation fee, the
unused balance shall be returned to the applicant.



   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the
results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of
the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the
Council may order the police department to conduct such investigation. The
applicant shall pay the required fee for the comprehensive background and
financial investigation. If the cost of the investigation is less than the
investigation fee, the unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the
applicant. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the
amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the
event the application is denied.



   (C)   At any time an additional investigation is required because of
a change in the ownership or control of a corporation, a partnership or an
association, or because there is a change in the officers, charter, articles,
or bylaws of a corporation, or because there is a change in the partnership
or association agreement, or because of an enlargement, alteration, or
extension of premises previously licensed, the licensee shall pay an
additional background investigation fee in the amount established by City
Council resolution.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.12  HEARING AND ISSUANCE.



   The Council, in its sound discretion, may either grant or deny an
initial, renewal, or transfer application for any license or permit. An
opportunity to be heard shall be given to any person prior to the issuance or
transfer of any license or permit or renewal of any license or permit if such
renewal application is not approved administratively and is referred to the
City Council for consideration. No license shall become effective until any
required proof of financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety and any required approvals by the Division of Alcohol and
Gambling Enforcement or other state licensing authority have been received.
No applicant has a right to a license or permit under this chapter. Without
limiting the discretion of the Council to deny a license application for
other reasons, no license or permit shall be issued, transferred or renewed
if the results of the investigation of the application show, in the opinion
of the Council, that issuance, transfer, or renewal would not be in the
public interest. The Council may impose reasonable conditions on any license
issued, renewed, or transferred in order to promote the public health,
safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.13  NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely
to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds
that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed
under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person
or persons on the licensed premises, including any employees, when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed
premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts,
and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.



   (C)   No holder of an adult-oriented business license pursuant to
Chapter 112 of the City Code may also hold a license for the sale of
alcoholic beverages on the premises where the adult-oriented business is
located.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 119.23



§ 119.14  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall consume an alcoholic beverage in a public park, on any
public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other
than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter unless
otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter or another provision of the
City Code or where the consumption of an alcoholic beverage is lawfully
permitted. No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic beverage on any
public street or highway or in any public park or public parking lot except
as specifically permitted under this chapter, § 90.14 of the City Code, or
as otherwise permitted by an outdoor entertainment permit issued by the city.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 119.23



§ 119.15  RAFFLES, SILENT AUCTIONS AND FUND RAISING EVENTS FOR CHARITABLE
PURPOSES OF WINE, BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS.



   No person shall conduct a silent auction, raffle or other fund raising
event pursuant to M.S. § 340A.707 with prizes or awards of wine, beer or
intoxicating liquors without notifying the City Clerk of the event at least
ten days prior to the occurrence of the event. The event holder shall provide
the city with the following information: the person or organization holding
the event, the day, time and location of the event, type of fund raising
event (silent auction, raffle or otherwise), type and amount of wine, beer,
intoxicating liquor to be awarded as prizes, and the charitable purposes to
which the event proceeds will be donated.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 119.23



§ 119.16  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   All licenses and permits issued under this chapter shall be subject to
the following conditions, all other requirements of this chapter, and all
other applicable laws of the city and State of Minnesota unless otherwise
clearly inapplicable. The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the
conditions specified below, comply with all other requirements of this
chapter or any other City Code provision, or comply with any applicable state
or federal law may result in the suspension or revocation of a license or
permit and/or imposition of a civil penalty.



   (A)   Every license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
premises for which is issued.



   (B)   No license shall be effective beyond the compact and
contiguous space for which it was granted. A person must not possess open
containers of alcoholic beverages or consume alcoholic beverages on the
premises under the licensee’s control outside of the licensed structure or
in any area of the licensed premises that was not designated for those
activities in the license application.



   (C)   No alcoholic beverage sales or service shall be made during
the hours or days such sales are prohibited by state law or this chapter or
to any person to whom sale is prohibited by state law.



   (D)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee. The licensee shall be liable for the
administrative penalties imposed by this chapter upon a finding that the
license holder or its employees have committed one or more of the acts
prohibited by this chapter or state law.



   (E)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
city employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.



   (F)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (G)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state
law and this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.



   (H)   Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has
received a fee reduction pursuant to comply with the requirements for the fee
reduction.



   (I)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only for the
premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to
another person or place without the prior approval of the Council and the
filing of an application for a new license. Any transfer of stock of a
corporate licensee, partnership interest in a partnership, or membership
interest in a limited liability company shall be deemed to be a transfer of
the license, and such transfer without prior Council approval is grounds for
revocation of the license.



   (J)   Licenses and permits approved by the Council shall not be
effective until approved by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety if such
approval required by state statute.



   (K)   Each licensee or permit holder has the continuing duty to
promptly notify the City Clerk of any change in the information or facts
required to be furnished on a license or permit application. This duty
continues throughout the period of the license or permit.



   (L)   Proposed enlargements, alterations, or extension of license
premises shall be reported to the clerk at or before the time application is
made for a building permit for any such change. Except incident to a sale
made pursuant to a temporary license or permit, no person shall consume
alcoholic beverages while in the parking area of any school, college, park,
government facility, shopping center or commercial establishment. Except
incident to a sale made pursuant to a temporary license or permit issued by
the city, no person in the parking area of any school, college, park,
government facility, shopping center or commercial establishment shall have
in his/her possession on his/her person any bottle or receptacle containing
an alcoholic beverage which has been opened or the seal broken or the
contents of which have been partially removed.



   (M)   As a condition of a temporary licnese or permit, the Council
may require the presence of one or more uniformed police officers during the
use of the license or permit.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.17  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.



   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504. A restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with a seating
capacity for at least 30 persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license may be issued a Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license
which authorizes the licensee to sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on
the premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 8:00
a.m. on Sundays and 2:00 a.m. on Mondays. A taproom may be open and may
conduct on-sale business on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
midnight. A small brewer may sell malt liquor during the legal hours for
off-sale at exclusive liquor stores and may sell malt liquor at off-sale in
growlers between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.18  RESTRICTIONS ON CONSUMPTION, EXHIBITION, AND DISPLAY.



   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of an alcoholic beverage in an on-sale licensed premises more
than 15 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. No alcoholic
beverage shall be displayed or exhibited upon the bar or upon tables or
booths within the premises of an establishment licensed for the on-sale of
alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day.
No person, except the licensee or his or her employees, shall be within the
premises of an establishment licensed for the on sale of alcoholic beverages
more than thirty minutes after the time when sales of alcoholic beverages may
occur. No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing an alcoholic beverage to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or
other place where customers are served within a licensed establishment more
than 30 minutes after the time when the sale of alcoholic beverages can
legally occur.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.19  MINORS ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell intoxicating
liquor in a retail intoxicating liquor establishment.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age may enter a licensed
establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 119.23



§ 119.20  TEMPORARY EXTENSION OF PREMISES.



   (A)   After a hearing, the City Council may approve a temporary
amendment to an existing on-sale liquor license to allow the sale of
alcoholic beverages in an area outside the licensed premises, including
adjacent parking lots and sidewalks, if the Council determines in its sole
discretion that the following criteria are met:



      (1)   The area to be used must be immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises;



      (2)   The area will be used in connection with a special event
no longer than two days in duration;



      (3)   No more than three temporary amendments per year will be
allowed for a licensee at any one establishment. A special license issued to
a nonprofit organization which contracts with the licensee for provision of
service will be counted as part of this total;



      (4)   Adequate measures will be taken to control access to the
additional area to ensure that alcoholic beverages are not sold to minors and
are not carried outside of the licensed premises and the additional area;



      (5)   Adequate measures will be taken to ensure that there
will be no violation of the city’s noise ordinance;



      (6)   The use of the additional area will not decrease
available parking below that required by the zoning ordinance for the
licensed premises;



      (7)   The use of the additional area will not unreasonably
impede traffic circulation;



      (8)   The licensee has obtained adequate liability insurance
for the additional area; and



      (9)   The issuance of the temporary amendment would not be
adverse to the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   To obtain a temporary amendment, the licensee must submit an
application accompanied by:



      (1)   A diagram showing the expanded area to be used;



      (2)   A detailed description of the special event for which
the area will be used;



      (3)   A detailed description of the security measures to be
used;



      (4)   Evidence that the licensee has liability insurance to
cover the additional area;



      (5)   Evidence that the licensee has the right to use the
additional area; and



      (6)   The fee specified in the city fee schedule.



   (C)   The application for a temporary amendment to the liquor
license shall be granted or denied by the City Council in its discretion.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.21  TEMPORARY ON-SALE LICENSES FOR THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN
CITY PARKS.



   No temporary license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in any city park unless the applicant demonstrates proof of
financial responsibility as described in M.S. § 340A.409. The city shall be
named as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance evidencing the
required insurance coverage. In granting the license, the Council may impose
such conditions and restrictions as it deems proper to preserve the public
peace and safety. Licensed, private security guards or off-duty police
officers in a number determined by the City Council shall be required to
maintain order and ensure compliance with state statutes and City Code
requirements related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.22  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   Any violation of any of the provisions of a license or permit issued
under this chapter, the provisions of this chapter or any other section of
the City Code, or state laws related to the sale of alcoholic beverages, or
any falsification of any statement in an application for an initial or
renewal license or permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of a license or permit. No portion of
any license fee paid into the city treasury shall be returned upon revocation
or suspension. Any such license shall be revoked automatically upon the
conviction of a licensee of a felony.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.23  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   The Council may suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or
revoke any liquor license, and impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for
each administrative offense, or impose any combination of these penalties,
upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable
statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating to alcoholic
beverages.



   (B)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall
effect an immediate suspension of any license or permit issued pursuant to
this chapter or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of
cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also
constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license.
The holder of a license or permit who has received notice of lapse of
required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a
hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing
before the Council shall be granted within ten days. Any suspension under
this subdivision shall continue until the Council determines that the
financial responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have
again been met. The provisions of § 119.24 pertaining to administrative
penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or
revocation under this section.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



§ 119.24  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   Civil sanctions imposed. Upon a finding by the Council that a
licensee has failed to comply with an applicable state statute or rule
relating to alcoholic beverages or failed to comply with any provision of
this Chapter or any other provisions of the City Code, the Council may revoke
the license, suspend the license for up to 60 days, impose a civil penalty of
up to $2,000 for each violation, or impose any combination of these
sanctions. If the Council imposes a suspension, the Council shall set the
dates relating to the suspension.



   (B)   Minimum penalties. The following are the minimum penalties
that the Council shall impose upon a licensee for a violation listed in
subsection A of this section. Based upon the nature, type, severity and
circumstances of the violation, the Council may impose penalties exceeding
those stated in this subsection. The determination whether to impose
penalties above the minimum penalties and the level and order of the
penalties above the minimum penalties will be at the sole discretion of the
Council.



      (1)   First violation within 24 months: $500 civil penalty.



      (2)   Second violation within 24 months: $1,000 civil penalty
and a one day license suspension.



      (3)   Third violation within 24 months: $2,000 civil penalty
and a three day license suspension.



      (4)   Fourth violation within 24 months: $2,000 civil penalty
and a 60 day license suspension.



   (C)   Hearing and notice. The licensee shall be granted a hearing
upon at least ten days’ notice before revocation or suspension is ordered
by the Council. For purposes of this division, “notice” shall mean
written notice served upon the licensee personally or by leaving the same at
the licensee’s usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and
discretion then residing therein or by leaving the same at the licensed
premises with the person in charge thereof. The notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing and shall  state the nature of charges against the
licensee. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee
has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 to
14.69 (the Administrative Procedures Act). This division does not require the
Council to conduct the hearing before an employee of the office of
administrative hearings. Imposition of a fine or suspension by either the
Council or the Commissioner of Public Safety does not preclude the imposition
of an additional fine or suspension by the other so long as the total fine or
suspension does not exceed the maximum allowed by state statute.



(Ord. 645, passed 8-24-2015)



SOCIAL HOSTS



§ 119.60  SOCIAL HOSTS.



   The City Council intends to discourage underage consumption of alcohol,
even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold
persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons
under 21 years of age consume alcohol regardless of whether the person
hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The City Council finds
that:



   (A)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful to those
persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring
prevention or abatement.



   (B)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is consumed by persons under the age of 21 disturb neighbors, damage
property and jeopardize their own or others’ safety.



   (C)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is consumed by persons under the age of 21 are responsible for a
disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources which can delay or
reduce the ability of the police, fire or other emergency service provider to
respond to other emergencies.



   (D)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage
persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol
consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic collisions.



   (E)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage consumption
occur outside the presence of parents or other responsible adults. However,
there are times when the parent or other adult is present and condones the
activity, and, in some circumstances, provides the alcohol.



   (F)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person
is a crime, this subchapter is necessary to help further combat underage
consumption.



   (G)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
consumption occurs.



(Ord. 600, passed 8-23-2010)



§ 119.61  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, or beer, and which
contains one-half of 1% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.



   EVENT or GATHERING. Any group of 3 or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   HOST or ALLOW. To aid, conduct, sponsor, entertain, organize,
supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.



   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



      (1)   As a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent;



      (2)   As a legal guardian;



      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or
any association of 1 or more individuals. A person does not include any city,
county, or state agency.



   RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Any location, including a home, yard, farm,
field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling
unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public
or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether
occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function,
and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or
compensation.



   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 600, passed 8-23-2010)



§ 119.62  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, whether present or not, to host
or allow an event or gathering at any residence or premises where alcohol or
alcoholic beverages are present if the person hosting the event or gathering
knows or reasonably should know that under aged persons may be present who
will possess or consume any alcoholic beverage and the person fails to take
reasonable steps to prevent such possession or consumption by the under aged
person.



   (B)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (A)
of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



(Ord. 600, passed 8-23-2010)



§ 119.63  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter does not apply to conduct solely between an
underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent’s
household.



   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.



   (C)   This subchapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor
or 3.2% malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503, Subd. 1(a)(1), as it may be
amended from time to time, but it does apply to a person who hosts a
gathering or event at such liquor establishment.



   (D)   This subchapter does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of employment.



(Ord. 600, passed 8-23-2010)



§ 119.64  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to
law.



(Ord. 600, passed 8-23-2010)



CHAPTER 120:  CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS



Section



   120.01   Purpose



   120.02   Criminal history background investigations



   120.03   Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension computerized
criminal history



   120.04   Consent of applicant



   120.05   Verification of identity



§ 120.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s computerized criminal
history information for criminal background checks.



(Ord. 575, passed 10-13-2008)



§ 120.02  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.



   The Forest Lake Police Department is authorized, as the exclusive
entity within the city, to conduct criminal history background investigations
on employees, applicants for employment, volunteers and applicants for the
following city licenses and permits:



   (A)   Liquor;



   (B)   Massage;



   (C)   Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants;



   (D)   Tobacco;



   (E)   Pawn shops;



   (F)   Lawful gambling;



   (G)   Fireworks;



   (H)   Recreation center;



   (I)   Theater;



   (J)   Outdoor entertainment;



   (K)   Adult oriented business;



   (L)   Carnival;



   (M)   Fertilizer-pesticide;



   (N)   Garbage/rubbish hauler.



(Ord. 575, passed 10-13-2008)



§ 120.03  MINNESOTA BUREAU OF CRIMINAL APPREHENSION COMPUTERIZED CRIMINAL
HISTORY.



   In conducting the criminal history background investigation, the Police
Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension’s computerized criminal history information system in
accordance with Bureau of Criminal Apprehension policy and any other
automated and non-automated sources. Any data that is accessed and acquired
shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and custody of
the Chief of Police or his or her designee.  A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the Police Department
to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City
Clerk/Administrator or other city staff involved in the license approval
process.



(Ord. 575, passed 10-13-2008)



§ 120.04  CONSENT OF APPLICANT.



   (A)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation.  The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information.



   (B)   The city will not reject an applicant for a license on the
basis of an applicant’s prior criminal conviction unless the crime is
directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.  If the city rejects
the applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant
in writing of the following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;



      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in M.S. § 364.06;



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the
license; and



      (4)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 575, passed 10-13-2008)



§ 120.05  VERIFICATION OF IDENTITY.



   If a questioned identity situation occurs fingerprint verification
shall be obtained.



(Ord. 575, passed 10-13-2008)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



      131.   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Adoption of certain provisions of Criminal Code



   130.02   Disturbing the peace



   130.03   House of ill fame prohibited



   130.04   Abuse of animals



   130.05   Curfew



   130.06   Use and possession of firearms and other weapons



   130.07   Storage of explosives



   130.08   Drug paraphernalia



   130.09   Loitering



   130.10   Graffiti



   130.11   Panhandling



§ 130.01  ADOPTION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF CRIMINAL CODE.



   (A)   The following provisions of the Criminal Code of 1963, being
M.S.A. §§ 609.01 et seq. (Laws 1963, Chapter 753), as they may be amended
from time to time, are adopted by reference and the provisions thereof thus
incorporated shall be as much a part of this chapter as if they had been set
forth in full herein.



      (1)   M.S.A. § 609.224, assault;



      (2)   M.S.A. § 609.52, theft where the value of the property
or services is $100 or less;



      (3)   M.S.A. § 609.535, issuance of worthless check;



      (4)   M.S.A. § 609.545, misusing credit card to secure
services;



      (5)   M.S.A. § 609.576, negligent fires;



      (6)   M.S.A. § 609.605, trespasses and other acts;



      (7)   M.S.A. § 609.66, dangerous weapons;



      (8)   M.S.A. § 609.675, exposure of unused refrigerator or
container to children;



      (9)   M.S.A. § 609.68, unlawful deposit of garbage;



      (10)   M.S.A. § 609.705, unlawful assembly;



      (11)   M.S.A. § 609.715, presence at unlawful assembly;



      (12)   M.S.A. § 609.72, disorderly conduct;



      (13)   M.S.A. § 609.725, vagrancy;



      (14)   M.S.A. § 609.74, public nuisance;



      (15)   M.S.A. § 609.745, permitting public nuisance;



      (16)   M.S.A. § 609.755, acts of or relating to gambling.



   (B)   Three copies of the Criminal Code of 1963 shall be marked by
the City Clerk as official copies and filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   Any person who shall violate the provisions hereof shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 19.05)



§ 130.02  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   (A)   Any person who shall, within the city, wilfully disturb the
peace and quiet of the city by any loud or unusual noise, screaming,
quarreling, striking or fighting under any pretense whatever, or in any other
manner, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished
according to law.



(Prior Code, § 19.06, Subds. 1, 6)  Penalty, see, § 10.99



§ 130.03  HOUSE OF ILL FAME PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Any person who, within the city, shall keep a house of ill
fame, or a place resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or any other
lewd, obscene or indecent purpose, or who shall permit or suffer to come
together at such house or place persons of evil name or fame, or who shall
commit or suffer to be committed therein any immoral, lewd or indecent
behavior, or any reveling, rioting or disturbance, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person who shall resort to or visit any house of ill fame,
or any other place, within the city, for the purpose of prostitution or other
lewd, immoral or indecent behavior, or who shall appear in any street, or
common highway or public place in the city, or in any window, door or other
place exposed to public view in the city, and shall invite and induce, or
attempt to induce another to lewd intercourse or behavior, or who shall
appear in the street or highway or other place exposed to public view, for
the purpose of inviting or inducing, or attempting to induce another to the
intercourse or behavior shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 19.06, Subds. 3, 4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  ABUSE OF ANIMALS.



   Any person who shall inhumanely or unnecessarily and cruelly beat,
injure or otherwise abuse any animal within the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 19.06, Subd. 5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for four primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor's household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by reference
to the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAIN- MENT OR REFRESHMENT.  Those
places that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not
be another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 15 years.  No minor under the
age of 15 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day,
official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages 15 and 16 years.  No minor of the ages of
15 or 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day,
official city time.



      (3)   Minors age 17 years.  No minor of the age of 17 years
shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other
public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in or upon places of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot,
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city
time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business trade, profession, or
occupation and the minor's residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor's presence at work.



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor.



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew.



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's
presence.



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section apply.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.




   (I)   Penalty.




      (1)   Minors.  Any minor found to be in violation of this
section may be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the
dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (2)   Adults.  Any adult person found to be in violation of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



§ 130.06  USE AND POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, no person
shall fire or discharge any fire arm, BB gun, air gun or splat ball gun
within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, a BB gun or air
gun may be discharged within a residence or other secure enclosure; and
provided, further, that a fire arm, BB gun or air gun may be discharged
within the Conservancy (C), Agriculture (A) and Rural Residential (RR)
Districts and on and near to public waters in accordance with the regulations
of the State of Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
possession of a firearm within the home or the discharge of the same when
done in the lawful defense of person, property or family.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, no person
shall fire or discharge a bow and arrow within the corporate limits of the
city except in a designated area with a permit issued by the Chief of Police
or his or her designee; provided, however, that a bow and arrow may be fired
or discharged within a residence or other secure enclosure; and provided,
further, that a bow and arrow may be discharged within the Conservancy (C),
Agricultural (A) and Rural Residential (RR) Districts and on or near public
waters in accordance with the regulations of the State of Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



   (D)   No person shall keep, carry or have in his or her possession
on any public street, upon the premises of another or in any public place any
type of weapon having the personal assault characteristics of any sap,
numchuck, blackjack, slungshot, slingshot, sand club, chain club, metal
knuckles, shurikens, or yawara stick. For purposes of this division, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      NUMCHUCKS. Any device constructed of 2 solid cylindrical objects
joined together on one end by a chain, rope, thong, or other such material.



      SHURIKENS.  Any metal device which has the shape of a multiple
pointed star, each point being sharpened and primarily designed to be thrown.



      YAWARA STICK.  Any cylindrical shaped object which has spheres
on both ends and measures less than 10 inches in length.



   (E)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a firearm, other dangerous
weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;



      (2)   Intentionally point a firearm or other dangerous weapon,
whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;



      (3)   Display in public any toy, look-alike or imitation
firearm without the red or orange tip required by Federal law at the time of
manufacture.



   (F)   No minor under the age of 12 years shall handle or have in his
or her possession or under his or her control, except while accompanied by or
under the immediate supervision of his or her parent or guardian, any
firearm, air gun or dangerous weapon of any kind for any purpose.



   (G)   No person shall:



      (1)   Without the parent’s or guardian’s consent, furnish
a child under 14 yeas of age, or as a parent or guardian, permit the child to
handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, a firearm,
air gun or dangerous weapon of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive;



      (2)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm,
air gun, or dangerous weapon of any kind or any ammunition or explosive
without the written consent of his or her parent, guardian, or the Chief of
Police or his or her designee.



   (H)   No person shall transport a firearm by vehicle of any type,
whether motorized or not, unless the firearm is:



      (1)   Unloaded and in a gun case expressly made to contain a
firearm, and the case fully encloses the firearm by being zipped, snapped,
buckled, tied, or otherwise fastened, and without any portion of the firearm
exposed;



      (2)   Unloaded and in the closed trunk of a motor vehicle; or



      (3)   A handgun carried in compliance with M.S. §§ 624.714
and 624 715, as they may  be amended from time to time.



   (I)   A person may not transport an archery bow in a vehicle of any
type whether motorized or not unless the bow is:



      (1)   Unstrung;



      (2)   Completely contained in a case; or



      (3)   In the closed trunk of a motor vehicle.



   (J)   A peace officer is authorized and empowered to seize and
confiscate and dispose of any weapons, firearms, guns, and/or bows and arrows
possessed or used in violation of this section. Articles which have no lawful
use may be summarily destroyed. All other articles confiscated may be
retained for use by the Police Department or sold at public auction.



   (K)   Exceptions. The following exceptions to the application of
this section shall apply:



      (1)   A weapon of any type may be discharged in the city by
peace officers or animal control officers in carrying out their official
duties.



      (2)   Firearms and archery equipment may be fired or
discharged in an enclosed soundproofed building meeting the noise
requirements of Chapter 96 of the City Code with a conditional use permit in
the Limited Industrial Business (B-3), Industrial (I) and General Mixed Use
(MU-2) zoning districts. Indoor firearms and archery ranges shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to the construction and
maintenance of an indoor firearms or archery range in a new or existing
building.



   (L)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 19.08) (Am. Ord. 558, passed 11-27-2007; Am. Ord. 560, passed
12-11-2006; Am. Ord. 592, passed 1-11-2010; Am. Ord. 626, passed 3-11-2013)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.07  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dynamite,
giant power or similar explosive within the city, except as hereinafter
provided.



   (B)   The explosives in quantities of 200 pounds and less shall not
be kept any nearer than 100 feet to any business or dwelling house within the
city; nor in quantities in excess of 200 pounds nearer than a quarter of a
mile to any business or dwelling house within the city.



   (C)   The explosives shall be kept in a bulletproof building
constructed of cement, the walls of which shall not be less than 6 inches in
thickness. The location of any such building shall be subject to the approval
of the City Council.



   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished according to law.



(Prior Code, § 9.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.08  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products, and materials of any
kind which are used, primarily used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, enhancing, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Ch. 152, as it may be amended from
time to time. Drug paraphernalia does not include the possession,
manufacture, delivery, or sale of hypodermic needles or syringes. The term
drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;



      (2)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining, marijuana;



      (3)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which controlled substances can
be derived;



      (4)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



      (5)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or.
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



      (6)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity
of controlled substances;



      (7)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed
for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, grinders, and
mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding,
manufacturing, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;



      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers
used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or products
or materials used or intended for use in manufacturing, producing,
processing, or preparing controlled substances;



      (11)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body, which shall include, but not be limited to
the following:



         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls;



         (b)   Water pipes;



         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (e)   Objects commonly referred to as roach clips,
meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana
cigarette, which has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;



         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



         (g)   Chamber pipes;



         (h)   Carburetor pipes;



         (i)   Electric pipes;



         (j)   Air-driven pipes;



         (k)   Chillums;



         (l)   Bongs;



         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers; and



      (12)   Ingredients or components to be used or intended or
designed to be used in manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, or analyzing a controlled substance, whether or not otherwise
lawfully obtained, including anhydrous ammonia, nonprescription medications,
methamphetamine precursor drugs, or lawfully dispensed controlled substances.



   (B)   Factors to be considered in determining if an object is drug
paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in
control of the object under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance and/or drag paraphernalia;



      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of this section;



      (4)   The proximity of the object to any controlled substance;



      (5)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance
on the object;



      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to any person
whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intends to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this section. The innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation, of this act shall
not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use
as drug paraphernalia;



      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (11)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      (12)   The existence and scope of any legitimate use for the
object in the community;



      (13)   Expert testimony concerning its use;



      (14)   Whether the owner, or any one in control of the object,
is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, for
example, a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; and



      (15)   The actual or constructive possession by the owner or a
person in control of the object or the presence in a vehicle or structure
where the object is located of written instructions, directions, or recipes
to be used, or intended or designed to be used, in manufacturing, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, or analyzing-a controlled substance.



   (C)   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of M.S. Ch. 152, as it may be
amended from time to time. Any violation of this section is a petty
misdemeanor.



   (D)   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It
is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, sell,
possess with intent to sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell,
drug paraphernalia, if that person knows, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, enhance, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Ch. 152. Any violation of this
section is a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 19.10)  (Ord. 333, passed 7-12-1982; Am. Ord. 629, passed
8-12-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.09  LOITERING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.



      LOITERING. Whoever commits any of the following acts is guilty of
loitering:



         (a)   Lingering about the entryway of any public or
private premises, or sitting or lingering upon the sidewalk, steps,
windowsills, railing, fence, or parking area adjacent to any such premises in
such a manner so as to obstruct or partially obstruct ingress to or egress
from such building or adjacent parking area to the annoyance or inconvenience
of owners, occupants, pedestrians, or other persons seeking ingress or egress
therefrom.



         (b)   Lingering for any length of time upon any public
or private premises or moving in a slow and meandering manner without purpose
or otherwise interfering with, obstructing, or rendering dangerous or
unreasonable for passage, any public highway, sidewalk, parking area, or
right-of-way.



         (c)   Lurking, lingering, or prowling in any place, at a
time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals, under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity.



      PREMISES. For purposes of this section, premises shall include
any house, yard, lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway, alley,
park, playground, restaurant, cafe, church or other place of worship, school,
any car or other motor vehicle, parking lot, drive-in, building used for
public, business, commercial or industrial purposes, washroom, apartment
building and entryways and hallways located therein, or any other location
whether public or private in the City of Forest Lake.



   (B)   Warning, exception. A person may not be arrested or convicted
under this section, until after a law enforcement officer has informed the
person at least once in the previous 72 hour period that his or her action
violates this section and has asked the person to move to a location that
would not violate this section. It shall not be necessary to inform any
person: (1) who is charged under this section; or (2) who has been convicted
of a violation of this section within one year of the act complained of.



   (C)   Loitering, circumstances causing alarm. A person shall not
lurk, loiter, or prowl in any place, at a time or in a manner not usual for
law abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances that
may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that
the person refuses to identify him or herself, or endeavors to conceal him or
herself or an object.



   (D)   Authority to detain. A police officer may stop and briefly
detain a person suspected of violating this section if the person’s
behavior reasonably causes suspicion of criminal activity. The officer’s
reasonable suspicion must be based on objective, articulable facts and
reasonable inferences drawn from all the circumstances surrounding the
person’s behavior.



   (E)   (1)   Opportunity to dispel alarm. Unless flight by the
person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer must,
prior to any arrest for violation of this section, allow the person an
opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by
requesting him or her to identify him or herself and explain his or her
presence and conduct. The person may identify him or herself by presenting
any of the following:



         (a)   A state-issued identification card or driver’s
license containing the person’s photograph;



         (b)   An employer-issued identification card which
verifies the person’s employment and includes the person’s photograph;



         (c)   A currently valid passport;



         (d)   A certified copy of the person’s birth
certificate; or



         (e)   Verification of the person’s identity by another
person who can establish his or her own identity by one of the documents
listed above.



      (2)   An explanation of the person’s presence and conduct
will be sufficient to dispel alarm if it shows that the person was engaging
in and planning to continue engaging in, lawful activity consistent with his
or her actions and all the circumstances surrounding his or her behavior.



   (F)   Loitering, intent to commit crime. A person shall not in any
public or private place lurk, loiter, prowl, lie in wait, or be concealed
with intent to commit any act prohibited by law.



   (G)   Penalties.



      (1)   Petty misdemeanor. Whoever commits any of the acts
enumerated in divisions (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by
law.



      (2)   Misdemeanor.  Whoever commits any of the following acts
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
according to law:



         (a)   Loitering with intent to commit a crime as
provided in division (F) of this section;



         (b)   Any of the acts enumerated in this section within
1 year of being found guilty of any violation of this section.



(Ord. 591, passed 1-11-2010)



§ 130.10  GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to help prevent the
spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of
graffiti from public and private property. The City Council finds that
graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of
property owners and the public. Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from
public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties
then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and
become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the
city. The City Council intends, through adoption of this section, to provide
additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts
of graffiti vandalism and defacement.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or
other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti
was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or
despite advance authorization is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the
City Council.



      GRAFFITI MATERIALS.



         (a)   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container
that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other
substances capable of defacing property.



         (b)   BROAD-TIPPED MARKER. Any felt tip indelible marker
or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its
broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or
other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.



         (c)   ETCHING EQUIPMENT. Any tool, device or substance
that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.



         (d)   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. An aerosol paint container, a
broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching
equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible
mark on any natural or manmade surface.



         (e)   PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK. A device containing
a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of
being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least
one-fourth of an inch in width.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative association,
private corporations, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee,
or any other legal entity.



   (C)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally
place graffiti on any exterior surface located on public or private property.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess graffiti
materials for the purpose of placing graffiti on any exterior surface located
on public or private property.



   (D)   Graffiti as a nuisance.



      (1)   The existence of graffiti on public or private property
in violation of this section is expressly declared to be a public nuisance
and a public health and safety hazard and, therefore, is subject to the
removal and abatement provisions specified herein.



      (2)   It is the duty of both the owner of the property to
which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession
or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the
property free of graffiti.



   (E)   Removal of graffiti.



      (1)   Removal by applier. Any person applying graffiti on
public or private property shall remove the graffiti within 24 hours after
notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. This removal
must be done in a manner prescribed by the City Administrator, Chief of
Police, Public Works Director or their designees. Any person applying
graffiti is responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal.
Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal will
constitute an additional violation of this section. Where graffiti is applied
by a person under 18 years of age, the parent or legal guardian of such
person will also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the
removal.



      (2)   Removal by city or owner. If the applier fails to remove
the graffiti within 7 days after notice is given as provided in division
(E)(1), the city may order that the graffiti be removed by the property owner
or any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such
property.



         (a)   The City Administrator shall send a letter to the
property owner by certified mail informing the property owner of the graffiti
and directing the property owner to remove the graffiti within 7 days or such
additional time as may reasonably be required due to weather conditions and
other relevant factors. The police department shall verify that the graffiti
has, in fact, been removed.



         (b)   If the police department finds that the graffiti
has not been removed within the time allotted, the department shall contact
the City Administrator who shall schedule a public hearing. The City Clerk
shall notify the affected property owner of the hearing date, the preliminary
finding that graffiti exists on the owner’s property and that the Council
may after the hearing order the removal of the graffiti by either the
property owner or the city’s Department of Public Works, and, if said
department is required to remove the graffiti, that the costs will be
assessed against the owner’s property.



         (c)   At a hearing before the Council, the Council shall
receive evidence from the police department and from any other persons with
knowledge as to the existence of graffiti. The property owner shall be
entitled to be heard on all matters relating to the graffiti and the process
of removal. The existence of graffiti must be proven by a preponderance of
the evidence.



         (d)   If the Council finds graffiti exists, the Council
shall notify the Department of Public Works and direct its removal. The
Department of Public Works may authorize private contractors to handle
graffiti removal.



   (F)   Costs to be assessed.



      (1)   In the event the city removes and/or abates the
graffiti, an accurate record of the costs incurred therein shall be kept by
the Department of Public Works and reported to the Department of Finance. The
total cost of the removal or abatement, including the administrative costs
incurred by the Department of Finance in processing the abatement and costs
incurred by the police department in investigating the graffiti, shall be
considered a tax on real property which may be assessed against the affected
property and collected as provided in M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (2)   In the event the person or persons responsible for the
graffiti are convicted and the court orders the offender(s) to pay
restitution for the cost of the clean up, and either the city or a private
property owner has expended funds to clean up the graffiti, the restitution
shall be directed to either the city or the private property owner as
reimbursement for the cost of the clean up.



   (G)   Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished according to law.



(Ord. 599, passed 8-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.11  PANHANDLING.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
term shall have the meaning given herein.



      PANHANDLING. Any begging or solicitation made in person,
requesting an immediate donation of money or asking for any item of value;
attempting to sell or obtain compensation for an item or service for an
amount that is at least twice its value, or an item or service that is
already offered or available at no charge to the general public; or
attempting to sell or obtain compensation for an item or service under
circumstances that would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the
payment is in substance a donation.



         (a)   PANHANDLING may include approaching or following
pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or
profane language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact,
or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



         (b)   This section is intended to protect citizens from
the disruption, fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of
solicitation and not to limit constitutionally protected activity.



         (c)   PANHANDLING shall not include the act of passively
standing, sitting, or engaging in a performance of art with a sign or other
indication that a donation is being sought without any vocal request other
than in response to an inquiry by another person.



         (d)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a
person representing a bona fide charitable organization.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in any
public place; on any public street, sidewalk, or in any park, playground,
recreational or entertainment facility, government building or transportation
facility or in any place of business.



   (C)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished according to law.



(Ord. 634, passed 1-27-2014)



CHAPTER 131:  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES



Section



   131.01   Purpose



   131.02   Administrative offense defined



   131.03   Notice



   131.04   Payment



   131.05   Hearing



   131.06   Hearing Officer



   131.07   Failure to pay



   131.08   Disposition of penalties



   131.09   Offenses and penalties



   131.10   Subsequent offenses



   131.11   Administrative Offenses Fee Schedule



§ 131.01  PURPOSE.



   Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this chapter
are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal,
cost-effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges
for violations of city code provisions. The procedures are intended to be
voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative
offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty, as
is provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in
the procedure in which event the city may bring criminal charges in
accordance with this code. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose
not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in
the first or succeeding instances.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.02  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE DEFINED.



   An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of this code
and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of
offenses and penalties referred to in § 131.09.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.03  NOTICE.



   An officer of the Forest Lake Police Department, or any other person
employed by the city authorized in writing by the City Administrator and
having authority to enforce this code, shall, upon determining that there has
been a violation of this code and set forth on the schedule of administrative
offenses, notify the violator, or in the case of a vehicular violation,
attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. Said notice shall set forth
the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the official issuing
the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.04  PAYMENT.



   Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within 7 days of
the time of the issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the
schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request a hearing, in
writing, as is provided for hereinafter. The penalty may be paid in person or
by mail, and the payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.05  HEARING.



   Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this
chapter may, within 7 days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a
hearing by a Hearing Officer who shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing
to determine if a violation has occurred. The Hearing Officer shall have
authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the
violation is sustained by the Hearing Officer, the violator shall pay the
penalty imposed.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.06  HEARING OFFICER.



   The City Administrator shall appoint a Hearing Officer to hear and
determine any controversy relating to administrative offenses provided for in
this chapter.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.07  FAILURE TO PAY.



   In the event the party charged with an administrative offense fails to
pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought
against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable Minnesota State
Statutes and/or this code. If the penalty is paid, or if an individual is
found not to have committed the administrative offense by the Hearing
Officer, no such charge may be brought by the city for the same violation.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.08  DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES.



   All penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the
City Clerk and shall be deposited in the city’s General Fund.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.09  OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.



   Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and the
penalties for such offenses shall be set forth in Appendix A, the
Administrative Offense Fee Schedule. The Administrative Offense Fee Schedule
may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council and shall
be maintained in the office of the City Administrator.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.10  SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES.



   In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative
offense within a 12-month period of paying an administrative penalty for the
same or substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty
shall be increased by 50% above the previous penalty except as otherwise
provided by resolution.



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 131.11  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES FEE SCHEDULE.



 


Offense

 

City Code Section

 

Fee ($)




Unreasonable acceleration

 

71.01

 

60



Illegal U-turn
 

71.02

 

60




 



 




Offense

 

City Code Section

 

Fee ($)



Slow-No Wake (Forest Lake Bay)
 

71.03

 

60



Illegal Snowmobile Operation
 

71.04

 

60



Illegal All-Terrain Vehicle Operation
 

71.06

 

60



Overnight Parking
 

72.02(A)

 

35



Snow Removal from Sidewalks
 

72.02(C)

 

50



Erecting a Temporary Structure in a Public Park
 

90.03

 

50



Littering in a Public Park
 

90.04

 

50



Motorized Vehicle Traffic in a Public Park
 

90.05

 

60



Violating Public Park Hours
 

90.06

 

60



Domestic Animals in a Public Park
 

90.10

 

50



Possession/Consumption of Alcohol in Public Parks
 

90.14

 

100



Shields Lake Violations
 

91.03

 

60



Animal Licensing Violations
 

99.02

 

50



Animal Tag and Collar Violations
 

99.03

 

50



Animal Waste
 

99.17

 

20



Public Consumption of Alcohol
 

119.05

 

100



Allowing Curfew Violation/Adult
 

130.05

 

100





 



(Ord. 567, passed 6-25-2007)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



      152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      153.   ZONING CODE



      154.   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   150.01   Adoption of State Building Code



   150.02   Uniform numbering system for streets and numbering
properties and buildings



   150.03   Natural gas licenses and fees



§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code,
as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59
to 16B.75, as they may be amended from time to time, including all
amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from
time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the
Building Codes and Standards Division is adopted by reference with the
exception of the optional chapters not included in division (B) of this
section.



   (B)   Optional provisions. The following optional provisions
identified in the most current edition of the State Building Code are adopted
and incorporated as part of the Building Code of the city:



      (1)   1306, subp. 2, Special Fire Protection Systems, with
option 1306.0020, subp. 2 and 1306.0030E, Option 2;



      (2)   1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts 135.0600 to
1335.1200;



      (3)   2006 International Building Code, Appendix Chapter J
(grading).



   (C)   Application, administration and enforcement. The application,
administration and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with the
Minnesota State Building Code. This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota
Certified Building Official designated by the city to administer the code.



   (D)   Permits and fees.  The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1, as amended from
time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by the code in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by ordinance of the City Council. In
addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by the Code in accordance with M.S. § 16B.70, as amended from time
to time.



   (E)   Violations.  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
The city may also institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate violations or threatened violations of this
section.



(Prior Code, § 12.01)  (Am. Ord. 459, passed 3-27-1995;  Am. Ord. 489,
passed 12-14-1998;  Am. Ord. 524, passed 4-14-2003; Am. Ord. 568, passed
7-9-2007)



§ 150.02  UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR STREETS AND NUMBERING PROPERTIES AND
BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Uniform naming and numbering system. A uniform system of
naming streets and numbering properties and principal buildings, as shown in
the manual of procedures identified by the title Uniform Street Naming and
Property Numbering System, which if filed in the County Courthouse is adopted
for use in Forest Lake. This map and all explanatory matter thereon is
adopted and made apart of this section.



   (B)   Assignment of names and numbers.



      (1)   All properties of parcels of land within the city shall
hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform numbering system adopted
herein, provided all existing numbers of property and buildings not now in
conformity with provisions of this section shall be changed to conform to the
system herein adopted within 6 months from the date of passage of this
section. The names of all streets in the city shall be as designated by the
Uniform Street Naming System.



      (2)   Each principal building shall bear the number assigned
to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal
building is occupied by more than 1 business or family dwelling unit, each
separate front entrance of the principal building shall bear a separate
number.



      (3)   Numerals indicating the official numbers for each
principal building or each front entrance to the building shall be posted in
a manner as to be visible from the street on which the property is located.



   (C)   Administration.



      (1)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for
maintaining the numbering system. In the performance of this responsibility
he or she shall be guided by the provisions of division (B) of this section.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall keep a record of all numbers
assigned under this section.



      (3)   The City Clerk shall assign to any property owner in the
city upon request of a number for each principal building or separate front
entrance to such building. In doing so, he or she shall assign only the
numbers assigned to the building under the provisions of this section;
provided, however, that the Recorder may assign additional numerals in accord
with the official numbering system whenever a property has been subdivided, a
new front entrance opened, or undue hardship has been worked on any property
owner.



      (4)   Street names in existence prior to the passage of the
ordinance set forth in this section may be retained subject to approval by
the City Council.



   (D)   Penalties. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor
and may be punished as set forth in § 10.99. Each separate day the violation
is continued shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 34 (town), passed 5-18-1970)



§ 150.03  NATURAL GAS LICENSES AND FEES.



   (A)   General. No person, firm, corporation or agent shall hereafter
install, alter, repair or service gas burners or gas burner equipment within
Forest Lake without conforming to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Licenses required. No person, firm, or corporation shall
engage in the business of altering, repairing, or servicing of gas burners
without first securing a master gas installer’s license from the Clerk
permitting him or her to engage in the business. The requirements contained
herein shall not be construed to limit the right of the gas utility and its
authorized employees to render necessary service.



   (C)   Liability insurance. No license or renewal shall be granted,
nor shall the same be effective, until the applicant shall file with the City
Clerk proof of a public liability insurance policy covering all operations of
the applicant under this chapter for the sum of at least $300,000 against
liability for bodily injuries or death for each person, for the sum of at
least $1,000,000 against liability for bodily injuries or death to more than
1 person from 1 accident and for at least $300,000 against liability for
damage or destruction of property. The city shall be named and the insurance
provided shall include the city as an additional party insured. The policy
shall provide that it may not be canceled by the insurer except after 10 days
written notice to the city, and if the insurance is canceled and the licensee
shall fail to replace the same with another policy conforming to the
provisions of this chapter, the license shall be automatically suspended
until the insurance shall have been replaced. The policy or policies of
insurance shall also contain a “completed operations clause” conditioned
for the faithful performance of all work, entered upon or contracted for, in
strict accordance and compliance with the terms, requirements, and provisions
of all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be kept
in full force and effect for and during the license period.



   (D)   Examinations. The City Clerk may require an examination of
applicants for gas installers’ licenses if he or she deems it necessary.



   (E)   Violations. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be
punished according to law, and his or her license granted under this chapter
may in such case be revoked by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 14.01)  (Am. Ord. 375, passed 2-10-1986)



CHAPTER 151:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



Section



   151.01   Authorization



   151.02   Findings



   151.03   Purpose



   151.04   Definitions



   151.05   Scope and effect



   151.06   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan approval procedures



   151.07   Plan review procedure



   151.08   Minimum construction site best management practices



   151.09   Lawn fertilizer regulations



   151.10   Completion of work



   151.11   Enforcement procedures



   151.12   Effective date



   151.13   Conflicts



 



   151.98   Violations



§ 151.01  AUTHORIZATION.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.351, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995)



§ 151.02  FINDINGS.



   The City Council finds that uncontrolled land disturbing or development
activities at construction sites, areas subject to soil erosion and areas
containing restrictive soils adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other
environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses
of environmental resources and hindering the ability of the city to provide
adequate water, sewage disposal, flood control, and other community
services.  In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required
for the protection of persons and property in such areas and in areas which
may be affected by unplanned land usage.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 151.03  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the
natural resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects
occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by
regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an
adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and
fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and
encouraging compatibility between land disturbing and development activities
and water quality and environmentally sensitive land; and by requiring
detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development
activities proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban
growth and development and protection of water quality and natural areas. In
addition to this chapter, the requirements of the MPCA’s Construction
Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed District
standards shall be met.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 677, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 151.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or
subdivision approval.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP).  Erosion and sediment control, water
quality, and permanent storm water management practices that are the most
effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing
the degradation of surface water, including construction- phasing, minimizing
the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management
practices published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies.



   CITY.  The elected governing body of the City of Forest Lake, or its
designated officials or agents.  Agents may include districts, water
management organization, joint powers boards, watershed districts, or other
governmental entities responsible for resource management within the city.
After adopting this chapter, the city may enter into an agreement with its
agent allowing the agent to administer the functions and perform the duties
of the city set out in this chapter.



   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control
erosion and attendant pollution.



   DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or man-made structure,
including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a
permanent pool of water.



   DISCHARGE.  The release, conveyance, channeling, runoff, or drainage,
of stormwater including snowmelt, from a construction site.



   EXPOSED SOIL AREAS.  All areas of the construction site where the
vegetation (trees, shrubs, brush, grasses, and the like) or impervious
surface has been removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. 
This includes topsoil stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within
the construction site.  It does not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of
gravel, concrete or bituminous.  Once soil is exposed it is considered
“exposed soil,” until it meets the definition of “final
stabilization”.



   FINAL STABILIZATION.  All soil disturbing activities at the site have
been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of
70% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization
measures have been employed.  Simply sowing grass is not considered final
stabilization.  All facilities designed to convey or store water shall be
returned to their original design volume prior to meeting the final
stabilization requirements of the site.



   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.



   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have
been or may be covered by a regional flood.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and
those portions of the adjoining flood plains that are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood water and provide water storage during a regional
flood.



   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.



   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil
or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a
result of excessive water content.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  A constructed hard surface that either prevents
or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to
development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.



   LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land
surface, including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading
and the construction of any structure.



   MPCA.  Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT.  Construction on any site with less than 15% of
existing impervious surfaces prior to the commencement of construction
activity. For sites with less than 15% impervious cover prior to
construction, conditions of this chapter apply as if the site had no
impervious surfaces prior to construction.



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge not composed entirely of
discharge, for example, process wastewater, cooling water, boiler blow down,
wash water, or rinse water.



   NPDES.  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; the
program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring,
and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (§§ 301, 318,402 and 405)
and 33 C.F.R. §§ 1317,1328, 1342 and 1345 authorizing the discharge of
pollutants to water of the United States.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise,
association or governmental entity.



   PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005,
Subd. 15, as it may be amended from time to time.



   REDEVELOPMENT.  The addition of new impervious surfaces, or
improvement by renewing or restoring any developed property, that results in
the land disturbance of 1 acre or greater to sites with greater than 15% of
the surface covered by an existing impervious surface.



   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood that is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100
year recurrence interval.



   RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or manmade structure that
provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool
of water.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid mineral or organic material that, in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its original site by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has been deposited at another location.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).  A joint storm water and
erosion and sediment control plan containing the requirements of this
chapter, that when implemented will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land
and off-site non-point pollution.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.  Surface water arising from rain, snow or the
action of any person.



   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is
normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures,
earthen structures, roads, parking lots and paved storage areas.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.  As defined in M.S. § 115.01, subd. 22, all
streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state or any portion thereof.



   WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is
covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have
the following three attributes:



      (1)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;



      (2)   Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and



      (3)   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of the
vegetation.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 677,
passed 7-9-2018)



§ 151.05  SCOPE AND EFFECT.



   (A)   Applicability. Except as provided in division  (B) of this
section, every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a
permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a storm water
pollution prevention plan to the city. No building permit, subdivision
approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until
approval of the storm water pollution prevention plan or a waiver of the
approval requirements has been obtained in strict conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. The provisions of § 151.07 apply to all land,
public or private, located within the city.



   (B)   Exemptions The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:



      (1)   Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision
has been approved by the City Council on or before the effective date of this
chapter;



      (2)   Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been
approved by the watershed management organization within 6 months prior to
the effective date of this chapter;



      (3)   A lot for which a building permit has been approved on
or before the effective date of this chapter;



      (4)   Excavation or grading resulting in the movement of less
than 50 cubic yards of material;



      (5)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric
poles and other kinds of posts or poles;



      (6)   Emergency work to protect life, limb or property;



      (7)   Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural,
horticultural, or silvicultural (forestry) crops; or



      (8)   Single-family residential site improvements such as the
construction of houses, house additions, decks and garages that disturb an
area less than one acre in size except that such land disturbances shall
comply with § 151.08(A) and (H) of this chapter.



   (C)   Waiver. The City Council may waive any requirements of this
chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will
involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of the requirement will not
adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 587,
passed 11-23-2009)



§ 151.06  STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application. 



      (1)   A storm water pollution prevention plan shall be filed
with the city and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which
the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right or as
an exception in the underlying zoning district and adequate evidence showing
that the proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this
chapter. Prior to applying for approval of a storm water pollution prevention
plan, an applicant may request that the storm water pollution prevention plan
be reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city.  A storm water
pollution prevention plan shall be submitted in conjunction with any grading
permit applications, land use applications or other applications as
determined appropriate by the city.



      (2)   Five sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies
of drawings and required information shall be submitted to the city with
required fees for processing and approval as set forth in § 151.07 and
financial security when required by § 151.07 in the amount to be calculated
in accordance with that section.  Drawings shall be prepared to a scale
appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be
performed.  At a minimum the scale shall be 1 inch equals 100 feet.



   (B)   Storm water pollution prevention plan. All construction
activities that disturb 1 acre or more of land must comply with the MPCA’s
Construction Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001). Land disturbances of
less than 1 acre may require compliance with applicable Watershed District
standards. At a minimum, the storm water pollution prevention plan shall
contain the following information.



      (1)   Narrative.  A narrative describing the nature of the
construction activity, including:



         (a)   Project description: the nature and purpose of the
land disturbing activity and the amount of grading, utilities, and building
construction involved;



         (b)   Chain of command describing who is responsible for
implementing the erosion and sediment control BMPs during construction;



         (c)   Schedule of anticipated starting and completion
date of each land disturbing activity, including the installation of
construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of
this chapter;



         (d)   A description of the soils of the site, including
a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and
describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render the
soils suitable;



         (e)   Receiving waters within 1 mile of the property;



         (f)   Pollution prevention measures;



         (g)   A plan for the maintenance and inspection of the
construction site erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter;



         (h)   A description of the post construction stormwater
management measures that are going to be used including drainage calculations
modeling the existing and proposed conditions meeting the standards
identified in §151.06; and



         (i)   The identity of the person responsible for
overseeing the long term operation and maintenance of the permanent
stormwater management system.



      (2)   Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions
showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, including:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant, the
section, township and range, north point, date and scale of drawing and
number of sheets;



         (b)   Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale
sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property and giving such
information as the names and number of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities,
subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks;



         (c)   Existing topography with a contour interval
appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour
interval greater than 2 feet;



         (d)   Volume of material to be moved or removed;



         (e)   A woodland survey showing the removal,
replacement, and preservation plan of all significant trees and woodlands, as
regulated in §§ 153.295et seq.;



         (f)   A delineation of all streams, rivers, public
waters and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site,
including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be found
in the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification
given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and/or the United States
Army Corps of Engineers;



         (g)   Location and dimensions of existing storm water
drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to
the site delineating in which direction and at what rate storm water is
conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public
water, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where
storm water collects;



         (h)   Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any
vegetation proposed for removal; and



         (i)   100 year flood plains, flood fringes and floodways.



      (2)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan,
including:



         (a)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land
disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities;



         (b)   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or
dirt stockpiles;



         (c)   Locations and dimensions of all construction site
erosion control measures and best management practices (BMPs) necessary to
meet the minimum BMP requirements of this chapter;



         (d)   Designation of the site’s areas that have the
most potential for erosion; and



         (e)   Any other information pertinent to the particular
project which in the opinion of the applicant or city is necessary for the
review of the project.



      (3)   Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site
conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site
changes and how the site will be stabilized after construction is completed,
including:



         (a)   Finished grading shown at contours at the same
interval as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the
relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features;



         (b)   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale,
including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and
description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to the
site as part of the development;



         (c)   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating
in which direction and at what rate storm water will be conveyed from the
site and setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be
allowed to collect;



         (d)   The proposed size, alignment and intended use of
any structures to be erected on the site;



         (e)   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas
which shall be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing
material to be used; and



         (f)   Any other information pertinent to the particular
project which in the opinion of the applicant is necessary for the review of
the project.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 677,
passed 7-9-2018)



§ 151.07  PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Process. Storm water management plans meeting the requirements
of § 151.06 and minimum BMP requirements of § 151.08 shall be submitted to
the city for review.



   (B)   Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of
this chapter shall expire 1 year after the date of approval unless
construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to
the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the
city for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the
reasons for the requested extension, the city may grant one extension of not
greater than 1 single year.



   (C)   Conditions. A storm water pollution prevention plan may be
approved subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to
insure that the requirements contained in this chapter are met. The
conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the
proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage
facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of
vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over
time, require alterations of the site design to insure buffering, and require
the conveyance to the city or other public entity of certain lands or
interests therein.



   (D)   Financial security.



      (1)   Prior to approval of any storm water pollution
prevention plan, the applicant shall submit an agreement to construct the
required physical improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to
comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. The agreement shall
be accompanied by a financial security satisfactory to the city to cover the
amount of the established cost of complying with the agreement. The agreement
and financial security shall guarantee completion and compliance with
conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended in accordance
with division (B) of this section.



      (2)   The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any
agreement and financial security shall be determined by the city.



   (E)   Fees. All applications for storm water pollution prevention
plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee as
established from time to time by duly adopted resolution or ordinance of the
City Council.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 151.08  MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION SITE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   (A)   Standards. No storm water pollution prevention plan which
fails to meet the standards contained in this section and in §§ 153.270et
seq., shall be approved by the City Council or its designated representative.



   (B)   Site dewatering.  Water pumped from the site shall be treated
by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow
chambers, hydra-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other controls, as
appropriate. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion,
sedimentation, or flooding of the site, receiving channels or a wetland. 
All dewatering must comply with the MPCA’s Construction Stormwater General
Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed District standards.



   (C)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic
materials or hazardous materials, collected sediment, asphalt and concrete
millings, floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, construction and
demolition debris and other wastes) shall be properly disposed of off-site
and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm
sewer system and must comply with MPCA disposal requirements.



   (D)   Hazardous materials. Oil, gasoline, paint and any hazardous
substances must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to
prevent spill, leaks or other discharge.  Restricted access to storage areas
must be provided to prevent vandalism.  Concrete wash must be limited to a
defined area of the site and runoff must be contained within the defined
area. Storage and disposal of hazardous waste must be in compliance with MPCA
regulations.



   (E)   Liquid waste. All non-stormwater discharges (concrete truck
washout, vehicle washing, maintenance spills, and the like) conducted during
the construction activity shall not be discharged to the municipal storm
sewer, wetlands, natural drainageways, or waters of the state and must comply
with the MPCA NPDES Construction Site General Permit.



   (F)   Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives
and parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public
or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before the
end of each workday.



   (G)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be
protected during construction and must comply with the MPCA’s Construction
Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed District
standards.



   (H)   Site erosion and sediment



      (1)   Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through
the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise,
the channel shall be protected as described below. Sheetflow runoff from
adjacent areas greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted
around disturbed areas, unless shown to have resultant runoff rates of less
than 0.5 cubic feet per second across the disturbed area for the 1-year
storm. Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the
conveyance and receiving channels.  All temporary or permanent drainage
channels must be stabilized within 24 hours of being connected to a water of
the state.  Sediment control is required along channel edges to reduce
sediment reaching the channel.



      (2)   All activities on the site shall be conducted in a
logical sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time
and to the extent feasible conform to the natural limitations presented by
the topography and soils as to create the best potential for preventing soil
erosion.



         (a)   All disturbed ground left inactive must be
stabilized using the methods and time frames listed in the MPCA’s
Construction Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed
District standards.



         (b)   Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be
retained and protected.



         (c)   For sites with more than 10 acres disturbed at one
time, or if a channel originates in the disturbed area, 1 or more temporary
or permanent sedimentation basins shall be constructed.  Each sedimentation
basin shall be designed to meet storage requirements identified in the
MPCA’s Construction Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable
Watershed District standards with accepted design specifications.  The basin
discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to not cause erosion along
the discharge channel or the receiving water.



         (d)   Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more
than 10 cubic yards of material should not be located with a downslope
drainage length of less than 25 feet from the toe of the pile to a roadway or
drainage channel. If remaining for more than 7 days, they shall be stabilized
by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps or other means.  Erosion from piles
which will be in existence for less than 7 days shall be controlled by
placing silt fence barriers around the pile.  In street utility repair or
construction, soil or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a
roadway or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable
alternative control, if exposed for more than 7 days, and the storm drain
inlets must be protected with appropriate inlet protection.



         (e)   Perimeter sediment control measures shall be
placed along all down gradient perimeters, side slopes, and down slope sides
of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff passes through the
site, perimeter sediment control measures shall be placed along the channel
edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel. All perimeter sediment control
measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule.



         (f)   Pipe outlets must have energy dissipation
installed in accordance with the MPCA’s Construction Stormwater General
Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed District standards.



         (g)   Exposed slopes shall not be steeper in grade than
3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical (33%);



         (h)   Slopes over 33% (3:1) shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and/or Washington Conservation District;



         (i)   Development on slopes with a grade between 25%
(4:1) and 33% (3:1) shall be carefully reviewed to insure adequate measures
have been taken to prevent soil erosion, sedimentation, vegetative and
structural damage; and



         (j)   The bank of a natural waterway shall be protected
with permanent turf vegetation.



      (3)   Site restoration.



         (a)   All soil disturbing activities shall be stabilized
by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70% of its
expected final growth density over the entire pervious surface area, or other
equivalent means necessary to prevent soil failure under erosive conditions;



         (b)   All restoration shall include the application of a
minimum of 4 inches of a mineral topsoil or similar material that will
support plant growth;



         (c)   Final grades shall be in conformity with the
permit and topography of the surrounding land;



         (d)   If the land is to be restored to crop production,
no slope shall exceed 5 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical (20%);



         (e)   If the restoration is not for crop production, no
grade shall exceed 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical (25%);



         (f)   All restored areas shall be seeded with a mixture
recommended by the Conservation District or returned to crop production;



         (g)    The standards in divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E)
above may be waived or modified to accommodate a specific restoration plan;
and



         (h)   All other requirements for final site
stabilization shall be adhered to in accordance with the MPCA’s
Construction Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed
District standards.



      (4)   The contractor or owner shall be responsible for
inspections and maintenance on site and must comply with the MPCA’s
Construction Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed
District standards. Inspections are required to track the following
information:



         (a)   Date and time of the inspections;



         (b)   Name of person(s) conducting inspections;



         (c)   Findings of inspections including recommendations
for corrective actions;



         (d)   Corrective actions taken (including dates, times,
and party completing maintenance activities;



         (e)   Date and amount of rainfall events great than ½
inch in 24 hours;



         (f)   Documentation of changes made to the SWPPP;



      (5)   Maintenance is required as follows:



         (a)   When sediment reaches 1/3 the height of the BMP on
perimeter control devices, sediment must be removed within 24 hours of
discovery.



         (b)   If the perimeter control device is not functional
it must be repaired or replaced within 24 hours of discovery.



         (c)   Temporary sediment basins shall be maintained when
sediment reaches ½ the outlet height or ½ the basin storage volume.  The
basin must be drained or sediment removed within 72 hours of discovery.



         (d)   Construction site vehicle entrance and exit
locations sediment must be removed from paved surfaces within 24 hours of
discovery.



   (I)   Storm water management criteria for permanent facilities.



      (1)   An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the
proposed land disturbing, development or redevelopment  activity, all storm
water management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff to meet the
water quantity and water quality guidelines identified in the city’s
Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP) and is also encouraged to meet the
infiltration guidelines identified in the city’s SWMP.



      (2)   The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the
need for storm water management facilities by incorporating the use of
natural topography and land cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales and
depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can
accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity
or quality of the wetland or pond.



      (3)   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational
as quickly as possible during construction. 



      (4)   One inch of impervious surface runoff must be
infiltrated within 48 hours using accepted BMPs. Green infrastructure
techniques and practices (including, but not limited to, infiltration,
evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry,
and green roofs), shall be given preference as design options consistent with
zoning, subdivision, and public utility district requirements. The following
storm water management practices shall be investigated in developing a storm
water pollution prevention plan in the following descending order of
preference:



         (a)   Infiltration of runoff on-site, if suitable soil
conditions are available for use;



         (b)    Bioretention/biofiltration, rain gardens with
underdrain, and tree boxes;



         (c)   Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales
and natural depressions;



         (d)   Filtration;



         (e)   Storm water retention facilities; and



         (f)   Storm water detention facilities.



      (5)   Infiltration volumes and facility sizes shall be
calculated using the appropriate hydrological soil group classification and
saturated infiltration rate from the table below. Documented site-specific
infiltration or hydraulic conductivity measurements completed by a licensed
soil scientist or engineer can be used in place of the values in the table.



 

Hydrologic Soils Group
 
Infiltration Rate (in/hr)
 
Soil Texture


A
 
0.30
 
Sand, loamy sand, or sand loam


B
 
0.15
 
Silt loam or loam


C
 
0.07
 
Sandy clay loam


D
 
0.03
 
Clay loam, silt clay loam, silty clay, or clay



 



      (6)   The banks of a natural waterway shall not exceed 5 feet
horizontal to 1 foot vertical.



      (7)   The gradient of the natural waterway bank shall not
exceed a grade that will result in a velocity that will cause erosion of the
banks of the waterway.



      (8)   The bed of the natural waterway shall be protected with
turf or sod.  If turf or sod will not function properly, the bed shall be
designed with a turf reinforcement mat, riprap or other suitable measures as
approved by the City Engineer as to prevent erosion of the bed of the
waterway.  Riprap shall consist of quarried limestone or field stone (if
random riprap is used).  The riprap shall be no smaller than 2 inches square
or larger than 2 feet square.



      (9)   The flow velocity in the natural waterway shall be
controlled to a velocity that will not cause erosion of the natural
waterway.  If the flow velocity in the natural waterway is such that erosion
of the turfside wall will occur, and the velocity cannot be decreased via
velocity control structures, then other materials may replace turf on the
side walls such as, turf reinforcement mat or riprap.



      (10)   Prior to infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be
required before the runoff enters the infiltration practice.



      (11)   For new development, no net increase from pre-project
conditions (on an annual average basis) of:



         (a)   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by
the stormwater management limitations in division (15) below.



         (b)   Stormwater discharge of total suspended solids
(TSS).



         (c)   Stormwater discharge of total phosphorus (TP).



      (12)   For redevelopment, a net reduction from pre-project
conditions (on an annual average basis) of:



         (a)   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by
the stormwater management limitations in division (15) below.



         (b)   Stormwater discharge of total suspended solids
(TSS).



      (13)   Stormwater discharge of total phosphorus (TP).
Conditions in divisions (11) and (12) are considered met if the following
standards are met.



         (a)   Retain a runoff volume equal to 1 inch times the
area of the proposed new impervious surfaces on the site.



         (b)   Another standard that achieves the volume, TSS,
TP, and rate control goals as approved by the city including calculations:



            1.   Indicating that post-construction runoff
volume for the ninety-fifth percentile storm has been retained on site.



            2.   Indicating that the post-development runoff
volume, TSS, and TP concentrations match the pre- construction condition.



            3.   From the minimal impact design standards
(MIDs) indicating that the post-development runoff volume, TSS, and TP
concentrations match the pre-construction condition.



            4.   Other methods approved by the city.



      (14)   The use of infiltration techniques are prohibited when
the infiltration structural stormwater BMP will receive discharges from, or
be constructed in, the following areas:



         (a)   Where industrial facilities are not authorized to
infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater
Permit.



         (b)   Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.



         (c)   Where less than 3 feet of separation from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally
saturated soils or the top of bedrock exists.



         (d)   Where high levels of contaminants in soil or
groundwater will be mobilized by infiltrating stormwater.



      (15)   (a)   The use of infiltration techniques will be
restricted when the infiltration device will be constructed in areas:



            1.   With predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D
(clay) soils.



            2.   Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet
down-gradient of active karst features.



            3.   Within a drinking water supply management
area (DWSMA) as defined in Minn. Rules, Part 4720.5100, Subp. 13.



            4.   Where soil infiltration rates are more than
8.3 inches per hour.



         (b)   In these restricted areas, the city engineer may
request additional information and/or testing to ensure that infiltration
basins will perform properly and that groundwater is adequately protected.



      (16)   Linear projects.



         (a)   Linear projects on sites where infiltration is not
prohibited or restricted that create 1 acre or greater of new impervious
surfaces, shall meet the requirements of § 151.08(I)(4) for the increase in
impervious surface.



         (b)   Linear projects on sites where infiltration is not
prohibited or restricted that create 1 acre or greater of fully reconstructed
surface, shall meet the requirements of subsection § 151.08(I)(4) for the
impervious surface.



            1.   Mill and overlay and other resurfacing
activities are not considered fully reconstructed unless specifically defined
otherwise in local watershed district regulations.



            2.   A reasonable attempt must be made to obtain
right-of-way during the project planning process for volume control
practices. For linear projects where the lack of right-of-way precludes the
installation of volume control practices to meet §§ 151.08(I)(11) or
151.08(I)(12), exceptions as described in §§ 151.08(I)(14) and §
151.08(I)(15) can be applied.



      (17)   A lesser volume control standard on the site of the
original construction activity may be applied, at the discretion of the city,
under the following circumstances:



         (a)   The owner and/or operator of a construction
activity is precluded from infiltrating stormwater due to limitations under
§§ 151.08(I)(14) and 151.08(I)(15); and



         (b)   The owner and/or operator of the construction
activity implements volume reduction techniques, other than infiltration, on
the site of the original construction activity that reduces stormwater
discharge volume, but may not meet the requirements of post-construction
stormwater management in §§ 151.08(I)(11) and 151.08(I)(12).



      (18)   If the owner and/or operator of a construction activity
believes that the requirements for TP and/or TSS cannot be met on the site of
the original construction activity, the owner and/or operator must provide
appropriate documentation to the city as support. Stormwater discharges that
do not meet the TP and/or TSS standards on the site of the original
construction activity shall be mitigated off-site. The proposed mitigation
must meet the following criteria:



         (a)   Mitigation project areas should be selected in the
following order of preference and in consultation and with approval by the
city:



            1.   Locations that yield benefits to the same
receiving water that receives runoff from the original construction activity.



            2.   Locations within the same Department of
Natural Resource (DNR) catchment area as the original construction activity.



            3.   Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment
area upstream.



            4.   Locations within the city's jurisdiction.



         (b)   Mitigation projects must involve the creation of
new structural stormwater BMPs, the retrofit of existing structural
stormwater BMPs, or the use of a properly designed regional structural
stormwater BMP.



         (c)   Routine maintenance of structural stormwater BMPs
required by this section cannot be used to meet mitigation requirements.



         (d)   Mitigation projects must be completed within 24
months after the start of the original construction activity. If the
mitigation project is a private structural stormwater BMP and the city is not
responsible for long-term maintenance of the project, the city will require
written and recorded documentation of maintenance responsibilities.



      (19)   The city shall not provide regulatory oversight of
private BMPs that are not connected to the city's storm sewer system.



      (20)   Any structural stormwater BMP that is connected to the
city's storm sewer system and the city determines to be private shall meet
the following; requirements.



         (a)   A permanent public easement shall be provided to
the city for access for inspection and/or maintenance purposes. Costs
incurred by the city for any maintenance of private systems will be billed
and/or assessed to the owner/operator.



         (b)   Recorded inspection and maintenance agreements
that define inspection and maintenance responsibilities are required. A
minimum annual inspection for private systems shall be required. These
requirements are transferrable to any party that becomes the owner/operator
of the site.



         (c)   If site configurations or structural stormwater
BMPs change, causing decreased BMP effectiveness, new or improved structural
stormwater BMPs must be implemented to meet the requirements of §§
151.08(I)(11) and 151.08(I)(12).



   (J)   Design standards. Storm water management facilities
constructed in the city shall be designed in accordance with the city’s
SWMP and according to the most current technology as reflected in the MPCA
publication Minnesota Stormwater Manual.



   (K)   Wetland.



      (1)   Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands
without presettlement of the runoff.



      (2)   A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation shall be
provided around all wetlands in accordance with § 153.343 and the MPCA’s
Construction Stormwater General Permit (MN R100001) and applicable Watershed
District standards.



      (3)   Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or
partially, unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least
equal public value in accordance with § 153.343. Replacement must be guided
by the following principles in descending order of priority:



         (a)   Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the
activity that may destroy or diminish the wetlands;



         (b)   Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or
magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation;



         (c)   Rectifying the impact by repairing,
rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment;



         (d)   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by
preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity; and



         (e)   Compensating for the impact by replacing or
providing substitute wetland resources or environments.



   (L)   Catch basins.  All newly installed and rehabilitated catch
basins shall be provided with a sump area for the collection of
coarse-grained material.  The basins shall be cleaned when they are half
filled with material.



   (M)   Drain leaders. All newly constructed or reconstructed
buildings will route drain leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can
be allowed to infiltrate.  The flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall
be controlled so no erosion occurs in the pervious areas.



   (N)   Inspection and maintenance. All storm water management
facilities shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide
access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound.  All storm
water management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance
that assures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in storm water
runoff.  The Director of Public Works, or designated representative, shall
inspect all storm water management facilities during construction, during the
first year of operation, and at least once every 5 years thereafter.  The
inspection records will be kept on file at the Public Works Department for a
period of 6 years.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to
the storm water management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes.



   (O)   Models/methodologies/computatio ns. Hydrologic models and
design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of
storm water management structures shall be approved by the City Engineer and
as per the design guidance in the city’s SWMP.  Plans, specifications and
computations for storm water management facilities submitted for review shall
be sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer.  All
computations shall appear on the plans submitted for review, unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.



   (P)   Watershed management plans/groundwater management plans. Storm
water pollution prevention plans shall be consistent with adopted watershed
management plans and groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with
M.S. §§ 103B.231 and 103B.255 respectively, as they may be amended from
time to time, and as approved by the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil
Resources in accordance with state law.



   (Q)   Easements. If a storm water pollution prevention plan involves
direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any
necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of water.



   (R) Fences, hedges and retaining walls.  No fence, hedge or retaining
wall may be constructed or located within the drainage and utility easement
of a stormwater drainage pond unless such improvement is approved, in
writing, by the city.  No fences or structures shall be constructed across
the waterway that will reduce or restrict the flow of water.  No such
approval shall be granted for an improvement defined herein within the
drainage and utility easement of a stormwater drainage pond to the extent it
is constructed within 5 feet of either side yard property line or within 20
feet of the ordinary high water mark of the storm drainage pond.  The
property owner seeking to construct the improvement regulated herein must
provide a certificate of compliance from the city.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 677,
passed 7-9-2018)



§ 151.09  LAWN FERTILIZER REGULATIONS.



   Fertilizer shall be applied in accordance with Chapter 100, Lawn
Fertilizer and Pesticide Application Control.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 151.10  COMPLETION OF WORK.



   Work will be considered complete when all exposed soil areas have
undergone final stabilization, as defined in § 151.04; is constructed to
finish grade, and is in conformance with all permit conditions to the
satisfaction of the city.  The applicant or its representative shall notify
the city when the land disturbing operations are ready for final
inspection.  Final approval shall not be given until all work, including
installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all
erosion control measures, have been completed and final stabilization has
occurred in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 151.11  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Right of entry.  The applicant shall promptly allow the city
and its authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials to:



      (1)   Enter upon the permitted site for the purposes of
obtaining information, examining records and conducting investigations,
inspections or surveys;



      (2)   Bring such equipment upon the permitted site as is
necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations;



      (3)   Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or
memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under the
terms and conditions of the permitted site;



      (4)   Inspect the storm water pollution control measures;



      (5)   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to
storm water pollution control measures; and



      (6)   Move or remove any temporary or permanent obstruction to
the safe and easy access to the site for the purposes herein described.  The
cost of providing such access shall be borne by the Applicant.



   (B)   Notification of failure of the stormwater pollution prevention
plan.



      (1)   Notification by the city.  The initial contact will be
to a party listed on the application and/or the stormwater pollution
prevention plan.  Forty-eight hours after notification by the city or 72
hours after the failure of the erosion control measures, whichever is less,
the city, at its discretion, may issue a stop work order, revoke any permit
issued by the city to the applicant for the site in question or any other of
the applicant’s sites within the city’s jurisdiction and withhold the
scheduling of inspections, and/or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   Erosion off-site.  If erosion breaches the perimeter of
the site, the applicant shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration
plan, obtain right-of-entry from the adjoining property owner, and implement
the cleanup and restoration plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining
property owner’s permission.  In no case, unless written approval is
received from the city, shall more than 7 calendar days go by without
corrective action being taken.



      (3)   Erosion into streets, wetlands or water bodies.  If
eroded soils (including tracked soils from construction activities) enter or
appear likely to enter streets, wetlands, or other water bodies, prevention
strategies, cleanup and repair must be immediate.  The applicant shall
provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect the traveling
public during cleanup operations.



   (C)   Failure to do corrective work.  When an applicant fails to
conform to any provision of this chapter within the time stipulated, the city
may take the following actions:



      (1)   Issue a stop work order, withhold the scheduling of
inspections, and/or withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy;



      (2)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant
for the site in question or any other of the applicant’s sites within the
city’s jurisdiction;



      (3)   Direct the correction of the deficiency by city forces
or by a separate contract.  The issuance of a permit constitutes a
right-of-entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction
site for the purpose of correcting deficiencies in erosion control;



      (4)   All costs incurred by the city in correcting storm water
pollution control deficiencies must be reimbursed by the applicant.  If
payment is not made within 30 days after costs are incurred by the city then
the city may bring an action in court to collect its costs, assess the cost
against the property to be collected with real estate taxes and/or draw on
the financial security.  As a condition of the permit, the owner shall waive
notice of any assessment hearing to be conducted by the city, concur that the
benefit to the property exceeds the amount of the proposed assessment, and
waive all rights by virtue of M.S. § 429.081 to challenge the amount or
validity of the assessment.



   (D)   Action against the financial security.  If appropriate
remedial action by the applicant has not been completed within 7 days after
notification by the city, the city may draw against the financial security. 
The city shall use funds from this security to finance any corrective or
remedial work undertaken by the city or a contractor under contract to the
city and to reimburse the city for all direct costs incurred in the process
of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time, consultant’s
time, and attorney’s fees if any of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   The applicant ceases land disturbing activities and/or
filling and abandons the work site prior to completion of the city approved
grading plan;



      (2)   The applicant fails to conform to any city approved
grading plan and/or storm water pollution prevention plan as approved by the
city, or related supplementary instructions;



      (3)   The techniques utilized under the storm water pollution
prevention plan fail within 1 year of installation;



      (4)   The applicant fails to reimburse the city for corrective
action taken under division (C) hereof; or



      (5)   Emergency action is required to be undertaken by the
city under division (D) hereof.



   (E)   Emergency action. If circumstances exist such that
noncompliance with this chapter poses an immediate danger to the public
health, safety and welfare, as determined by the city engineer, the city may
take emergency preventative action.  The city shall also take every
reasonable action possible to contact and direct the applicant to take any
necessary action.  Any cost to the city shall be the responsibility of the
applicant and may be recovered from the applicant’s financial security.



(Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 151.12  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The ordinance set forth in this chapter shall be effective July 1, 1995.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995)



§ 151.13  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of the erosion control or shoreland protection chapter adopted
by the City Council, the more restrictive standard prevails.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 151.98  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.



(Ord. 464, passed 6-26-1995; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section




Title and Application




   152.001   Title



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Platting authority



   152.004   Relation to other laws and regulations



   152.005   Policy



   152.006   Administration




Rules and Definitions




   152.020   Application of rules



   152.021   Definitions




General Provisions/Administration




   152.030   Compliance with Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, Airport
Zoning Regulation and official map



   152.031   Fees



   152.032   Acceptance and recordation conditions



   152.033   Conveyance by metes and bounds



   152.034   Building permits



   152.035   Variances/exceptions



   152.036   Common Interest Community (CIC) plats




Minor Subdivision




   152.040   Purpose



   152.041   Qualification



   152.042   Filing and review of application



   152.043   Information required for minor subdivision



   152.044   Approval or denial of minor subdivision



   152.045   Deeds



   152.046   Park dedication fee



   152.047   Recording; procedure and time frame




Lot Consolidation/Lot Line Adjustment




   152.050   Purpose



   152.051   Qualification



   152.052   Filing and review of application



   152.053   Information required for lot consolidation/ lot line
adjustment



   152.054   Recording




Concept Plan




   152.060   Purpose



   152.061   Filing and review of application



   152.062   Information required for concept plan




Preliminary Plat




   152.070   Purpose



   152.071   Filing and review of application



   152.072   Information required for preliminary plat



   152.073   Public improvements



   152.074   Approval or denial of preliminary plat




Final Plat




   152.080   Purpose



   152.081   Timing of final plat application



   152.082   Filing and review of final plat application



   152.083   Information required for final plat



   152.084   Approval or denial of final plat



   152.085   Recording



   152.086   Utilities



   152.087   Dedication



   152.088   Record plans (as-built plans)




Park Land Dedication Requirements




   152.090   Purpose



   152.091   Dedication requirements



   152.092   Trails/sidewalks



   152.093   Determining land to be donated



   152.094   Calculating density requirements




Enforcement




   152.101   Violations



   152.102   Application to city personnel



   152.103   Injunction



   152.999   Penalty



TITLE AND APPLICATION



§ 152.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the “Forest
Lake Subdivision Regulations,” and will be referred to as “this
chapter.”



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   The City Council, being aware of the responsibility which it has for
the adoption of ordinances, rules, and regulations designed for the
protection of public health, safety, and general welfare, deems it necessary
to provide regulations for platting and subdividing of property within the
city. Piecemeal planning of subdivisions, without correlation to the
Comprehensive Plan, can bring a disconnected patchwork of plats, poor traffic
circulation, and an undesirable atmosphere. All subdivisions platted within
the jurisdiction of the city after the adoption of this chapter shall, in all
respects, fully comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter to
assure new subdivisions will contribute toward an attractive, orderly,
stable, and wholesome community environment, and be designed with adequate
municipal services and efficient movement of traffic.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.003  PLATTING AUTHORITY.



   The City Council shall serve as the platting authority of the city in
accordance with M.S. § 462.358, as may be amended. No plat or replat shall
be filed or accepted for filing by the Office of the County Recorder or
Registrar of Titles unless approved by a majority of the members of the City
Council voting on such plat or replat. The Building Official shall not issue
building permits for any structure on a lot in any proposed subdivision that
has not been approved by the City Council and does not have improved road
frontage. The City Council shall not permit any public improvement to be
installed unless the final plat is approved. Grading and installation of
services shall not be permitted prior to a development agreement being
approved by the City Council and the applicant having filed all required
financial securities.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.004 RELATION TO OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.



   It shall not be intended by the provisions of this chapter to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with private restrictions
placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreements which are
equal to or more restrictive, or with restrictive covenants running with the
land to which the city is a party except that the most restrictive shall
apply. The city shall not be obligated to enforce private restrictions. In
their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.005  POLICY.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider
the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of a plat to be
subject to the control of the city pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan for the
orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the city.



   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can
be used safely for building purposes without danger to health from fire,
flood, or other hazard. Land shall not be subdivided unless proper provisions
have been made for drainage, stormwater management, wetland protection,
potable water, domestic waste water, streets, and capital improvements such
as parks, recreation facilities, transportation facilities, stormwater
improvements, and any other necessary improvements.



   (C)   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to
and be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan and Capital Improvement
Plan of the city.



   (D)   The provisions of this chapter are in addition to and not in
replacement of provisions of all building and zoning regulations. Any
provision of the building and zoning regulations shall remain in full force
and effect except as may be contradictory to the provisions hereof where any
provision conflicts with another provision, the more restrictive provision
shall be applied.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.006  ADMINISTRATION.



   This chapter shall be administered by the Community Development
Director who is appointed by the City Council.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



RULES AND DEFINITIONS



§ 152.020  APPLICATION OF RULES.



   The language contained in this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction as applicable:



   (A)   The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.



   (B)   The present includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present tense.



   (C)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine
gender includes the masculine.



   (D)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in this
chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition.



   (E)   In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.



   (F)   The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not
merely discretionary.



   (G)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.021  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, wherever a term, phrase, word and
their derivatives appear in this chapter and are defined in §§ 153.010 and
153.296 or in this section such term, phrase, word and their derivatives
shall have the meaning given them solely and for the purposes of
implementation of this chapter:



   AIRPORT ZONING REGULATION. The Forest Lake Airport Zoning Regulation,
as may be amended, regulating and restricting the height of structures and
objects of natural growth and controlling the use of property in the vicinity
of the Forest Lake Airport.



   AREA MAP. See “key map.”



   BLOCK. An area of land within a plat, containing lots, that is entirely
bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets, railroad right-of-way,
the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or the shoreline of
the above with a river, stream or lake.



   BOULEVARD. That portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line or edge of pavement and the property line.



   BOUNDARY LINES. Lines indicating the bounds or limits of any tract or
parcel of land.



   BOXES. All mailboxes, newspaper boxes, and advertising boxes wherein
either mail is distributed, newspapers and magazines are distributed, or
advertising is placed for the use of residents of the city.



   BUILD OUT PLAN. See “ghost plat.”



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN. An itemized program setting forth the
schedule and details of specific contemplated public improvements by fiscal
year, together with their estimated cost, the justification for each
improvement, the impact that the improvements will have on the current
operating expense of the government, and other information on capital
improvements as may be pertinent.



   CITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE. A committee that may consist of Council
members or non-council members or both such as the Planning Commission,
Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission and Airport Commission.



   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the subdivision, zoning and other
related codes.



   CONCEPT PLAN. Written and graphic documents submitted by the applicant
that indicate in a conceptual or minimally detailed form the proposed land
uses, design, and overall impact on the subject tract and surrounding lands.



   CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL. Conditions which are established by city staff
and/or the City Council and approved by the City Council which must be met by
a developer to obtain approval of a development proposal.



   CONSULTANTS. Professionals hired by the city, such as the City Attorney
and the City Engineer.



   CONTOUR MAP. A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by
lines connecting points of equal elevations. Contour interval is the vertical
height between contour lines.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only 1 outlet and having a safe and
convenient turn around.



   DEPOSIT. The placing of funds in an account maintained by the city
specifically for the purpose of ensuring fulfillment of certain obligations
required by this chapter.



   DEVELOPABLE LAND. Contiguous land area occurring within the property
lines of parcel(s) or lot excluding wetlands, water courses, ponds, public
waters below the ordinary high water mark, and easements for pipelines and
utility transmission lines.



   DEVELOPER. A person who submits an application for the purpose of land
subdivision as defined herein.



   DEVELOPMENT. The acts of land preparation, building structures and
installing site improvements.



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A written agreement between the city and a
developer, drafted by the City Attorney.



   DEVELOPMENT DENSITY. The number of individual dwelling units that can
be located on a parcel of land as established through the Zoning Code and
Comprehensive Plan.



   DRAINAGE COURSE. A water course or indentation for the transmission of
surface water.



   ENGINEERING STANDARDS. The specifications to landowners or subdividers
for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among
other things the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of items as
rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, trails, and utilities, as approved by the
City Council.



   FINANCIAL GUARANTEE. A financial security posted with the city upon the
approval of a final plat, guaranteeing compliance with the approved final
plat, construction plans, and conditions of approval set forth by the City
Council.



   GHOST PLAT. A subdivision or resubdivision concept plan illustrating
possible future lot layout, street networks, and utility systems for
oversized lots, outlots or undeveloped land adjoining a preliminary plat.



   GRADE, PERCENTAGE OF. The rise or fall of a street in feet and tenths
of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance measured at the center
line of the street, or similar ratio of land elevations measured against an
established baseline.



   HIGH WATER LEVEL. The water level in a watercourse which could be
predicted to occur as a result of the 100-year, 24-hour rainfall event using
U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service methodology, as
approved by the City Council. In addition, developers shall model the
500-year, 24-hour rainfall event, if determined necessary by the City
Engineer.



   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any project designed and constructed by or on
behalf of the city and thereafter owned and maintained by the city.



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (ISTS). Septic tank, drainfield, or
other sewage treatment system approved for private, individual use by
Washington County.



   KEY MAP (AREA MAP). A map drawn to a comparatively small scale which
shows the area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it, to a
given distance.



   LAND ALTERATION. Any area in which movement of earth, alteration in
topography, soil compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil
chemistry, or any other change in the natural character of the land occurs as
a result of site preparation, grading, building construction, or any other
construction activity.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTED. An interior lot having frontage on 2 streets.



   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of real property which is
not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described
by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a fractional
portion of a section, lot, or area by described lines or portions thereof.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing no more than 2 new lots
fronting on an existing street which does not require any new street or the
creation of any public improvements, and does not adversely affect the
remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and is not in conflict with
any provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, Airport Zoning
Regulation, official map or this chapter. This includes one-in-forty lot
splits which do not meet the criteria in M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 4, as may be
amended from time to time.



   NATURAL WATER WAY. A natural passageway in the surface of the earth
allowing water to flow from one point to another.



   NORMAL WATER LEVEL. A level of water in a watercourse when the
watercourse is not in the process of receiving or discharging storm water
runoff. The NORMAL WATER LEVEL will typically be the outlet elevation of a
pond, lake, or other standing water body.



   OUTLOT. A parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an outlot, and
designated alphanumerically, (for example - Outlot A). OUTLOTS are used to
designate 1 of the following: land that is part of the subdivision but is to
be final platted into lots and blocks at a later date; or land that is to be
used for a specific purpose as designated in a development agreement or other
agreement between the city and the developer.



   PARKS. Public land and open spaces in the city dedicated or reserved
for recreational purposes.



   PEDESTRIAN AND/OR BICYCLE TRAIL. An easement or land dedication given
to the city for the purpose of providing walking and/or bicycling areas to
city residents. The trails shall provide recreational opportunities and
access to parks, natural areas, and public land in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.



   PLANNER or CITY PLANNER. See “Community Development Director.”



   PLAT. The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 505, as may be amended from time to time.



   PLAT, COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY (CIC). A common interest community plat
pursuant to M.S. § 515B.2-101, as may be amended. CIC means contiguous or
noncontiguous real estate within Minnesota that is subject to an instrument
which obligates persons owning a separately described parcel of the real
estate, or occupying a part of the real estate pursuant to a proprietary
lease, by reason of their ownership or occupancy, to pay for real estate
taxes levied against; insurance premiums payable with respect to; maintenance
of; or construction, maintenance, repair or replacement of improvements
located on one or more parcels or parts of the real estate other than the
parcel or part that the person owns or occupies. Real estate subject to a
master association, regardless of when the master association was formed,
shall not collectively constitute a separate common interest community unless
so stated in the master declaration recorded against the real estate.



   PLAT, FINAL. The final map or drawings and accompanying material
described in §§ 152.80 et seq. on which the developer's plan or subdivision
is presented to the City Council for approval and which, if approved, will be
submitted to the Office of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles for
filing.



   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The preliminary map or drawings and accompanying
material described in §§ 152.70 et seq. indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision to be submitted to the city for its consideration for
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, the Airport Zoning
Regulation, the official map, and this chapter along with the required
supporting data.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEY. A survey map of registered land designed to
simplify a complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same
into a tract or tracts of a REGISTERED LAND SURVEY.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor licensed and registered in
the state.



   RE-SUBDIVISION. A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if
the change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved for public
use, or any lot line or if it affects any map, or plan legally recorded prior
to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.



   STREET, PRIVATE. A local street approved by the city but not owned or
maintained by the city.



   UNIT LOT. A lot created from the subdivision of a 2-family dwelling, a
multi-family dwelling or an attached or detached townhouse having different
minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lot within the
zoning district.



   ZONING CODE. The Forest Lake Zoning Code (Chapter 153), as may be
amended, controlling the use of land within the city.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



GENERAL PROVISIONS/ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.030  COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, ZONING CODE, AIRPORT ZONING
REGULATION AND OFFICIAL MAP.



   No subdivision of land shall conflict with the provisions of the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, Engineering
Standards, Surface Water Management Regulation, official map, or policies
adopted by the City Council, as may be amended.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.031  FEES.



   The fees for all applications and for all permits shall be established
by the City Council by ordinance. No application shall be considered complete
without payment of established fees. The acceptance of all applications,
issuance of permits, or recording of any plat shall not occur until the
appropriate fees have been paid.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.032  ACCEPTANCE AND RECORDATION CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Approvals necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats.
Before any plat or subdivision shall be recorded or be of any validity, it
shall be referred to the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council
as having fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Conditions for recording No plat or subdivision shall be
entitled to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder or have any
validity until the plat thereof has been prepared, approved, and acknowledged
in the manner prescribed by this chapter.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.033  CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.



   Except in unique situations as may be allowed by the City Council, no
division of 1 or more parcels of conveyed land which is described by metes
and bounds shall be made or recorded if the parcels described in the
conveyance are 5 acres or less in area and 300 feet or less in width, unless
the parcel was a separate parcel of record at the effective date hereof.
Building permits will be withheld for buildings or tracts which have been
subdivided and conveyed by this method. The city may refuse to take over
tracts as streets or roads or to improve, repair, or maintain any such
tracts. A certificate of survey shall be required for conveyances which do
not require platting.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.034  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued by the city for any construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition, or moving of any building or
structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of this chapter
and/or the Zoning Code have been fully met or exceptions from this
requirement have been formally established by a development agreement.



   (A)   Final plat conditions of approval. Unless otherwise stipulated
by the City Council in the development agreement, building permits shall not
be issued for new subdivisions until such time as all of the final plat
conditions of approval items have been completed by the developer.



   (B)   Model homes. Building permits for model homes may be granted
as provided in the development agreement.



Cross-reference:



   Minor subdivision, see § 152.047(C)



   Lot consolidation-lot line adjustment, see § 152.054(C)



   Final plat, see § 152.085(B)(3)



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.035  VARIANCES/EXCEPTIONS.



   The City Council may approve variances or exceptions from the minimum
standards of this chapter (not procedural provisions) when, in its opinion,
exceptional undue hardship may result from strict compliance and the variance
will not interfere with the purpose and intent of this chapter or when the
variance is granted pursuant to an approved Planned Unit Development pursuant
to § 153.341.



   (A)   Variance or exception criteria. In approving any variance or
exception, the City Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems
necessary or desirable to the public interest. In granting its approval, the
City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land
and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will
reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. Hardship
relating to economic difficulties shall not be considered for the purpose of
granting a variance. A variance shall only be approved when the City Council
finds that each and every one of the following apply:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or highly unique
conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use
of land;



      (2)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to other property in the
vicinity in which the development site is situated;



      (3)   The granting of the variance will not increase the flood
hazard or flood damage potential;



      (4)   The variance results from physical hardship such as
topography, or inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems;



      (5)   The hardship is not a result of an action or actions by
the owner, applicant, or any agent thereof; and



      (6)   The granting of the variance will not allow a use not
otherwise permitted in the Zoning Code.



   (B)   Procedure. The procedures for processing variance applications
shall comply with § 153.036, as may be amended.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.036  COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY (CIC) PLATS.



   All common interest community plats shall provide a master plan for the
project to include building/unit placement for all units within the project,
including future phases. All units shall be required to be numbered
consecutively throughout the development starting with "Unit 1." The
numbering system shall then continue throughout the development, utilizing
the numbering system identified by the master plan, even if certain buildings
are constructed out of order.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



MINOR SUBDIVISION



§ 152.040  PURPOSE.



   The minor subdivision process allows for the division of certain
property described by metes and bounds and is an abbreviated review process
in which there are fewer requirements than a normal subdivision. This process
is limited to specific situations as set forth in this section.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.041  QUALIFICATION.



   The following may be considered a minor subdivision provided that the
parcel of land has not been part of a minor subdivision within the last 5
years:  Division of land into not more than 2 new lots fronting on an
existing public street which does not:



   (A)   Require any new street;



   (B)   Require the creation of any public improvements;



   (C)   Adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property; and



   (D)   Conflict with any provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, official map, or any other city regulations,
including this chapter.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.042  FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Procedure.



      (1)   Application. Before any contract is made for the sale of
any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure on
such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner or
authorized agent, shall file an application and secure approval of a minor
subdivision.



      (2)   Placement on the Planning Commission agenda. The city
must receive an application form and all of the required information. Upon
receipt, the matter will be placed on the next Planning Commission meeting
agenda which is at least 30 days after the date the application was received.
The Community Development Director or appointee shall submit copies of the
application and required information to other staff, committees, consultants,
or agencies as appropriate who may make written comments to the Planning
Commission.



      (3)   Incomplete application. The city shall have the
authority to request additional information. An application may not be heard
by the Planning Commission if incomplete. The Community Development Director
or appointee will notify applicant of missing information within 15 days of
receiving the application. Failure to provide the necessary supportive
information may be grounds for denial of the request.



      (4)   Transportation and Highway Department review. A minor
subdivision abutting any existing or proposed trunk highway, county road or
highway or county state-aid highway shall be subject to review by the
Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or County Highway Department.
Written notice and a copy of the proposed minor subdivision shall be filed
with the Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or County Highway
Department for review and comment. Final action on a minor subdivision shall
not be taken until the required comments and recommendations have been
received or until the minimum 30 day review period has elapsed.



      (5)   DNR.  When the land in the minor subdivision is located
within a shoreland district or floodplain district, the Department of Natural
Resources shall be notified of the minor subdivision as required by law. 
Any requirements of the Department of Natural Resources shall be met prior to
the issuance of a building permit.



      (6)   Watershed.  When the land in the minor subdivision is
located within a watershed district, the watershed district shall be
notified.  Any requirements of the watershed district shall be met prior to
the issuance of a building permit.



      (7)   Planning Commission meeting. The minor subdivision
application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review and comment on the
subdivision's acceptability in relation to the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, official map, engineering standards, Surface
Water Management Plan, and this chapter. A recommendation may be made at that
time or the matter may be tabled to allow further time for review and
consideration.



      (8)   City Council meeting. The Planning Commission's
recommendation shall be conveyed to the City Council. The City Council shall
review and comment on the subdivision's acceptability in relation to the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, official map,
engineering standards, Surface Water Management Plan, and this chapter.
Action may be taken at that time or the matter may be tabled to allow further
time for review and consideration.



   (B)   Attendance at meetings mandatory. The applicant, or a
representative, is required to attend all meetings with advisory boards and
the City Council.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.043  INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   Number of copies required at the time of application. The
developer shall submit 5 large scale copies and 2 reduced scale (11" x 17")
copies of the required information to the Community Development Department.
Additional copies may be required as determined by staff.



   (B)   Required information.



      (1)   The following information shall be submitted along with
a city land use application for minor subdivision:  A current certificate of
survey prepared by a registered land surveyor which includes:



         (a)   Scale not more than 1 inch equals 100 feet;



         (b)   North point indication;



         (c)   Original and proposed lot boundaries;



         (d)   Existing and resulting parcel legal descriptions;



         (e)   The location of existing structures on the site;



         (f)   Existing and proposed driveway locations;



         (g)   Existing easement locations;



         (h)   Environmental constraints of the site;



         (i)   Existing parks, streets and utility easements;



         (j)   Delineated wetlands and waterbodies, drainage
flows and drainage improvements; and



         (k)   Individual sewer treatment systems and/or well
locations.



      (2)   A soil test demonstrating the suitability for an on-site
septic system if public sewer is not immediately available.



      (3)   A soil test report showing structural bearing capacity
at the soils.



      (4)   A title search showing the ownership of the property and
any existing deed restrictions.



      (5)   Additional information as outlined in § 152.72 if
deemed necessary and required by the city.



      (6)   Statement of proposed use of the property.



   (B)   Staking. The existing and proposed lot corners shall be staked
at the site in a manner that they are visible from the road for review by the
city and shall be maintained throughout the application process.



   (C)   City standards. The minor subdivision shall conform to all
city standards. The city may, at its sole discretion, waive some of the
requirements of the city standards.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.044  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF MINOR SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   City Council action. The City Council shall act on the minor
subdivision by motion within 120 days from the date of application, unless
the applicant agrees to an extension. The motion shall include findings of
fact supporting the approval or denial, and shall be entered into the written
record of the proceedings of the City Council.



   (B)   Denial of minor subdivision. The City Council may deny the
subdivision if it makes any of the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed subdivision is in conflict with adopted
applicable general or specific provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, engineering standards, Surface Water
Management Plan, official map, or this chapter;



      (2)   The physical characteristics of the site, including but
not limited to topography, vegetation, percolation rate, soil conditions,
susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water
storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for
the type of development, design, or use contemplated;



      (3)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed
improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage;



      (4)   The design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;



      (5)   The design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements will conflict with easements of record or with easements
established by judgment of a court;



      (6)   The design of the subdivision does not conform to
minimum city standards; and



      (7)   The applicant has failed to provide all documents
required by the city in order to adequately evaluate the application.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.045  DEEDS.



   Prior to certification by the city of the approval of the minor
subdivision, the applicant shall supply the deed(s) granting to the city any
easements and/or right-of-way required by the city.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.046  PARK DEDICATION FEE.



   The park dedication fee as required in § 152.091 shall be paid prior
to recording the appropriate documents.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.047  RECORDING; PROCEDURE AND TIME FRAME.



   (A)   Deadline. The applicant shall record the appropriate documents
in the Office of the County Recorder within 120 days after the date of
approval. If not recorded within the 120-day period, the approval shall be
considered void.



   (B)   Copy to city. The applicant shall, immediately upon receipt of
the recorded document from the County Recorder, furnish the City Clerk with a
copy of the document(s) showing evidence of the recording.



   (C)   Building permit. No building permits shall be issued for
construction of any structure on any lot in the minor subdivision until the
city has received evidence of the document(s) being recorded by the County
Recorder and all conditions of approval have been met.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



LOT CONSOLIDATION/LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT



§ 152.050  PURPOSE.



   The lot consolidation/lot line adjustment process is an administrative
review process in which there are limited requirements to combine multiple
lots into 1 parcel or to adjust a common lot line affecting existing parcels.
Parcels resulting from these procedures must be consistent with all Zoning
Code requirements and other applicable regulations. Lot consolidation is
required prior to a building permit being issued. In areas which are not well
defined, or where lots are irregular in shape and/or are included in more
than 1 plat, the city may require that lot consolidation occur through the
major subdivision platting requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.051  QUALIFICATION.



   (A)   Lot consolidation. Two or more parcels, whether recorded
platted lots or not, must be consolidated into 1 parcel.



   (B)   Lot line adjustment. A lot line may be adjusted by relocating
a common boundary.



   (C)   Rezoning. If the adjustment or combination would cause 1 of
the parcels to have 2 different zoning classifications, the applicant must
rezone the property to achieve a consistent zoning classification for the
newly created parcel.



   (D)   Easements. Any easements that become unnecessary as a result
of the combination of parcels must be vacated. In addition, new easements
must be established where appropriate.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.052  FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof,
and before any permit for the erection of a structure on such proposed
property shall be granted, the owner or authorized agent, shall file an
application and secure approval of a lot consolidation or lot line adjustment.



   (B)   The Community Development Director or appointee shall review
the application and required information to determine conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, official map, and
this chapter. The Community Development Director shall give final approval.
In reviewing the application, the Community Development Director may request
comments from its consultants and may refer the matter to the Planning
Commission, if necessary. Unless a request for additional review time is
requested by the Community Development Director, action on the application
shall be made within 60 days.



   (C)   The City Council shall serve as the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals if the application for lot combination or lot line adjustment is
denied by the Community Development Director.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.053  INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR LOT CONSOLIDATION/LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Number of copies required at the time of application. The
developer shall submit 3 large scale copies, and 2 reduced scale (11" x 17")
copies of the required information to the Community Development Director.



   (B)   Required information.  The following information shall be
submitted along with the application for lot consolidation or lot line
adjustment:



      (1)   A certificate of survey prepared by a registered land
surveyor for all parcels involved, which includes:



         (a)   Scale not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet;



         (b)   North point indication;



         (c)   Original and proposed lot boundaries;



         (d)   Existing and resulting parcel legal descriptions;



         (e)   The location of existing structures on the sites;



         (f)   Proposed driveway locations;



         (g)   Existing and proposed easement locations;



         (h)   Environmental constraints of the site; and



         (i)   Existing and proposed utilities.



      (2)   A title search showing ownership of the property and any
existing deed restrictions.



      (3)   Additional information as outlined in § 152.072 if
deemed necessary and required by the city.



      (4)   For good cause shown certain requirements may be waived
by the Community Development Director as not being pertinent to the lot
consolidation/lot line adjustment being sought.



   (C)   Staking. The city may require that the existing and proposed
lot corners be staked at the site in such a manner that they are visible from
the road for review by the city and maintained throughout the entire review
process.



   (D)   Lot consolidation agreement. A lot consolidation agreement or
lot combination agreement prepared by the City Attorney shall be executed by
all affected parties and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.054  RECORDING.



   (A)   Deadline. The applicant shall record the appropriate documents
in the Office of the Washington County Recorder within 120 days after the
date of approval. If not recorded within the 120-day period, the approval
shall be considered void.



   (B)   Copy to city. The applicant shall, immediately upon receipt of
the recorded document from the County Recorder, furnish the City Clerk with a
copy of the document(s) showing evidence of the recording and all conditions
of approval have been met.



   (C)   Building permit. No building permits shall be issued for
construction of any structure on any affected lots until the city has
received evidence of the document(s) being recorded by the County Recorder.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



CONCEPT PLAN



§ 152.060  PURPOSE.



   The preparation and submittal of a concept plan shall be required. The
purpose of the concept plan is to obtain informal review comments prior to
filing a formal preliminary plat application. On the basis of the concept
plan, the city shall informally advise the developer as promptly as possible
of the extent to which the proposed subdivision generally conforms to city
standards. Concept plan review does not convey any legal development rights
to the applicant.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 152.061  FILING AND REVIEW OF CONCEPT PLAN APPLICATION.



   (A)   Procedure.



      (1)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to any formal submission
and review of a concept plan, the developer shall request and attend a staff
meeting for staff level review.



      (2)   Pre-development agreement. The city requires that
developers enter into an agreement with the city in which the developer
agrees to reimburse the city for its costs incurred in considering and
reviewing the proposed development. This includes, but is not limited to,
administrative fees, legal fees, engineering fees, planning fees, and other
consultants' fees. The agreement also requires that the developer pre-pay a
portion of these fees. The amount required shall be as set forth in the
agreement.



      (3)   Application and placement on agenda. The city must
receive a concept plan application form and the required accompanying
information. Upon receipt, the matter will be placed on the next Planning
Commission meeting agenda which is at least 30 days after the date the
application is received. Copies of the concept plan and required accompanying
information shall be conveyed to city staff, committees, consultants, or
agencies, as appropriate, who may make written comments. If substantial
changes are required, a revised concept plan shall be submitted to city staff
prior to submitting one to the Planning Commission.



      (4)   Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission meeting. The
developer shall meet with the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission to review
the concept plan and receive comments. The Parks, Trails, and Lakes
Commission shall make a preliminary determination as to the park needs and/or
location. This preliminary determination shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for review and consideration.



      (5)   Planning Commission meeting. The concept plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. The
Planning Commission shall review and comment on the project’s acceptability
in relation to the comprehensive plan, utility availability, and development
regulations. A recommendation may be made at that time or the matter may be
tabled to allow further time for review and consideration.



      (6)   City Council meeting. The Planning Commission’s
recommendation shall be conveyed to the City Council. The City Council shall
review and comment on the project’s acceptability in relation to the
comprehensive plan, utility availability, and development regulations. Action
may be taken at that time or the matter may be tabled to allow further time
for review and consideration. Comments on the concept plan shall not be
considered binding in regard to subsequent plat review. Concept plan review
does not convey any legal development rights to the applicant.



   (B)   Attendance at meetings mandatory. The applicant, or a
representative, is required to attend all meetings with advisory boards and
the City Council. Failure of the applicant, or a representative, to attend a
meeting may result in the denial of the application.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 152.062  INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR CONCEPT PLAN.



   (A)   Number of copies required at the time of application.  The
developer shall submit 5 large scale copies and 2 reduced scale (11" x 17")
copies of the concept plan and required accompanying information to the
Community Development Director at least 30 days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting.



   (B)   Required accompanying information.  The required accompanying
information shall consist of detailed written materials, plans, and
specifications to include the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of developer and owner, if different.



      (2)   Date of plan preparation.



      (3)   Scale of plan.



      (4)   North arrow indication.



      (5)   Property location map illustrating the site location
relative to adjoining properties and streets.



      (6)   Aerial photo with concept plan overlay detailing
density, lot size, lot layouts, streets, possible park areas, preliminary
wetland delineation, and surface waters, existing right-of-way, buildings,
developments and other significant features.



      (7)   Scaled drawing illustrating property boundaries.



      (8)   Street and trail systems that interconnect neighborhoods
and are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.



      (9)   Approximate total area of wetlands and uplands on site.



      (10)   Additional information as required by the Community
Development Director.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



PRELIMINARY PLAT



§ 152.070  PURPOSE.



   (A)   An application for a preliminary plat shall be filed with the
city after the completion of the concept plan process. The preliminary plat
is a plan of how property will be subdivided and developed. The preliminary
plat stage is when all information pertinent to the proposed development is
furnished by the developer for review by city staff, consultants, city
advisory committees, the City Council, any other applicable agencies, and the
public. The information provides a basis for approval or denial of the
application. The information submitted in the application shall address both
existing conditions and changes that will occur during and after development.



   (B)   Additional information or modifications may be required by
consultants, city staff, city advisory committees, or the City Council.
Additional information may also be requested during the review process. In
certain cases, some information required by these standards may not be
appropriate or may need to be modified in order to provide an adequate basis
for making a decision.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 152.071  FILING AND REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting a preliminary
plat application, the property owner/applicant shall meet with city staff to
discuss the preliminary plat application process. Through this meeting, the
city staff may summarize the city's concept plan review comments and offer
suggestions pertaining to additional information or design changes that may
assist in expediting the preliminary plat review.



   (B)   Neighborhood meeting. On large subdivisions or developments
with uses significantly different from adjacent properties, the city
recommends the property owner/ applicant hold a neighborhood meeting for
informal comment and feedback prior to submitting a preliminary plat
application. The developer is responsible for organizing and conducting the
meeting. The developer shall give the city notice of the time, place, and
location of the meeting.



   (C)   Environmental review. The developer shall determine if the
proposed plat meets or exceeds the mandatory threshold for an Environmental
Assessment Worksheet (EAW) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) pursuant
to Minnesota Rules, and if necessary, the developer shall immediately
complete those requirements. No further action will be taken by the city
until the environmental review process is completed.



   (D)   DNR review. Preliminary plats located within a Shoreland
District or Floodplain District shall be subject to review by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



   (E)   Transportation and Highway Department review. A preliminary
plat abutting any existing or proposed trunk highway, county road or highway
or county state-aid highway rights-of-way shall be subject to review of the
Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or the County Highway Department.
Written notice and a copy of the proposed preliminary plat shall be filed
with the Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or the County Highway
Department for review and comment.



   (F)   Watershed review. Preliminary plats located within a Watershed
District shall be subject to review and comment of the Watershed District.



   (G)   Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission meeting. The developer
shall attend a Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission meeting to review the
draft preliminary plat and available comments from city staff.  The Parks,
Trails, and Lakes Commission shall make an determination as to the park needs
and/or location. This determination shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission and City Council for review and consideration.



   (H)   Advisory committees. The draft preliminary plat may also be
reviewed by additional city advisory committees. The city advisory
committees' recommendations will be forwarded to the Planning Commission and
City Council for their consideration at a public hearing and public meetings.



   (I)   Application and placement on the Planning Commission agenda.



      (1)   The city must receive a preliminary plat application
form, 5 copies of the preliminary plat along with 2 copies of the required
accompanying information.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the matter will be placed on the next
Planning Commission meeting agenda which is at least 30 days after the date
the application was received. The Community Development Department shall
submit copies of the preliminary plat and required accompanying information
to other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies, as appropriate, who may
make written comments to the Planning Commission. If substantial changes are
required to the preliminary plat, it may be advisable to submit a revised
preliminary plat to city staff prior to submitting one to the Planning
Commission.



   (J)   Incomplete application. The city shall have the authority to
request additional information. An application will not be heard by the
Planning Commission if incomplete. The city staff will notify applicant of
missing information within 15 days of application submittal. If the requested
information is not received within 60 days of notification, the application
will be considered null and void and will be returned.



   (K)   Planning Commission meeting. The preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. The
Planning Commission shall review and comment on the project's acceptability
in relation to the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, Airport Zoning
Regulation, official map, and this chapter. A recommendation may be made at
that time or the matter may be tabled to allow further time for review and
consideration.



      (1)   Report. The Community Development Department shall
prepare a report of the findings and recommendations for the Planning
Commission. The report may include specific conditions of approval or
findings related to denial of the plat.



      (2)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed preliminary plat. Notice of the public hearing
shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the City Council
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The city shall mail written
notification of the public hearing on the proposed preliminary plat to
property owners located within 350 feet of the subject site at least 10 days
prior to the hearing. The failure to give mailed notice to individual
property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply has been made.



      (3)   Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall take
public testimony at the public hearing and evaluate the requested preliminary
plat against the premature subdivision criteria of § 152.074(B), applicable
city standards, the Zoning Code, the Comprehensive Plan and other city
requirements. The Planning Commission shall make findings and offer a
recommendation for either preliminary plat approval, modification or denial.
The Planning Commission may offer a recommendation of approval with
conditions necessary to satisfy city regulations.



   (L)   City Council meeting. The Planning Commission's recommendation
shall be conveyed to the City Council. The City Council shall review and
comment on the project's acceptability in relation to the Comprehensive Plan,
Zoning Code, Airport Zoning Regulation, official map, and this chapter.
Action may be taken at that time or the matter may be tabled to allow further
time for review and consideration.



      (1)   Council action. The City Council shall take action on
the application within 120 days following delivery of a complete application
in accordance with the regulations of this chapter, unless an extension is
agreed to in writing by the applicant. The City Council may act on the
preliminary plat if it does not receive a recommendation from the Planning
Commission within 60 days of receipt of a complete application. In approving
the preliminary plat, the City Council may impose conditions it considers
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.



      (2)   City Council findings. The City Council shall take
action on the application which shall include findings of fact, and shall be
entered in the proceedings of the City Council and transmitted to the
applicant in writing.



   (M)   Generally.  Upon recommendation of the city staff and
submittal of an executed interim development agreement, including all
required subdivision fees and financial securities, the city may, at its
discretion, authorize site grading as a condition of pre-plat approval and
allowable activity prior to final plat approval.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 152.072  INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Number of copies required at the time of application.  The
developer shall submit 5 large scale copies and 1 reduced scale (11" x 17")
copy of the preliminary plat and required accompanying information to the
city.



   (B)   Contents of the preliminary plat and required accompanying
information. The developer shall submit a preliminary plat and required
accompanying information which shall include, but not be limited to, all of
the information outlined below:



      (1)   Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall include the
following:



         (a)   A north arrow and scale not greater than 1 inch
equals 100 feet shall be shown on all maps/drawings;



         (b)   The proposed name of the plat, which name shall
not duplicate or be substantially similar to a plat previously recorded in
the county;



         (c)   Date of application, name, address, phone number,
and applicable license or registration number of the owner, developer, agent,
applicant, engineer, surveyor, planner, attorney, or other principal involved
in the development of the plat;



         (d)   Proof of ownership or legal interest in the
property in order to make application;



         (e)   Existing comprehensive plan land use and zoning
designation within and abutting the proposed plat;



         (f)   Any zoning changes needed, or reference to any
zoning or similar land use actions that are pertinent to the proposed
development;



         (g)   Total acreage of the land to be subdivided and
total upland area (land above the ordinary high water mark of existing
wetlands, lakes and rivers);



         (h)   Boundary line survey and legal description;



         (i)   Existing covenants, liens, or encumbrances;



         (j)   Proposed lot lines, dimensions, the gross acreage,
and the acreage net of any wetlands, floodplains, surface waters, and other
encumbered areas of all lots. When lots are located on a curve in a road or
cul-de-sac, the lot width at the building setback line shall be shown. Lot
areas shall consist of buildable land as defined by the Zoning Code and lots
which contain water bodies, power line or pipeline easements shall show the
lot area outside of the water body/easement;



         (k)   Proposed lot and block numbers;



         (l)   Building pad and minimum building setbacks shown
on each lot indicating dimensions of the setbacks;



         (m)   Layout of streets, showing right-of-way widths,
centerline street grades and approximate radii of all curbs, proposed
contours within the entire plat, and proposed street names for consideration
and acceptance by the city. Access, right-of-way widths, driveways, and
street classifications shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;



         (n)   Parks, trails, sidewalks or other areas intended
for public use or common ownership;



         (o)   Minimum lot areas, lot widths, and setback
dimensions shall be shown and the minimum lot areas, lot widths, and setback
areas shall conform with the proposed zoning for the site, unless the
subdivision is a PUD;



         (p)   Topography map showing topographic contours at
2-foot intervals;



         (q)   All delineated wetlands, flood plain areas, the
ordinary high water level (OWHL) of DNR protected waters, and any
encroachments;



         (r)   Wetland replacement plan shall be provided (if
applicable);



         (s)   Tree inventory and preservation plan;



         (t)   Utility easements, drainage easements, wetland
easements, wetland buffers, and shoreland setback requirements, if applicable;



         (u)   Preliminary landscape plans; and



         (v)   Any additional information requested by the
Community Development Department.



      (2)   Certificate of survey. A certificate of survey prepared
by a licensed land surveyor must be submitted which identifies the following:



         (a)   Scale not more than one inch equals 100 feet;



         (b)   North point indication;



         (c)   Existing parcel boundaries to be platted with
dimensions and area;



         (d)   Existing legal description;



         (e)   Easements of record;



         (f)   Delineated wetland boundary, also including the
Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL) of any lakes, rivers, or Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) waters;



         (g)   All encroachments;



         (h)   Existing buildings, structures, and improvements
within the subject property and those 100 feet outside the boundaries of the
subject property; and



         (i)   Location, widths, and names of all existing public
streets, rights-of-way or railroad rights-of-way showing type, width, and
condition of the improvements, if any, which pass through and/or are within
100 feet.



      (3)   Preliminary grading, drainage (storm water) and erosion
control plan. The developer shall submit a preliminary grading, drainage and
erosion control plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as
a base for the site in question, prepared and signed by a licensed engineer.
The grading plan shall be designed to avoid premature disruption of land and
long-term storage of excess materials. The grading plan shall depict the
following information:



         (a)   A north arrow and scale not greater than one inch
equals 100 feet shall be shown on all maps/drawings;



         (b)   Location of natural features including, but not
limited to, tree lines, delineated wetlands, water courses, ponds, lakes,
streams, floodplain, drainage channels, ordinary high water level (OHWL) and
100-year storm elevations, bluffs, steep slopes, and the like. If wetlands
are proposed to be impacted, a mitigation plan shall also be submitted;



         (c)   Existing contours at 2-foot intervals shown as
dashed lines for the subject property and extending 100 feet beyond the
outside boundary of the proposed plat;



         (d)   Proposed grade elevations at 2-foot intervals
shown as solid lines;



         (e)   Proposed plan for surface water management,
ponding, drainage and flood control, including the normal water level and
high water level of all ponds and watercourses;



         (f)   Provision for groundwater management including
sub-surface drains, disposals, ponding, and flood controls;



         (g)   Location of all existing storm sewer facilities
including pipes, manholes, catch basins, ponds, swales, and drainage channels
within 100 feet of the subject property. Existing pipe sizes, grades, rim and
invert elevations, and normal and high water elevations must be included;



         (h)   If the subject property is within or adjacent to a
100-year floodplain, flood elevation and locations must be shown;



         (i)   Spot elevations at drainage break points and
directional arrows indicating site, swale, and drainage on lots and streets;



         (j)   Lot and block numbers, building style, building
pad location and elevations at the lowest floor and garage slab for each lot;



         (k)   Locations, sizes, grades, rim and invert
elevations of all proposed storm water facilities, including ponds, proposed
to serve the subject property;



         (1)   Phasing of grading;



         (m)   Location and purpose of all oversize, non-typical
easements;



         (n)   All soil erosion and sediment control measures to
be incorporated during and after construction must be shown. Locations and
standard detail plates for each measure shall be in accordance with city
standards and included on the plan;



         (o)   Soil tests for areas where streets and building
pads are proposed and other soil information as requested by the City
Engineer;



         (p)   All re-vegetation measures proposed for the
subject property must be included on the plan, including seed and mulch types
and application rates;



         (q)   Drainage plan, including the configuration of
drainage areas and calculations for 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year 24-hour
storm events. A 500-year event may also be required by the City Engineer;



         (r)   Layout of proposed streets showing centerline
gradients, section widths, and typical cross sections; and



         (s)   Date of plan preparation and dates of all
revisions.



      (4)   Preliminary utility plan. The developer shall submit a
preliminary utility plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of
survey as a base of the site in question, prepared by a licensed engineer,
depicting the following information:



         (a)   Scale not larger than one inch equals 100 feet;



         (b)   Location, dimensions, and purpose of all easements;



         (c)   Location and size of existing sanitary sewers,
water mains, culverts, or other underground facilities within the subject
property and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the outside boundary of the
proposed plat. Data such as grades, invert elevations, and location of catch
basins, manholes, and hydrants shall also be shown;



         (d)   Location and size of proposed sanitary sewers,
water mains, culverts and other stormwater facilities, or other underground
municipal facilities within the subject project;



         (e)   All other utilities shall be located and designed
in accordance with the requirements of the city engineering standards; and



         (f)   Date of plan preparation and dates of all
revisions.



      (5) Miscellaneous information. The following shall be submitted
to the city, if applicable:



         (a)   An evaluation by the applicant that the
subdivision would not be determined to be premature pursuant to the criteria
outlined by the comprehensive plan and this chapter.



         (b)   All preliminary plats that will not be
subsequently final platted or improved in their entirety shall include a
phasing plan with the following information submitted with the preliminary
plat:



            1.   The sequence of development and approximate
areas, approximate number of lots in each phase, total area and buildable
area per phase. Information shall be provided regarding the number of
dwelling units, proposed improvements, and common facilities for each. Each
phase of a preliminary plat shall be consistent with growth management
criteria of the city;



            2.   Any trail, sidewalks, and parks within the
approved phase of the preliminary plat shall be constructed along with
streets and utilities and shall be clearly marked on a site map which shall
be an attachment to all sales agreements for individual lots;



            3.   A site grading plan that is coordinated with
the phasing plan to avoid premature disruption of land or long-term storage
of excess materials;



            4.   A development agreement that includes a
financial security to ensure completion of common facilities, trails, and
landscaping shall be provided. A master subdivision development agreement
that governs subsequent phases shall also be required; and



            5.   Unless otherwise clearly noted on the phasing
plans or stated in the development agreement, all improvements shown within
each phase shall be constructed and completed with that particular phase.



         (c)   Documents outlining the content of proposed
conservation easements, restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, and
establishment of homeowners associations for review. Where the plat is
intended to include common open spaces, these documents shall address
ownership and long-term maintenance of these open space areas.



         (d)   Information or easements showing how public
utilities, drainage, and roads can be extended to serve adjacent property.



         (e)   Landscape and screening plans showing landscape
plantings for yards and subdivision entrances, and specifying plant
locations, varieties, and sizes.



         (f)   Plans showing the elevations of signs and the
location, ownership, and maintenance responsibilities of the signs.



         (g)   Examples of building product showing illustrations
of building footprint, floor plans, building elevations, and exterior
building materials.



         (h)   Street lighting plans showing proposed location
and type of fixture.



   (C)   Staking. At a minimum, street centerline, parks and trails
identified to be staked by the developer during the preliminary plat process
shall be staked in the field at least 15 days prior to the Planning
Commission preliminary plat public hearing to allow city staff, board and
commission members and the City Council to view the subject site.



   (D)   Development agreement. Approval of the preliminary plat shall
be contingent upon the applicant's entrance into a development agreement with
the city.



      (1)   The developer shall provide an estimate of the project
construction cost for review and approval by the City Engineer.



      (2)   The developer shall meet with city staff and the City
Attorney to finalize the terms of the development agreement.



      (3)   Upon the finalization of the development agreement, the
City Attorney shall have the final copy of the agreement signed by all
appropriate parties. The development agreement shall be recorded against the
property.



      (4)   Financial securities shall be posted with the city as
outlined in the development agreement.



      (5)   Final grading and utility plans shall be approved by the
City Engineer and made a part of the development agreement.



         (a)   No grading shall be allowed until the preliminary
plat has been approved, an interim development agreement has been executed,
and the required financial securities are posted with the city.



         (b)   No construction/installation of sanitary sewer or
water utilities or streets shall be allowed until approval of a final plat
and final development agreement and the required financial securities are
posted with the city.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 647, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 152.073  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Required public improvements. All improvements required by
this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with city design standards
and the plan requirements of this chapter. The following improvements shall
be constructed at the expense of the developer:



      (1)   Site grading, road grading and surfacing;



      (2)   Erosion control and related appurtenances to meet local
Watershed District permitting requirements;



      (3)   Concrete curbs and gutters;



      (4)   Pedestrian sidewalks or trails, if required;



      (5)   Sanitary wastewater facilities;



      (6)   Water distribution facilities;



      (7)   Storm water drainage facilities;



      (8)   Street signs and pavement markings;



      (9)   Streetlights;



      (10)   Private utility services and utility relocation if
required;



      (11)   Permanent reference monuments and monument boxes;



      (12)   Landscaping and screening;



      (13)   Site restoration;



      (14)   Sealcoat on public roads on a schedule determined by
the city;



      (15)   Other improvements specified by an approved PUD; and



      (16)   Other public improvements as may be required by the
City Council.



   (B)   Payment for installation of public improvements. The required
improvements are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the
developer. Further, if any improvement installed within the subdivision will
be of substantial benefit to properties beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the
improvement to be assessed against the benefitting property. The developer
will be required to pay for the portion of the whole cost of the improvement
that will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision. If
other properties other than that owned by the developer are to be assessed,
the city can elect to construct the required improvements and specially
assess the developer and other benefited properties pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429.



   (C)   Infrastructure design by a licensed engineer. The developer
shall use a licensed engineer that meets all of the following requirements.
The engineer or engineering firm shall:



      (1)   Have at least one employee who is a registered
professional civil engineer licensed to work in the State of Minnesota with a
minimum of ten years of experience in municipal infrastructure projects;



      (2)   Employ on a full-time basis, or through the use of
subconsultant(s), one Professional Civil Engineer registered in the State of
Minnesota with a minimum of five years of experience in each of the following
project categories: local roadway systems, sanitary sewer collection systems,
water distribution systems, and storm sewer systems. One professional civil
engineer may be used for all of the listed project categories if qualified;
and



      (3)   Possess an errors and omission insurance policy with a
minimum of $1,500,000 in liability coverage.



   (D)   Survey by a registered surveyor. The surveyor must be
registered to work in the state of Minnesota and have a minimum of five years
of experience. The surveyor must possess an errors and omission insurance
policy with a minimum of $100,000 in liability coverage. The registered
surveyor is required for plat work, legal survey, and installation of
monuments. A registered surveyor is not required to conduct construction
staking.



   (E)   Developer’s agreement providing for the installation of
improvements. Prior to the installation of any required improvements and
prior to approval of the final plat, the developer must enter into a
development agreement requiring the developer to furnish and construct the
improvements at their sole cost and in accordance with city specifications.
When applicable, the development agreement shall contain language specifying
preconstruction requirements, the content of materials & shop drawings that
must be submitted for review and approval, contractor insurances, bond
requirements for performance and payment, and contract requirements with
contractors with regards to EJCDC/Special Provisions. The development
agreement shall also designate the applicant and/or responsible party for
applicable MN Department of Health, MN Pollution Control Agency, and
Watershed permits and sureties. No developer is permitted to start work on
any subdivision without special approval of the City Council if the developer
has previously defaulted on work.



   (F)   Financial guaranty.



      (1)   The developer shall furnish to the city an irrevocable
letter of credit (“Financial Guaranty”) equal to 125% of the total
estimated cost of the public improvements. The financial guaranty shall be
for the exclusive use and benefit of the city and, if in the form of a letter
of credit, shall state thereon that the same is issued to guarantee and
assure performance by the developer of all the terms and conditions of the
required development agreement and construction of the required public
improvements in accordance with the ordinances and specifications of the
city. The city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of the deposit for
any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion of the work in case
of default of the developer under the contract, and for any damages sustained
on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and termination
of any liability, the balance remaining in the deposit shall be refunded to
the developer.



      (2)   Concurrently with furnishing to the city the irrevocable
letter of credit to ensure the construction of public improvements, the
developer shall furnish to the city a cash escrow to be held by the city as
partial security for the payment of inspection, administrative, legal, public
works department, and engineering costs (collectively, the “city costs”)
incurred by the city during the development review process prior to the
public dedication of public improvements and during the warranty period of
the improvements. The city reserves the right to draw, in whole or in part,
on any portion of the cash deposit to recover city costs related to the
project. In the event the escrow is depleted, the developer agrees to post
additional sums of money to replenish the escrow and to cover projected city
costs. Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability, the
balance remaining in the escrow shall be refunded to the developer.



   (G)   Construction plan design process, required inspection, and
utility testing. The preliminary survey, construction staking, preparation of
plans, and materials/utility testing shall be conducted by the developer, who
is responsible for all costs associated with the activities. The developer is
also responsible for the cost of all inspections.



      (1)   Construction plans for the required improvements
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this chapter shall be
prepared at the developer’s expense by a qualified engineer. The public
improvement construction plans must be submitted to the City Engineer for
approval and for an estimate of the total costs of the required improvements.
Upon approval of the plans, an electronic copy of the plans must be furnished
to the city.



      (2)   All required improvements on the site that are to be
installed under the provisions of this chapter must be inspected by the City
Engineer during the course of construction at the developer’s expense.
Construction not inspected will not be accepted for public ownership.



      (3)   Upon completion of the improvements and prior to public
dedication, the developer is responsible for conducting quality control and
materials testing that includes, but is not limited to, compaction testing,
concrete  testing, bituminous testing, sand/gravel testing, testing all
developer-installed utilities, and related appurtenances material testing
requirements. The City Engineer shall perform final inspection of the public
improvements.



   (H)   Dedication of public improvements. Acceptance by the city is
subject to the City Engineer’s certificate of compliance with the approved
plans. Upon approval, the developer must provide as-built drawings of the
public improvements to the city that are in compliance with city
requirements. The developer must conduct a post-construction survey and
submit record drawings and electronic files verifying all grading, utility
installations with location by GPS coordinates and elevation information.



   (I)   Trunk facilities. Where larger size water main, sanitary
sewer, storm drain, or similar facilities are required to serve areas outside
the subdivision, the city may require that the larger facility required be
constructed. A cost estimate for oversizing the trunk facility will be
determined by the City Engineer and the oversizing cost subtracted from the
applicable utility area charge.



   (J)   Alternate installation and incomplete improvements. The City
Council may elect to install any or all of the required public improvements
pursuant to the development agreement with the developer. The City Council
may also elect to commence assessment proceedings, utilize funds of the
financial guaranty, or otherwise move to finance and install improvements
when the improvements are required in order to provide greater assurance of
public health, ensure reliability of water supply, provide for economy of
installation, provide more effective firefighting through hydrants, or
otherwise protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare.



   (K)   Developer guaranty. The developer shall warrant and guarantee
the improvements against any defect in materials or workmanship for a period
of two years following completion and acceptance. The developer is
responsible for the cost of warranty inspections. In the event of the
discovery of any defect in materials or workmanship within the two-year
period, the defect shall be promptly repaired or corrected, and the warranty
and guarantee for the entire project shall be extended for one additional
year beyond the original two year period. Defects in material or workmanship
shall be determined by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 647, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 152.074  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   City Council action. The City Council shall act on the
preliminary plat by motion. The motion shall include findings of fact
supporting the approval or denial, and shall be entered into the written
record of the proceedings of the City Council.



   (B)   Premature subdivisions. Any plat of a proposed subdivision
deemed premature for development shall be denied by the City Council.



      (1)   Conditions establishing premature subdivisions. A
subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the conditions set forth in
the provisions which follow exist:



         (a)   Lack of adequate drainage.



         (b)   Lack of adequate water supply.



         (c)   Lack of adequate roads or highways to serve
subdivision.



         (d)   Lack of adequate wastewater treatment systems.



         (e)   Inconsistency with the adopted comprehensive plan.



         (f)   Public improvements, such as recreational
facilities, or other public facilities reasonably necessitated by the
subdivision which must be provided at public expense cannot be reasonably
provided for within the next 2 fiscal years.



         (g)   The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the
Minnesota Environmental Review Program, Minnesota Rules Ch. 4410, as may be
amended, and could adversely impact critical environmental areas, or
potentially disrupt or destroy historic areas which are designated or
officially recognized by the city, in violation of federal and state
historical preservation laws.



      (2)   The burden shall be upon the applicant to show that the
proposed subdivision is not premature.



   (C)   Denial of preliminary plat. The City Council may deny the
subdivision if it makes any 1 or more of the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed subdivision is in conflict with adopted
applicable general or specific provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Code, Surface Water Management Plan, Engineering Standards, Airport Zoning
Regulation, official map of the city, or this chapter;



      (2)   The physical characteristics of the site, including but
not limited to topography, vegetation, percolation rate, soil conditions,
susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water
storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for
the type of development, design, or use contemplated;



      (3)   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed
density;



      (4)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed
improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage;



      (5)   The design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;



      (6)   The design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements will conflict with easements of record or with easements
established by judgment of a court;



      (7)   The proposed subdivision, its site, or its design,
adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the floodway, increases
flood stages and velocities, or increases flood hazards within the flood way
fringe or within other areas of the city;



      (8)   The applicant has failed to provide all documents
required by the city in order to adequately evaluate the application.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 647, passed 9-14-2015)



FINAL PLAT



§ 152.080  PURPOSE.



   After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final plat shall be
submitted for review as set forth in this subchapter.  The final plat shall
conform to all Minnesota platting regulations and shall incorporate all
changes, modifications, and revisions required by the city. Otherwise, it
shall strictly conform to the approved preliminary plat.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.081  TIMING OF FINAL PLAT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Final plat approval within 1 year after preliminary plat
approval. A complete application for final plat shall be submitted no later
than 1 year after the date of approval of the preliminary plat, or a time as
provided in the development agreement. If the final plat application is
submitted more than 1 year after the date of approval of the preliminary plat
or after the time allowed in the development agreement, the preliminary plat
approval shall be considered void, unless an extension is requested in
writing and is granted by the City Council for good cause.



   (B)   Final plat approval for subsequent phases. The final plat
applications for subsequent phases, as described by the approved phasing
plan, shall be submitted within 1 year of approval of the final plat for the
previous phase, or as provided in the development agreement. An extension may
be requested in writing for City Council approval.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.082  FILING AND REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Placement on the City Council agenda.



      (1)   The city must receive a final plat application form,
copies of the final plat, and required information and plans.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the matter will be placed on the next City
Council meeting agenda which is at least 30 days after the date the
application was received. The Community Development Director shall submit
copies of the final plat and required accompanying information to other
staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as appropriate who may make
written comments to the City Council.



   (B)   City Council meeting. The final plat, together with the city
staff recommendations, shall be submitted to the City Council for
consideration. The City Council shall review and comment on the final plat to
ensure that it conforms to the approved preliminary plat and incorporates any
changes, modifications, and revisions required by the City Council as part of
the preliminary plat approval. A recommendation may be made at that time or
the matter may be tabled to allow further time for review and consideration.
If accepted, the final plat shall be conditionally approved by motion. The
approval shall provide for the acceptance of all agreements for basic
improvements, public dedication, and other requirements as indicated by the
City Council. If disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to approve a final
plat shall be set forth in the written record of the proceedings of the City
Council and reported to the applicant in writing. The City Council shall act
on the final plat within 60 days of receipt of the completed final plat
application.



   (C)   Development agreement. The applicant shall execute a
development agreement with the city which controls the installation of all
required improvements and approval conditions to comply with approved
engineering standards and applicable regulations. The development agreement
shall be approved as a condition of final plat approval and shall be recorded
with the final plat.



   (D)   Special assessments.



      (1)   When any existing special assessments which have been
levied against the property described are to be divided and allocated to the
respective lots in the proposed plat, the City Clerk shall:



         (a)   Estimate the administrative cost of preparing a
revised assessment roll;



         (b)   File the same with the County Auditor; and



         (c)   Make such division and allocation.



      (2)   Upon approval by the City Council of all costs
associated with the development and filing of the assessment roll, the same
shall be paid to the city before final plat approval, or as provided in the
development agreement.



   (E)   Title review. The City Attorney shall review and approve the
status of title and ownership of the property. The developer shall provide an
abstract of title, a registered property abstract or a title insurance
commitment or policy dated within 30 days of the execution of the final plat
as evidence of ownership.



   (F)   Street addresses. The developer shall consult with the city
and/or county in regard to the assignment of addresses. Addresses shall
conform to the uniform street naming and property numbering system for the
county unless otherwise approved by the city. With submission of the final
plat, 1 11 x 17 copy of the plat map showing all addresses correctly labeled
shall be supplied to the city for subsequent distribution to the utility
companies, post office, Fire Department, and local school district.



   (G)   Recording the final plat. If the final plat is approved by the
City Council, the developer shall record the final plat in the Office of the
County Recorder within 120 days after the date of approval. If not recorded
within 120 days after the date of approval, the approval of the final plat
shall be considered void unless the developer requests an extension, in
writing, and receives approval from the City Council. The developer shall,
immediately upon receipt of the recorded documents from the County Recorder,
furnish the Community Development Director with a print of the final plat
showing evidence of the recording. No building permits or improvements,
except those specifically permitted by the development agreement, shall be
issued for construction of any structure on any lot or other construction
activities in said plat until the city has received evidence of the plat
being recorded by the County Recorder.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.083  INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT.



   (A) Number of copies required at the time of application.  The
Developer shall submit 5 large scale copies and 1 reduced scale (11" x 17")
copy of the final plat and required information and plans, together with a
final grading plan, utility plan, landscape plan and other related plans to
the Community Development Department.



   (B)   Contents of the final plat and required information and plans.



      (1)   Preparation.  Final plat preparation, prepared for
recording purposes, shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of
Minnesota Statutes and county regulations, and such final plat or
accompanying submittals shall contain the following information:



         (a)   A large scale copy and a 11" x 17" copy of the
approved preliminary plat and supporting documents illustrating all changes
and conditions that were required as part of preliminary plat approval. This
revised preliminary plat will provide the historical record of the
subdivision approval by which subsequent final plats shall be considered.



         (b)   The name of the subdivision, which name shall not
duplicate or be substantially similar to a plat previously recorded in the
county. The name shall be subject to City Council approval.  The first phase
of development shall be called the "first addition", subsequent phases shall
be consecutively numbered.



         (c)   Location by section, township, range, county, and
state as well as descriptive boundaries of the subdivision based upon an
accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions.



         (d)   A north arrow and scale not greater than one-inch
equals 100 feet shall be shown on all maps/drawings.



         (e)   The location of monuments shall be shown in
reference to existing official monuments on the nearest established street
lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points and
monuments.



         (f)   The location of all lots, outlots, streets, public
highways, alleys, parks, and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet
and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and
with all other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground.
Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points of curve to lot line.



         (g)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks are to be
numbered, with numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.



         (h)   The exact location, widths, and names of all
streets to be dedicated.



         (i)   The location and width of all easements to be
dedicated.



         (j)   The name, address, and phone number of the
surveyor making the plat.



         (k)   Land dedicated as public park shall be labeled as
outlot(s) on the final plat and the deed for the outlot(s) shall be given to
the city with the final plat.



         (l)   Documents and information necessary to fulfill the
conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.



         (m)   A current abstract of title or a registered
property certificate, at the option of the City Attorney.



         (n)   A commitment for title insurance (not more than 30
days old) from a title insurance carrier authorized to conduct business in
this state.



         (o)   Any title declaration, conservation easements,
deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, homeowner's association documents,
or common interest community documents.



         (p)   Statement dedicating all streets, alleys, other
public right-of-way, and other public areas not previously dedicated, as
follows: streets, alleys, and other public areas shown on this plat not
heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated.



         (q)   Statement dedicating all easements as follows:
easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage
facilities are reserved over, under, and along the designated areas marked
"drainage and utility easements."



         (r)   Final grading and construction plans shall be
prepared and submitted in accordance with city standards.



         (s)   Copies of permits from the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR), Corp of Engineers, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA), Minnesota Department of Health, and other agencies as applicable. The
permits shall be obtained prior to city approval of the final plat.



         (t)   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, and
lengths of all areas.



         (u)   Accurate location of all monuments. Pipes or steel
rods shall be placed at the corners of each lot and at the edge of wetlands.



         (v)   Accurate outlines, legal descriptions of any areas
to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or for the exclusive use of
property owners within the subdivision with the purposes indicated therein.



         (w)   Certification by a registered land surveyor, to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made by the surveyor and that
monuments and markers shown thereof exist as located and that all dimensional
geodetic details are correct.



         (x)   Notarized certification by owner, and by any
mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat, and the dedication of
streets and other public areas.



      (2)   Certificates required.



         (a)   Certification by a registered land surveyor in the
form required by M.S. § 505.03, as may be amended.



         (b)   The execution of all owners of any interest in the
land and holders of a mortgage thereon of the certificates required by M.S.
§ 505.03, as may be amended, and which certificate shall include a
dedication of the utility easements and other public areas in such form as
approved by the City Council.



         (c)   Space for certificates of approval and review to
be filled in and signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk. The form of the
certificates shall be approved by the city. A copy of the approved format
shall be available at city hall.



   (C)   Monuments. The outside boundary of the subject property is to
be clearly marked with survey monuments.



   (D)   Development agreement.



      (1)   Final plat approval shall be contingent upon the
applicant's entrance into a development agreement with the city. The
agreement shall be prepared by the city and shall ensure development
performance based on approvals. The agreement shall address, but not be
limited to, the following:



         (a)   Financial securities;



         (b)   Warranties;



         (c)   Development time lines; and



         (d)   Remedies for default.



      (2)   The developer shall meet with the city staff and City
Attorney to finalize the terms of the development agreement.



      (3)   Upon the finalization of the development agreement, the
City Attorney shall have the final copy of the agreement signed by all
appropriate parties. The development agreement shall be recorded against the
property.



      (4)   Financial securities shall be posted with the city as
outlined in the development agreement.



      (5)   Final grading and utility plans shall be approved by the
City Engineer and made a part of the development agreement.



         (a)   No grading shall be allowed until the preliminary
plat has been approved, an interim development agreement has been executed,
and the required financial securities are posted with the city.



         (b)   No construction/installation of sanitary sewer or
water facilities or streets shall be allowed until approval of a final plat
and final development agreement and required financial securities are posted
with the city.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.084  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Council action. The City Council shall act on the final plat
by motion. The motion shall include findings of fact supporting the approval
or denial, and shall be entered into the written record of the proceedings of
the City Council. A motion to approve that fails for the lack of a simple
majority shall be a denial of the requested application.



   (B)   Development agreement. If the City Council moves to approve
the final plat and the development agreement is not yet finalized, the
approval shall be contingent upon the following:



      (1)   A completed and fully executed development agreement
including all required financial securities and time frame for final plat and
final grading completion; and



      (2)   All fees and charges related to the preliminary or final
plat paid in full.



   (C)   Required approval. The City Council shall certify final
approval within 60 days of an applicant's request for final plat approval if
the applicant has complied with:



      (1)   All conditions and requirements of the Comprehensive
Plan, Zoning Code, Surface Water Management Plan, engineering standards,
Airport Zoning Regulation, official map, and this chapter; and



      (2)   All conditions and requirements upon which the
preliminary plat approval was expressly conditioned, either through
performance or the execution of appropriate agreements assuring such
performance.



   (D)   Denial of plat. The City Council may deny the subdivision if
it makes any 1 or more of the following findings:



      (1)   The proposed subdivision is in conflict with adopted
applicable general or specific provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Code, Surface Water Management Plan, engineering standards, Airport Zoning
Regulation, official map, or this chapter;



      (2)   The final plat does not meet or satisfy all of the
conditions or requirements upon which the preliminary plat approval was
expressly conditioned, either through performance or the execution of
appropriate agreements assuring such performance.



      (3)   The design of the subdivision does not conform to
minimum city standards; and



      (4)   The applicant has failed to provide all documents
required by the city in order to adequately evaluate the application.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.085  RECORDING.



   (A)   Copies. After approval of the final plat by the City Council,
the developer shall submit 3 full size mylar copies and 3 full size paper
copies of the final plat, and 1 11" x 17" reduction of the final plat and
dedication page to city hall for signature.



   (B)   Procedure and time frame.



      (1)   Deadline. The developer shall record the approved final
plat and development agreement in the Office of the Washington County
Recorder within 120 days after the date of approval. If not recorded within
120 days after the date of approval, the approval of the final plat shall be
considered void unless the developer requests an extension, in writing, and
receives approval from the City Council.



      (2)   Copy to city. The developer shall, immediately upon
receipt of the recorded document from the County Recorder, furnish the City
Clerk with a print of the final plat showing evidence of the recording.



      (3)   Building permit. No building permits, shall be issued
for construction of any structure on any lot in the plat until the city has
received evidence of the plat being recorded by the County Recorder unless
exceptions have been formally established by the Development Agreement.



   (C)   Transportation Departments. When the land for which the final
plat abuts a state highway, county road, or county highway, a certificate or
other evidence showing submission of the preliminary plat to the Minnesota
Department of Transportation and/or Washington County Highway Department
shall be filed with the Office of the Washington County Recorder, with the
final plat.



   (D)   DNR. When the land included in the final plat is located
within a shoreland district or floodplain district, the Department of Natural
Resources shall be notified of the disposition of the final plat as required
by law.



   (E)   Recording final plats of multi-phased plats. Unless otherwise
provided in the development agreement or otherwise approved by the City
Council, a preliminary plat that is final platted in phases must be final
platted into lots and blocks, not outlots, within 5 years after the
preliminary plat has been approved by the City Council. Any phase of the
preliminary plat that is not final platted within the 5-year period shall be
void.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.086  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Installation. Sewer, water, and streets shall only be
installed in the area included in the final plat. No
construction/installation of sanitary sewer or water facilities or streets
shall be allowed until the final plat and the development agreement have been
approved and recorded and all required financial securities have been posted
with the city.



   (B)   Commitment of utility service areas. If the developer is
unable to fulfill the schedule of the approved phasing plan, the City Council
may consider allocating to a different development project the utility
service area that was committed to the next phase of the plat. The subject
plat must then wait until the following year for final plat or utility
service area approval for its next phase.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.087  DEDICATION.



   Parks, drainage, wetland and utility areas, or other public areas that
were designated as outlots shall be dedicated to the city.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.088  RECORD PLANS (AS-BUILT PLANS).



   Record plans shall be completed by the design engineer and shall be
submitted to the city within 90 days of the installation of the first layer
of bituminous on the public streets. Record plans shall include an as-built
grading plan. Record plans shall be approved by the City Engineer. Three full
size printed copies of the record plans shall be submitted after final
approval by the City Engineer. An electronic copy shall be submitted upon
request of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



PARK LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.090  PURPOSE.



   All developments or landowners requesting platting or replatting of
land shall convey to the city, or dedicate to the public use, a percentage of
land for public use as parks, playgrounds, trails, or open space. The city,
at its discretion, may accept cash in lieu of land to be dedicated, or a
combination of land and cash dedication.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.091  DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   As a prerequisite to any subdivision approval, and at the sole
determination of the city, applicants and/or developers shall dedicate land
for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces, trails, or other public uses
and/or shall make a cash contribution to the city's park dedication fund
roughly related to the anticipated effect of the subdivision on the city's
park and trail system. The amounts listed in this section are the city's best
estimate of the dedication or cash contribution needed to offset the effect
of the subdivision on the park and trail system. The requirement may also be
met with a combination of land and cash or land, cash, and improvements, if
approved by the City Council.



   (A)   Land dedication requirements.



      (1)   Residential. In all new residential subdivisions, a
percentage of the net area subdivided shall be dedicated for public space.
The net area shall be the gross area of the subdivided property minus the
area of wetlands, lakes, and streams below the ordinary high water mark. The
land dedicated for public use shall be in addition to property dedicated for
streets, alleys, easements, storm water ponding, or other public ways. No
areas may be dedicated for public use until the areas have been approved by
the city. The percentage of net land area to be dedicated to the city for the
purposes herein described shall be as follows:



 


UNITS PER ACRE

 
PERCENTAGE OF LAND OR EQUIVALENT MARKET VALUE


Up to 6
 
10


6 or more
 
10% plus 1% for each dwelling unit (DU) over 6 units per acre



 



      (2)   Non-residential. In all commercial or industrial
subdivisions, 5% of the gross area subdivided shall be dedicated for public
space. In the city’s sole discretion, the 5% may be calculated on the net
area, which shall be the gross area of the subdivided property minus the area
of wetlands, lakes, and streams below the ordinary high water mark. The land
dedicated for public use shall be in addition to property dedicated for
streets, alleys, easements, storm water ponding, or other public ways. No
areas may be dedicated for public use until such areas have been approved by
the City Council as suitable and necessary for the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   (B)   Cash requirements.



      (1)   Amount of payment required. The amount of cash to be
paid in lieu of land dedication shall be based upon the fair market value at
the time of final plat approval of the land to be subdivided multiplied by
the dedication percentage established in division (A) above. Fair market
value shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   The city and the developer may agree as to the
fair market value, or



         (b)   The fair market value may be based upon a current
appraisal submitted to the city by the subdivider at the subdivider’s
expense. The appraisal shall be made by appraisers who are approved members
of the SREA or MAI, or equivalent real estate appraisal societies.



         (c)   If the city disputes such appraisal the city may,
at the subdivider’s expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a
qualified real estate appraiser, which appraisal shall be conclusive evidence
of the fair market value of the land.



         (d)   The developer may pay a cash fee of $2,000 for
each residential unit created or for each gross acre of commercial land
developed as the presumptive fair market value of the land for which cash is
paid.



      (2)   Timing of payment. Cash contributions shall be paid
prior to the city’s signature of and release of the final plat, unless
otherwise specified in the development agreement. For subdivisions that do
not require a development agreement, the cash contribution shall be paid
before the city releases the signed approval of the subdivision for recording.



   (C)   Cash and land combination. The city, upon consideration of a
particular type of development, may require that a lesser parcel of land
should be dedicated due to particular features of the development. In such
cases, a cash contribution shall be required in addition to or in lieu of the
land dedication to ensure that compensation is received for the full amount
of the impact on the city's park and trail system.



   (D)   Improvement of land.



      (1)   The city shall identify land needed for park uses and
the land shall be suitable for park development. In the event dedicated park
lands are unsuitable for immediate use because of topographic or other
limitations, the developer shall grade and seed park lands for such suitable
use.



      (2)   In lieu of the full land or full combination of land and
cash contribution, the developer may agree to make certain improvements to
the donated land as required and approved by the city, including but not
limited to, paving or the installation of park equipment such as playground
equipment, basketball courts, tennis courts, and the like, in an amount equal
to the land or cash required but not contributed. The improvements shall be
included in the development agreement.



   (E)   Credit for private open space. Where private open space for
park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision, the
areas may be used for partial credit, at the discretion of the City Council,
against the requirement of dedication for park and recreational purposes,
provided the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so. No
credit shall be given unless at least the following minimum factors are
satisfied:



      (1)   The land area must be available for use, without
preference, by all of the residents of the city unless otherwise determined;



      (2)   The required setbacks must not be included in the
computation of such land area;



      (3)   The use of the private open space must be restricted for
park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants or declarations which
run with the land in favor of the owners of the property within the
subdivision and cannot be eliminated without the prior approval of the City
Council;



      (4)   The proposed private open space must be of sufficient
size, shape, location, and topography for park and recreational purposes or
must contain unique natural features that are important to be preserved; and



      (5)   The proposed open space must reduce the demand for
public recreational facilities to serve the development.



   (F)   Planned Unit Development (PUD).



      (1)   A Planned Unit Development with mixed land uses shall
make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section based
upon the percentage of land devoted to various uses.



      (2)   Land area conveyed or dedicated shall be in addition to
and not in lieu of open space requirements for PUDs.



   (G)   Different number of lots and units or additional land. If the
number of lots or the number of dwelling units is increased, or if land
outside of the previously recorded plat is added, then the park land
dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the additional
units/lots and on the additional land being added to the plat.



   (H)   Minor subdivision. A park dedication or cash contribution
shall be required in the case of a minor subdivision for each new lot created.



   (I)   Exemption; same number of lots and units. Property being
replatted with the same number of lots and the same number of dwelling units
shall be exempt from all park land dedication requirements.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 594, passed 1-25-2010)



Cross-reference:



   Final plat, see § 152.083



§ 152.092  TRAILS/SIDEWALKS.



   The developer shall be required to construct trails and sidewalks in a
manner determined by the city.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.093  DETERMINING LAND TO BE DONATED.



   (A)   Land suitability factors. Land shall be reasonably suitable
for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to
be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and
recreational areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology,
tree cover, access and location, and future park needs pursuant to the
comprehensive plan. Wetlands, ponding areas, and drainage ways shall not be
eligible for park dedication credit. Park land to be dedicated shall be above
the ordinary high water level. Grades exceeding 12% or areas unsuitable for
park development will not be considered for dedication unless specifically
accepted by the City Council for an intended public purpose. Land with trash,
junk, pollutants, and/or unwanted structures is not acceptable.



   (B)   Non/old public land designated in comprehensive plan.



      (1)   When a proposed park, playground, trail, open space,
recreation area, school site, or other public ground is shown in the
Comprehensive Plan, is located in whole or in part within a proposed plat,
exceeds the city's land dedication requirements, and the applicant elects not
to dedicate the excess land, the city, school district, or county or state
agency may consider acquiring the excess land through purchase or other means.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require
the city to accept land shown in the comprehensive plan as proposed park or
public land, in satisfaction of the land dedication requirements required
herein. Land shown on the Comprehensive Plan for park or public use that does
not satisfy the land suitability factors required in this section shall not
count toward the land dedication requirements.



   (C)   Approval procedure. The applicant shall confer with city
staff, consultants, and the Parks, Trails, and Lakes Commission at the time
of concept plan and prior to the preliminary plat public hearing to secure a
recommendation as to the location of any property that should be dedicated to
the public, such as parks, playgrounds, trails, or other public property. The
preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all areas to be
dedicated in this manner. The contribution requirement recommendations will
be sent to the Planning Commission for review and comment and subsequently to
the City Council for approval.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



Cross-reference:



   Concept plan, see §§ 151.060 et seq.



   Preliminary plat, see §§ 152.070 et seq.



§ 152.094  CALCULATING DENSITY REQUIREMENTS.



   Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city for park use may be used in
calculating density requirements of the Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.101  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats. It shall be a misdemeanor
to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as part of, or
in conformity with, any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area
located within the jurisdiction of the city, unless the plan, plat or replat
shall have first been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.



   (B)   Receiving or recording unapproved plats. It shall be unlawful
for a private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans,
plats of land laid out in building lots and streets, alleys, or other
portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or
for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto,
and located within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless the same shall
bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the City Council.



   (C)   Misrepresentations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person
owning an addition or subdivision of land within the city to represent that
any improvement upon any of the streets, alleys, or avenues of said addition
or subdivision or any sewer in the addition or subdivision has been
constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by the City
Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the city, when such
improvement has not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.102  APPLICATION TO CITY PERSONNEL.



   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this chapter shall not subject the officer or
employee to a penalty imposed for violation unless a penalty is specifically
provided for such failure.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.103  INJUNCTION.



   In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any
provision of this chapter, or any provision or condition of a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, the city, in addition to other remedies, may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct,
or abate such violation or threatened violation.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be punished as set
forth in § 10.99. Each day during which compliance is delayed or such
violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense and may be
prosecuted as such.



(Ord. 550, passed 5-22-2006)



CHAPTER 153: ZONING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   153.001   Title



   153.002   Authority



   153.003   Intent



   153.004   Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan



   153.005   Scope



   153.006   Interpretation and application



   153.007   Official Zoning Map



   153.008   Zoning district boundaries



   153.009   Severability



   153.010   Definitions




Applications and Procedures




   153.025   Purpose



   153.026   General procedures



   153.027   Zoning interpretation



   153.028   Required neighborhood meetings



   153.029   Certificate of compliance



   153.030   Building permit



   153.031   Driveway access approval



   153.032   On-site waste disposal permits



   153.033   Certificate of occupancy



   153.034   Conditional uses



   153.035   Interim uses



   153.036   Variances



   153.037   Zoning ordinance text and map amendments



   153.038   Site plan approval



Nonconformities



   153.050   Purpose



   153.051   Nonconforming uses



   153.052   Nonconforming lot of record



   153.053   Nonconforming residential structures



   153.054   Nonconforming site and building improvements



General Development Regulations



   153.065   Applicability



   153.066   Individual sewage treatment systems



   153.067   Sloping or erodible building sites



   153.068   Required yards and open spaces



   153.069   Minimum dwelling requirements



   153.070   Usable attic space



   153.071   Code compliance



   153.072   Buildable lot area, net



   153.073   Number of structures



   153.074   Prohibited dwelling units



   153.075   Occupancy of single-family dwelling



   153.076   Traffic control



   153.077   Private roads



   153.078   Maximum height



   153.079   Setbacks along unclassified water bodies



General Standards for Use Regulations



   153.095   Purpose



   153.096   Standards for uses



Detached Accessory Structure Regulations



   153.110   Detached accessory structures in C, A, RR, SF, MXR-1,
MXR-2, MXR-3, MU-1, MU-2, and BP Districts



   153.111   Accessory structures in multiple-family developments



   153.112   Accessory structures in business and industrial districts



Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations



   153.125   Purpose



   153.126   Scope of regulations



   153.127   General provisions



   153.128   Design, construction, and maintenance



   153.129   Parking provisions in residential districts



   153.130   Parking provisions in business districts



   153.131   Parking provisions in industrial districts



   153.132   Parking design requirements in business, commercial, mixed
use, and industrial districts



   153.133   Required off-street parking spaces and garages



   153.134   Off-street loading and unloading areas



   153.135   Minimum parking space and aisle dimensions



Exterior Storage In Residential Districts; Screening and Fence Regulations



   153.145   Exterior storage in residential districts



   153.146   Screening



   153.147   Fence regulations



Lighting Regulations



   153.185   Lighting regulations



Sign Regulations



   153.205   Signs



   153.206   Changeable electronic copy signs



   153.207   Signs in residential and agricultural districts



   153.208   Wall signs and freestanding signs in all commercial, mixed
use commercial, and industrial zoning districts



   153.209   Billboard signs



   153.210   Temporary signs



   153.211   Sign construction and maintenance



   153.212   Administration, compliance, and enforcement



Landscaping Regulations



   153.230   Purpose



   153.231   Landscape plan



   153.232   Minimum landscaping requirements



   153.233   Landscape design



   153.234   Building foundation landscaping



   153.235   Selection, installation, and maintenance of landscaping



   153.236   Landscape guarantee



   153.237   Retaining walls



   153.238   Landscaping letter of credit or cash escrow required



Environmental Regulations



   153.250   Purpose



   153.251   Explosives



   153.252   Radiation and electrical interference



   153.253   Noise, odor, air, and water pollution



   153.254   Vibrations



   153.255   Glare or heat 



   153.256   Public health



   153.257   Refuse



   153.258   Vacant land



   153.259   Hazardous waste



   153.260   Vehicles



   153.261   Outdoor wood boiler systems



   153.262   Drilling of wells in drinking water supply management area



Land Alteration and Grading Regulations



   153.270   Land alteration and grading



   153.271   Permit application, review, and approval procedure



   153.272   Construction site standards



   153.273   Erosion control



   153.274   Sediment control



   153.275   Restoration



   153.276   Public waters



   153.277   Drainage



   153.278   Preservation of natural drainageways/waterways and wetland
preservation



   153.279   Preservation of natural drainageways/waterways



Woodland Preservation Regulations



   153.295   Purpose



   153.296   Definitions



   153.297   Woodland Preservation Plan



   153.298   Permitted tree removals



   153.299   Mitigation procedures



   153.300   Tree replacement provisions



   153.301   Required protective measures



   153.302   Additional protective measures



Additional Requirements



   153.306   Sustainability requirements for all business, commercial,
industrial, mixed use, non-residential uses in a residential district and the
Multi-Family Residential District



   153.307   Solar energy system requirements



   153.308   Inclusionary housing requirements



Zoning District Regulations



   153.315   Zoning district regulations



   153.316   Conservancy (C) District



   153.317   Agriculture (A) District



   153.318   Rural Residential (RR) District



   153.319   Single-Family (SF) Residential District



   153.320   Mixed Residential, Single-Family, and Townhouse (MXR-1)
District



   153.321   Mixed Residential, Single and Two-Family (MXR-2) District



   153.322   Mixed Residential (MXR-3) District



   153.323   Multiple-Family Residential (MF) District



   153.324   Minimum standards for design: applicable to all
commercial/business districts (NC, B-1, B-2)



   153.325   [Reserved.]



   153.326   Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District



   153.327   Broadway Business (B-1) District



   153.328   Highway Business (B-2) District



   153.329   Limited Industrial Business (B-3) District



   153.330   Minimum standards for design: applicable to all industrial
districts (I, BP) and the B-3 District



   153.331   [Reserved.]



   153.332   Industrial (I) District



   153.333   Business Park (BP) District



   153.334   Downtown Mixed Use (MU-1) District



   153.335   General Mixed Use (MU-2) District



Overlay Districts



   153.340   Agricultural Preserve (AP) Overlay District



   153.341   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District



   153.342   Rural Open Space Housing Cluster Planned Unit Development
regulations



   153.343   Shoreland Overlay District



   153.344   Airport Overlay District



Responsibilities, Enforcement, and Appeals



   153.360   General responsibilities of Community Development
Department



   153.361   General responsibilities of the City Administrator



   153.362   General responsibilities of the Planning Commission



   153.363   General responsibilities of the City Council



   153.364   Development agreements and financial guarantees



   153.365   Procedures to appeal decisions of the city



 



   153.998   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  TITLE.



   This chapter may be known, cited, and referred to as the "Forest Lake
Zoning Ordinance," except as referred to herein where it may be known as
"this chapter."



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.002  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the
Municipal Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364, as they may be amended
from time to time.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.003  INTENT.



   (A)   This chapter is enacted to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the city and its people through establishment of
minimum regulations governing the development and use of property within the
city.



   (B)   The regulations are established for the following reasons:



      (1)   Implement the Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   Promote planned and orderly development and
redevelopment in the city;



      (3)   Provide adequate light, air, and convenient access to
property;



      (4)   Limit congestion in the public right-of-way;



      (5)   Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
population and structures;



      (6)   Provide for the compatible integration of different land
uses and protect from incompatible land uses;



      (7)   Conserve and protect natural resources in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter;



      (8)   Facilitate the provision of water, utilities, and sewage
disposal systems to property;



      (9)   Protect, to a reasonable extent, the population from
fire and other matters affecting public safety;



      (10)   Maintain, to a reasonable extent, property values and
the tax base of the city; and



      (11)   Provide for the administration of this chapter and
amendments to it, define the powers and duties imposed by this chapter, and
prescribe penalties for violation of its provisions.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.004  RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The administration, enforcement, and amendment of this chapter shall be
consistent with the policies contained in the city’s adopted Comprehensive
Plan. In accordance with Minnesota Statutes, the City Council will not
approve any rezoning or other changes in this chapter that are inconsistent
with the city’s Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.005  SCOPE.



   From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land
and all buildings erected, altered, enlarged, or relocated, and every use
accessory thereto, shall be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any existing use or building, lot, or development which was legally
established but is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be regarded as nonconforming and may continue in existence only for
such period of time and under such conditions as stated in this chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.006  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be minimum requirements.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter differ from
those required by any statute or other ordinance of the city, the regulations
that are more restrictive or which impose the higher standard shall prevail.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following
shall apply to a use not provided for within a zoning district:



      (1)   If a use is not specifically permitted in a zoning
district, the use shall be considered prohibited in the zoning district;



      (2)   The City Council may direct city staff to conduct a
study to determine if a particular use complies with the Comprehensive Plan,
in which zoning district, if any, the use is most appropriate, and which
zoning provisions may apply to the use;



      (3)   The city or an applicant may initiate an amendment to
this chapter to permit the particular use under consideration.



   (C)   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:



      (1)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular;



      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future the present;



      (3)   The words "will" and "shall" are mandatory and the word
"may" is permissive;



      (4)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders;



      (5)   Words or terms defined in this chapter shall have the
meanings assigned to them unless the meaning is clearly contrary to the
intent of this chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.007  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
established by this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the
"Official Zoning Map." The Official Zoning Map and all notations, references,
and data shown on it are incorporated by reference into this chapter and
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if it were fully described herein.



   (B)   All property within the city shall have the zoning designation
shown on the Official Zoning Map. If there is any discrepancy or
inconsistency between the Official Zoning Map and any other map, ordinance,
or source that intends to indicate the zoning of property, the Official
Zoning Map shall take precedence.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of city staff to maintain the
Official Zoning Map and to make changes on the map promptly whenever
appropriate.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.008  ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Except for the Shoreland Overlay District, zoning district
boundary lines shown on the Official Zoning Map are intended to follow lot
lines, the center lines of streets or alleys, the center lines of streets or
alleys projected, railroad right-of-way lines, the center of watercourses, or
the corporate limits of the city, unless otherwise indicated. In the case of
the Shoreland Overlay District, the boundary lines of the districts shall be
as stated in the Shoreland Overlay District.



   (B)   Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district
boundary line shall be heard by the Forest Lake City Council serving as the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



   (C)   Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by
an official action of the city, the zoning district adjoining each side of
the street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the
center of the vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and
henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts.



   (D)   All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way,
if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same
zone as the property in the most restrictive classification immediately
abutting upon the alleys, streets, public ways, or railroad rights-of-way.
Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way, or railroad right-of-way
serves as a district boundary, the zoning of the areas, unless otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the
abutting property up to the centerline.



   (E)   All areas within the corporate limits of the city which are
under water and which are not shown as included within any zone shall be
subject to all regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins the water
area. If the water area adjoins 2 or more zones, the boundaries of each zone
shall be construed to be extended into the water area in a straight line
until they meet the other district at the halfway point and/or to the
corporation limits.



   (F)   For the purpose of adult uses, as specified in the City Adult
Use Ordinance, if a building or leased space is intersected by the allowed
area boundary, then only that portion of the building or leased space within
the allowed area will be permissible for an adult principal use.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.009  SEVERABILITY.



   Every section or division of this chapter is declared separable from
every other section or division. If any section or division is held to be
invalid by competent authority, no other section or division shall be
invalidated by the action or decision.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING. Making direct contact with or immediately bordering.



   ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A secondary dwelling unit within an existing
owner-occupied single-family dwelling unit for use as a complete independent
living facility. A density unit is not attributed to this dwelling unit when
calculating density.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or subordinate structure
serving the principal use on the same lot and incidental thereto. ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS include, but are not limited to, garages, sheds, or other storage
buildings or structures.



   ACCESSORY STORAGE CONTAINER. A container placed outdoors and used for
the storage of goods, materials or merchandise that are used in connection
with a lawful principal or accessory use of the lot. The term ACCESSORY
STORAGE CONTAINER includes but is not limited to, containers such as boxcars,
semi-trailers, roll-off containers, slide-off containers, railroad cars,
piggyback containers, and portable moving and storage containers. The term
ACCESSORY STORAGE CONTAINER does not include a garage, barn, or storage shed
accessory to a dwelling, provided the structure is not of a type designed,
equipped, or customarily used for over-the-road transport of goods,
materials, or merchandise.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental or subordinate to the principal use of
the same land.



   ACCESSORY USE, CONDITIONAL. Uses that are clearly incidental to a
principal permitted use or conditional use but which are located in a
separate building may be allowed through the approval of a conditional use
permit.



   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. A structure on agricultural land designed,
constructed, and used to house farm implements, livestock, or agricultural
produce or products used by the owner, lessee, or sub-lessee of the building
and members of their immediate families, their employees, and persons engaged
in the pickup or delivery of agricultural produce or products.



   AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS. An agricultural business operated year round on
a rural farm (as defined) offering for sale to the general public produce or
any derivative thereof grown or raised on the property by the seller.



   AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS, SEASONAL. A temporary seasonal business on a
commercially zoned property or operated on a rural farm (as defined),
offering for sale to the general public produce or any derivative (such as
honey, maple syrup) thereof grown or raised locally.



   AGRICULTURAL USE. Land whose use is devoted to the production of
horticulture and nursery stock, fruit of all kinds, vegetables, forage,
grains, bees and apiary products, and raising domestic farm animals. This
activity does not need to be the principal source of income.



   AIRPORT or HELIPORT. Any land or structure which is used or intended
for use for the landing and take-off of aircraft and any appurtenant land or
structure used or intended for use for port buildings or other port
structures or rights-of-way.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way that affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.



   ALTERATION. To change or make different, to remodel or modify.



   AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA.  Any equipment or device used exclusively for
the purpose of sending and/or receiving electromagnetic signals for amateur
radio service communications as defined in 47 C.F.R. 97.3(4), and as used in
47 C.F.R. 97.15(a). An AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA includes any structure, such as
a mast, pole, tower, or any combination thereof, used exclusively for
supporting the AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA.



   ANIMAL UNIT. A unit of measure used to compare differences in the
production of animal wastes that has a standard as the amount of waste
produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer.



   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC FARM. Cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats,
chickens, and other animals commonly kept for commercial food producing
purposes.



   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC PETS. Dogs, cats, birds, and similar animals commonly
kept in a residence or structures accessory to a residence.



   ANIMALS, NONDOMESTIC PETS. Animals considered wild or exotic, such as
bears, lions, wolves, ocelots, and similar animals.



   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
tower, monopole, building, or other structure and used in communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals, or other communications signals. ANTENNA does not include a
lightning rod.



   APPLICANT. The owners, their agent, or representative having interest
in land where an application for city review of any permit, use, or
development is required by this chapter.



   APPRAISED VALUATION. The market value of a structure or lot as
determined by the current records of the City Assessor.



   AREA, GROSS DEVELOPABLE. Those lands within a development parcel
remaining after the deletion of wetlands, all other water bodies, and public
road rights-of-way.



   ATTIC. Space of a building located directly under a roof that is not
directly free and open to the public and is unfinished or finished only to a
limited degree to provide for inactive storage and/or mechanical equipment.



   ATTORNEY. The City Attorney.



   AUTO REDUCTION YARD. A lot or yard where 3 or more unlicensed motor
vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sale
of parts, sale as scrap, storage, or abandonment.



   AUTO SALES, LEASING, RENTAL REPAIR, SERVICE, WASH. See MOTOR VEHICLE.



   BALLOON PORT, COMMERCIAL. An area of land designated for the take-off,
storage, and maintenance of hot air balloons on a commercial basis.



   BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story, as further defined by
the adopted Building Code.



   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. An owner-occupied private home where
accommodations are offered for 1 or more nights to transients.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS. An official city board, prescribed in
the Minnesota Planning Act, to hear and take action on appeals and variances
to the regulations in this chapter or the administration thereof.



   BREWERY.  A location where malt liquor is produced.



   BUFFER. A strip of land intended to create physical separation between
potentially incompatible uses of land or environmentally sensitive areas.



   BUILDABLE LOT AREA, NET. The space remaining on a lot after the setback
requirements, area with a slope of 3:1 or 33% or more, 100 year floodplain,
and drainage easements or wetland have been subtracted.



   BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal, or
property of any kind. When any portion thereof is completely separated from
every other part thereof by area separation, each portion of the building
shall be deemed as a separate building.



   BUILDING CODE. The Minnesota State Building Code.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level within 5 feet of the building, or 10 feet above the lowest
ground level within 5 feet of the building, whichever is lower, and the
highest point of a flat or mansard roof, or the average height of the highest
gable of a pitched or hipped roof. See §§ 153.315et seq. for accessory
building height requirements. See §§ 153.147et seq. for fence height
requirements.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the State Building Code.



   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required from the responsible governmental
agency before any site work, construction, or alteration to structures can be
started.



   BUILDING SETBACK. See SETBACK.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE, MINIMUM REQUIRED. A line within a lot parallel
to a public right-of-way line, a side or rear lot line, a bluff line,
delineated wetland or an ordinary high water mark or line, behind which
buildings or structures must be placed.



   BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein merchandise
is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.



   CAR WASH. See MOTOR VEHICLE WASH.



   CARPORT. A permanent automobile shelter having 1 or more sides open.



   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead
and dedicated for cemetery purposes and including, but not limited to,
columbariums, mausoleums, and chapels when operated in conjunction with and
within the boundaries of the cemetery.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the city documenting
that a proposed development will meet all development standards if the
project proceeds in accordance with the plans.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Building Official
authorizing the use or occupancy of a building or structure.



   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY. A legal document depicting property information
that is signed by a registered land surveyor under Minnesota state laws.



   CITY. A conglomeration of public officials, Council, commission, and
committee as duly elected or appointed.



   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Forest Lake.



   CLUB or LODGE. A non-profit association of persons who are members
paying annual dues and where the use of the premises is restricted to members
and their guests.



   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT, RURAL. A development pattern and technique whereby
structures are arranged in closely related groups to make the most efficient
use of the natural amenities of the land as accomplished through a Planned
Unit Development.



   COLUMBARIUM. A structure, room, or other space in a building or
structure containing niches for inurnment of cremated remains in a place
used, or intended to be used, and dedicated for cemetery purposes.



   COMMERCIAL FOOD PRODUCING FARM OPERATIONS. See FARM LAND.



   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Land held in common ownership used for natural
habitat, pedestrian corridors, and/or recreational purposes that are
protected from future development.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The policies, statements, goals, and interrelated
plans for private and public land and water use, transportation and community
facilities, including recommendations for planned implementation, documented
in texts, and maps which constitute the guide for the future development of
the city.



   CONDITIONAL USE. See USE, CONDITIONAL.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Council in
accordance with procedures specified in § 153.034.



   CONDOMINIUM. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in common with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real
property, together with a separate interest in space in a building.



   CONSERVATION EASEMENT. An interest in real property created in a manner
that imposes limitations or affirmative obligations in regard to the use of
property, including the retention, protection and maintenance of natural
resources, open space, and agriculture.



   CONSTRUCTION TRAILER. A mobile manufactured trailer that temporarily
serves as an office for building construction or property maintenance
services.



   CONTIGUOUS. Parcels of land that share a common lot line or boundary.
Parcels which are separated by a right-of-way, easement, or railroad
right-of-way are considered contiguous for the purposes of this chapter.



   CONVENIENCE STORE. See MOTOR VEHICLE CONVENIENCE STORE.



   CONVEYANCE. As defined in Minnesota Statutes.



   COST OF RENOVATION, REPAIR, OR REPLACEMENT. The fair market value of
the materials, labor, and services necessary to accomplish the renovation,
repair, or replacement as determined by the Building Official.



   CRAWL SPACE. As defined by the Building Code.



   CREMATORIUM or CREMATORY. A place where bodies are consumed by
incineration and the ashes of the deceased are collected for permanent burial
or storage in urns.



   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb as measured at the top of
curb, in front of a building or structure measured at the center of the
front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the City Engineer shall
establish the curb elevation.



   DAY CARE FACILITIES. Include but are not limited to: family day care
homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, day time
activity centers, day treatment programs and day services, nursery and
preschools, and Montessori schools, as defined by Minnesota Statutes.



   DAY CARE FACILITY, LICENSED. Any facility required to be licensed by a
governmental agency which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides 1 or
more persons with care, training, supervision, rehabilitation, or development
guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a
place other than the person’s own home.



   DECIBEL. The unit of sound measured on the "A" weighing scale of a
sound level meter, set on slow response, the weighing characteristics of
which are specified in the "Standards on Sound Level Meters of the USA
Standards Institute."



   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units permitted per acre of net
developable acres of land as regulated by the applicable zoning district.



   DENSITY UNITS. The number of individual dwelling units that can be
located on a parcel of land as established through the use of a yield plan.
For the purpose of this chapter, a multi-family residential dwelling is
considered as having as many density units as there are individual dwelling
units, regardless of whether those units are attached or detached.



   DESIGN MANUAL. A prepared document for the purposes of articulating in
written, graphic and pictorial form design requirements of the Zoning Code.



   DISPOSAL AREA, ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT. As defined by Washington
County Codes.



   DREDGING. The process by which soils or other surface materials,
normally transported by surface water erosion into a body of water, are
removed for the purpose of deepening the body of water.



   DRIVE-THRU. Any use where products and/or services are provided to the
customer under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car
or where service to the automobile occupants is offered regardless of whether
service is also provided within a building.



   DRIVEWAY ACCESS PERMIT. A permit required from the responsible
governmental agency that allows access onto a public road. The permit must be
acquired prior to construction and the issuance of a building permit.



   DWELLING. A building or 1 or more portions thereof occupied exclusively
for human habitation, but not including rooms in hotels, motels, or bed and
breakfasts. (Also see DWELLING UNIT.)



      (1)   DUPLEX OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential building
containing 2 complete dwelling units with separate housekeeping and cooking
facilities for each and with both units being under the same ownership.



      (2)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential building
containing 8 or more dwelling units with separate housekeeping and cooking
facilities for each.



         (a)   APARTMENT, MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A room or
suite of rooms available for rent which is occupied as a residence by a
single-family or group of individuals living together as a single-family unit.



         (b)   CONDOMINIUM, MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A form of
property ownership that includes individual ownership of a residential
dwelling unit within a multi-family building and joint responsibility for
maintenance and repairs of the land or other common property.



         (c)   COOPERATIVE, MULTIPLE- FAMILY DWELLING. A
multi-unit development operated for and owned by its occupants. Individual
occupants do not own their specific dwellings unit outright, as in a
condominium, but they own shares in the enterprise.



      (3)   SEASONAL DWELLING. A residential building not capable of
year-round occupancy due to non-winterized construction or inadequate
nonconforming year-round on-site sewage treatment systems.



      (4)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling that is
joined to another dwelling by a common wall.



      (5)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling that is
entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.



      (6)   TEMPORARY DWELLING, CARE FACILITY. A manufactured home
which temporarily serves as a residence for an infirm relative of the
occupants residing in the primary single-family residence on the property
where the relative requires care by the family.



      (7)   TEMPORARY DWELLING, DURING CONSTRUCTION. A manufactured
home which temporarily serves as a residence for the present or potential
occupant while the primary single-family residence is being constructed or
reconstructed or altered due to natural catastrophe or fire.



      (8)   TOWNHOUSE DWELLING, ATTACHED. A single structure
consisting of 2 or more dwelling units having the first floor at or near the
ground level with no other dwelling units or portions thereof above or below
with each dwelling unit connected to each other unit by a single party wall
with no openings.



      (9)   TOWNHOUSE DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling that is
entirely surrounded by open space and owned by an individual or owned in
common by a homeowners association.



   DWELLING UNIT. A residential accommodation including complete kitchen
and bathroom facilities, permanently installed, which is arranged, designed,
used, or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for 1 family.



   EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons
other than the owner.



   ENGINEER. The City Engineer.



   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT WORKSHEET, ASSESSMENT or STATEMENT. A document
that might be required under Minnesota Statutes or this chapter to determine
the environmental effects resulting from a ground disturbing, development, or
construction activity.



   EQUESTRIAN USES. Those uses commonly associated with the raising,
maintaining, and training of horses for riding, racing, or breeding.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES, GOVERNMENTAL USES, BUILDINGS AND STORAGE. An area
of land or structures used for public purposes, storage, or maintenance and
which is owned or leased by a governmental unit.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES, UTILITY SUBSTATION. A utility use whose function is
to reduce the strength, amount, volume, or configuration of utility flow from
a bulk wholesale quantity in large-size long-distance transmission lines to
small retail quantities in a neighborhood distribution system. These uses
include electric substations and telephone switching and relay facilities.
Business offices associated with these uses are not included as part of this
definition.



   EXTERIOR STORAGE. The storage of goods, materials, equipment,
manufactured products, and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.



   FACE LIFT. A renovation or restyling of the facade of a building,
intended to give an attractive, more up-to-date appearance.



   FAMILY. An individual, or 2 or more persons each related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or foster care arrangement, living together as a single
housekeeping unit, or a group of not more than 6 persons not related
maintaining a common household exclusive of servants.



   FARM. A tract of land which is principally used for agricultural
activities such as the production of cash crops, livestock, or poultry
farming. Such farms may include agricultural dwellings and accessory
buildings and structures necessary to the operations of the farm.



   FARM LAND. Land that is capable of supporting the commercial production
of agricultural crops, livestock or livestock products, poultry products,
milk or dairy products, or fruit or other horticultural products.



   FEEDLOT. A lot or building or combination of lots and buildings
intended for the confined breeding, raising, or holding of animals, and
specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate,
or where a concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be
maintained within the enclosures of open lots used for feeding and rearing of
domestic farm animals shall be considered feedlots. Pastures are not
considered feedlots.



   FENCE. A partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing
marker, visual or physical barrier, or enclosure.



   FILL. Any act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any similar
material is deposited, placed, pushed, or transported and shall include the
conditions resulting thereupon.



   FINAL PLAT. A drawing or map of an approved subdivision that meets all
requirements of the subdivision regulations.



   FITNESS AND HEALTH CENTER. A business that provides recreational
services and facilities, usually for the benefit of its membership or the
general public, involving aerobic exercises, strength and cardiovascular
equipment, indoor or outdoor game courts, swimming pools, running tracks,
massage, tanning, hair and other personal services, saunas, steam rooms,
showers, lockers and the like that may be used at any time that the operation
is open for business.



   FLAG LOT. A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of
a narrow corridor.



   FLASHING LIGHT. See lighting-related definitions.



   FLOODPLAIN. The areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have
been or may be covered by a regional flood.



   FLOOR AREA. The area inside the exterior walls of a building or area.
Measurements shall be made from the inside of exterior walls.



   FLOOR PLAN, GENERAL. A graphic representation of the anticipated use of
the floor area within a building or structure.



   FLORIST, COMMERCIAL. A building or premises used primarily for the
retail sale of flowers and small plants which may not have been grown or
raised on the property and does not include a greenhouse.



   FOOTPRINT. The area of the land covered by a building’s foundation.



   FRONTAGE. The boundary of a lot that abuts a public street or private
road.



   FULL SERVICE HOTEL. A building having provision for 10 or more guests
in which lodging is provided for compensation, and which is open to transient
or permanent guests or both, and in which ingress and egress to and from all
rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in
charge. This type of facility may also include meeting rooms, on-site
restaurant and/or bars or other public amenities.



   FUNERAL HOME. A building or part thereof used for funeral services. The
buildings may contain space and facilities for: embalming and the performance
of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; the storage of
caskets, urns, and other related funeral supplies; and the storage of funeral
vehicles. Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be
permitted. This definition shall not include facilities for cremation.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of the
principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for the
storing of vehicles, trailers, or trucks.



   GARDEN SUPPLY STORE AND NURSERY YARD. A building or premises used
primarily for the wholesale and retail sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, other
plants, and accessory products, excluding power tools, tractors, decorative
rock, tree bark, gravel, and compost. Accessory products are those products
that are used in the culture, display, and decoration of lawns, gardens, and
indoor plants.



   GOLF COURSE. An area of land laid out for golf with a minimum series of
9 holes each, including a tee, fairway, and putting green and often 1 or more
natural or artificial hazards.



   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council.



   GROUND LEVEL VIEW. The view of the building from the furthest point of
the width of the right-of-way from the property line(s) that abut a street.



   HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS or HAZARDOUS PROPERTY. Any building or property
that, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage,
unsanitary condition, or abandonment, constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard
to public safety or health.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A chemical or substance, or a mixture of chemicals
or substances, which:



      (1)   Is regulated by the Federal Occupational Safety and
Health Administration regulations; or



      (2)   Is either toxic or highly toxic materials, an irritant,
corrosive, a strong oxidizer, a strong sensitizer, combustible, either
flammable or extremely flammable, dangerously reactive, pyrophoric,
pressure-generating, a compressed gas, a carcinogen, a teratogen, a mutagen,
a reproductive toxic agent, or that otherwise, according to generally
accepted documented medical or scientific evidence, may cause substantial
acute or chronic personal injury or illness during or as a direct result of
any customary or reasonably foreseeable accidental or intentional exposure to
the chemical or substance.



   HEALTH/RECREATION FACILITY. An indoor facility that includes uses such
as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, jacuzzi and/or sauna, and
pro shop.



   HIGH POWER TRANSMISSION LINE. A 69 kV or greater electric transmission
line with towers a minimum of 75 feet in height.



   HISTORIC BUILDING AND STRUCTURE. A structure which has been identified
by the Washington County History Network inventory or the State Historic
Preservation Office as having public value due to its notable architectural
features relating to the cultural heritage of the city.



   HOME OCCUPATION. See § 153.096(L).



   HOMEOWNER’S ASSOCIATION. A formally constituted non-profit
association or corporation made up of the property owners and/or residents of
the development for



the purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining the common open space and
facilities.



   HORSE SHOW. An event where horses not boarded on the subject property
are shown to the general public and guests.



   HORSE TRAINING FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. A building in which horses not
owned by the property owner are kept for commercial use, including boarding,
breeding, hire, sale, show, and training.



   HORSE TRAINING FACILITY, PRIVATE. A building in which horses owned by
the property owner are kept for private use and training.



   HOTEL. A building having provision for 10 or more guests in which
lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation, and which is
open to transient or permanent guests or both, and which ingress and egress
to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by
a person in charge.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. The portion of the buildable parcel which has a
covering which does not permit water to percolate into the natural soil.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, all
driveways and parking areas (whether paved or not), sidewalks, patios, tennis
and basketball courts, covered decks, porches, and other structures.



   INDIVIDUAL PARCEL. A parcel as a whole as charged on the tax lists or 2
or more contiguous parcels under common ownership on the effective date of
this chapter.



   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. A vehicle incapable of movement under its own
power.



   INTERIM USE. See USE, INTERIM.



   JUNK YARD. An area where used, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, gartered, cleaned, packed, disassembled,
or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rags, rubber products, bottles, and lumber. Storage of the material in
conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed
area or building shall not be included.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. A business which conducts the selling, boarding,
breeding, showing, treating or grooming of domestic animals over 6 months of
age.



   KENNEL, PRIVATE. An accessory structure kept on premises and owned by a
member of the household, which are zoned and occupied for residential
purposes and where the keeping of such domestic animals is incidental to the
occupancy of the premises for residential purposes.



   LAND ALTERATION. The reclaiming of land by depositing, removing, or
moving material so as to alter the grade or topography.



   LAND CLEARING. The removal of a contiguous group of trees and other
woody plants in an area of 20,000 square feet or more within any 12 month
period. For specific regulations with regard to this definition, please refer
to §§ 153.295et seq. as it relates to woodland preservation.



   LANDSCAPING. Planting trees, shrubs, and turf covers such as grasses
and shrubs.



   LIGHTING-RELATED.



      (1)   CUTOFF. The point at which all light rays emitted by a
lamp, light source, or luminaire are completely eliminated at a specific
angle above the ground.



      (2)   CUTOFF ANGLE. The angle formed by a line drawn from the
direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the
ground from the light source above from which no light is emitted.



      (3)   CUTOFF TYPE LUMINAIRE. A luminaire with elements such as
shields, reflectors, or refractor panels that direct and cut off the light at
a cutoff angle that is less than 90 degrees.



      (4)   FIXTURE OUTDOOR. Outdoor electrically powered
illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and
similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or
advertisement. The fixture includes the hardware that houses the illumination
source and to which the illumination source is attached, including, but not
limited to, the hardware casing. The devices shall include, but are not
limited to, search, spot, and flood lights for:



         (a)   Buildings and structures;



         (b)   Recreational areas;



         (c)   Parking lot lighting;



         (d)   Landscape lighting;



         (e)   Billboards and other signs;



         (f)   Street lighting;



         (g)   Product display area lighting; and



         (h)   Building overhangs and open canopies.



      (5)   FLASHING LIGHT. A light source that is not constant in
intensity or color at all times while in use.



      (6)   FOOTCANDLE. A unit of illumination produced on a
surface, all points of which are 1 foot from a uniform point source of 1
candle.



      (7)   LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit consisting of a
light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.



      (8)   OUTDOOR. Any light source or collection of light sources
located outside of a building, including, but not limited to, light sources
attached to any part of a structure, located on the surface of the ground, or
located on freestanding poles.



      (9)   SECURITY LIGHTING. Outdoor lighting fixtures installed
exclusively as a measure to reduce the possible occurrence of a crime on the
property.



      (10)   SHIELDING. A technique or method of construction
permanently covering the top and sides of a light source by a material which
restricts the light emitted to be projected below an imaginary horizontal
plane passing the light fixture.



      (11)   SOURCE. A single artificial point source of
luminescence that emits measurable radiant energy in or near the visible
spectrum.



      (12)   SPILLAGE. Any reflection, glare, or other artificial
light emission onto any adjoining property or right-of-way above a defined
maximum illumination.



   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. A public event or private use with the intent of
entertaining spectators.



   LIVESTOCK. See ANIMALS, DOMESTIC FARM.



   LIVESTOCK OPERATIONS. A lot or structure or combination of lots and
structures intended for the breeding, raising, or holding of 11 or more
animal units.



   LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley, or way, in or
outside of a building, for the use of trucks while loading and unloading
merchandise or materials.



   LOT. A parcel of land designated by metes and bounds, registered land
survey, plat, or other means, and which description is either recorded in the
Office of the Washington County Recorder or Registrar of Titles or used by
the County Treasurer or County Assessor to separate the parcel from other
lands for tax purposes. (See YARD.)



      (1)   AREA OF LOT. The area of a horizontal plane within the
lot lines.



      (2)   AREA - MINIMUM PER DWELLING UNIT. The minimum number of
square feet or gross developable area per dwelling unit.



      (3)   BUILDABLE LOT. A lot that meets or exceeds all
requirements of this chapter without the necessity of a variance.



      (4)   CORNER LOT. A lot situated at the junction of and
abutting 2 or more intersecting streets or public rights-of-way; or a lot at
the point of a deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle
of which does not exceed 135 degrees.



      (5)   COVERAGE OF LOT. That portion of a lot containing an
artificial or natural surface through which water cannot penetrate. This
definition includes, but is not limited to, driveways, structures, and patios.



      (6)   DEPTH OF LOT. The maximum horizontal distance between
the rear lot line and the frontage right-of-way. On a corner lot, the side
with the largest frontage is its depth and the side with the lesser frontage
is its width.



      (7)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot including
through lots.



      (8)   LOT LINE. A lot line is the property line bounding a lot
except that where any portion of a lot extends into a public right-of-way or
a proposed public right-of-way, the line of the public right-of-way shall be
the lot line for applying this chapter.



      (9)   LINE-LOT RELATED.



         (a)   FRONT LOT LINE. That boundary of a lot that abuts
an existing or dedicated public street or a private road. In the case of a
corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension of the lot abutting the street
or road. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot line
shall be designated by the owner and filed with the city. In the case of a
corner lot in a non-residential area, the lot shall be deemed to have
frontage on both streets.



         (b)   REAR LOT LINE. That boundary of a lot that is
opposite to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in
length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a
line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.



         (c)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any boundary of a lot that is not a
front lot line or a rear lot line.



      (10)   NOMINAL LOT. See NOMINAL PARCEL.



      (11)   THROUGH LOT. Any lot other than a corner lot that abuts
more than 1 street or street right-of-way. On a through lot, all property
lines abutting the street right-of-way shall be considered the front lines.



      (12)   WIDTH OF LOT. The maximum horizontal distance between
the side lot lines of a lot measured at the minimum required front setback
line.



   MAJOR HIGHWAY. Those highways and/or roadways that are classified as
principal and minor arterials and collectors in the Comprehensive Plan.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in 1 or more sections
which, in the transporting mode, is 8 body feet or more in width, or 40 body
feet or more in length, or when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein; except that the term includes any
structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies
with the standards established under Minnesota Statutes. No manufactured
dwelling shall be moved into the city that does not meet the Manufactured
Home Building Code as defined in Minnesota Statutes.



   MANUFACTURING. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of the products.



   MANURE. Any solid or liquid containing animal excreta.



   MARINA. Either an inland, shoreline, or off-shore area for the
concentrated mooring of 5 or more watercraft wherein facilities are provided
for any or all of the following ancillary services: boat storage, fueling,
launching, mechanical repairs, sanitary pumpout, and restaurant services.



   MAUSOLEUM. A structure for the entombment of the dead in crypts or
vaults in a cemetery.



   MEDICAL USES. Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and
care of human beings.



   MICRO DISTILLERY.  A distillery located within the city producing
premium distilled spirts in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons
per calendar year.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY.  A small wireless facility that is no larger
than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior
antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches.



   MINING. The excavation, removal, storage, or processing of sand,
gravel, rock, soil, clay, or other deposits. For the purposes of this
chapter, mining shall not include the excavation, removal, or storage of
rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay, or other material for the following purposes:



      (1)   Excavation for the foundation, cellar, or basement of
some pending construction for which a permit has been issued and which is to
be erected immediately following the excavation, removal, or storage;



      (2)   On-site construction of approved roads, sewer lines,
storm sewers, water mains, or surface water drainage approved by the local
unit of government for agriculture or conservation purposes, sod removal, or
other public utilities;



      (3)   Landscaping purposes on a lot used or to be used as a
building site;



      (4)   Grading/excavation of less than 1 acre of land in
conjunction with improvement of a site for lot development providing that
activities will be completed in 1 year;



      (5)   The removal of excess materials in accordance with
approved plats or highway construction.



      (6)   Topsoil removal pursuant to an interim use permit.



   MIXED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. A development consisting of
single-family detached and single-family attached dwelling units.



   MOORING. Any containment of tree-floating watercraft that provides a
fixed fastening for the craft.



   MOTEL. An establishment containing rooming units designed primarily for
providing sleeping accommodations for transient lodgers, with rooms having a
separate entrance providing direct access to the outside, and providing
automobile parking located adjacent to or near sleeping rooms.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. See TRANSPORTATION, MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.



   MOTOR VEHICLE CONVENIENCE STORE. Premises for self-service motor fuel
sales that may include the sale of convenience groceries, fast foods and/or a
restaurant, and may offer a car wash.



   MOTOR VEHICLE, NEW AUTO DEALERSHIP, LICENSED. Premises for the sale,
rental, leasing, and service of motor vehicles, including a building
containing such things as a showroom, offices, service area and parts room,
and exterior sales lots for displaying new and used vehicles.



   MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS. Retail and wholesale sale of new auto parts,
equipment, and supplies to the general public and the automotive industry.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding, or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision service,
including body frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting and
upholstering; and/or vehicle steam cleaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR. Repairs, incidental body and fender work,
replacement of parts and motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks
not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight, but not to include any operation
specified under MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR.



   MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. A place for the dispensing, sale, or
offering for sale of motor fuel directly to users of motor vehicles, together
with the sale of minor accessories and the servicing of and minor repair of
motor vehicles.



   MOTOR VEHICLE, USED AUTO DEALERSHIP, LICENSED. Premises having an open
sales lot for displaying used vehicles and which may include a small
structure for conducting sales and a service bay for detailing and minor
preparation of vehicles for sale.



   MOTOR VEHICLE WASH. Premises having a structure for washing and drying
vehicles and adequate outdoor space for staging vehicles into and out of the
wash.



   MOVING PERMIT. A permit required from the responsible governmental
agency prior to the moving of any partially or wholly erected structure from
one location to another.



   NATURAL DRAINAGE WAY. A depression in the earth’s surface, such as
ravines, draws, and hollows, which has definable beds and banks capable of
conducting surface water runoff from adjacent lands.



   NATURAL RESOURCES. The physical values of the land supplied by nature,
including, but not limited to, animal life, plant life, soil, rock, minerals,
and water.



   NEIGHBORHOOD. An area containing a contiguous group of residential lots
distinguishable by some identifiable feature or point of reference where
people live in close proximity to one another.



   NOISE, AMBIENT. The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being either a composite of sounds transmitted by any means from
many sources near and far or a single predominate source.



   NOMINAL PARCEL. A parcel not reduced by more than 10% of its lot area
due to road right-of-way dedication or survey corrections.



   NONCONFORMING LOT. A separate parcel or lot of record on the effective
date of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, which lot or parcel does not
conform to the regulations, including area or dimensional standards contained
in this chapter or amendments thereto.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any structure lawfully or legally existing on
the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, which does not
conform to the regulations, including the dimensional standards, for the
district in which it is located after the effective date of this chapter or
amendments thereto.



   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use lawfully or legally existing on the
effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, that does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.



   NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL. Material which is capable of causing injury
or is in any way harmful to living organisms, or is capable of causing
detrimental effect upon the physical, economic, or mental health of human
beings.



   NURSING HOME. A building with facilities for the health evaluation and
treatment of patients and residents who are not in need of an acute care
facility but who require nursing supervision on an inpatient basis. A nursing
home does not include a facility or that part of a facility that is a
hospital.



   OFFICE. A room, suite of rooms, or a building containing rooms or
suites of rooms in which commercial activities, professional services, or
occupations are conducted that do not require that goods are stored,
produced, sold at retail, or repaired, including, but not limited to,
financial institutions, professional offices, governmental offices, insurance
offices, real estate offices, utility offices, radio broadcasting, and
similar uses.



   OFFICIAL CONTROL. Legislatively defined and enacted policies,
standards, precise detailed maps, and other criteria, all of which control
the physical development of the city, or any part thereof, or any detail
thereof, and the means of translating into ordinances all or any part of the
general objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. The official controls may
include, but are not limited to, ordinances establishing zoning, subdivision
controls, site plan regulations, sanitary codes, building codes, housing
codes, and official maps that have been adopted by the city as the Forest
Lake Zoning Ordinance.



   OFFICIAL MAP. A map adopted in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes.



   OPEN SALES LOT. Lands devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent,
lease, or trade where the goods are not enclosed within a building.



   OPEN SPACE. Land used for agriculture, natural habitat, pedestrian
corridors, and/or recreational purposes that is undivided and permanently
protected from future development.



   OPEN SPACE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT. A pattern of subdivision development
that places residential dwelling units into compact groupings while providing
a network of dedicated open space.



   OPEN STORAGE. See EXTERIOR STORAGE.



   OUTDOOR SIDEWALK CAFE. A seasonal expansion of a permitted restaurant,
delicatessen, or lunch shop outside on an attached or unattached patio
structure, or a freestanding public or private outdoor cafe in conjunction
with a promotional event.



   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A zoning district shown as an overlay on the Zoning
Map. Development within an overlay district is subject to the regulations of
both the underlying zoning district and the overlay district.



   OWNER. Includes all persons interested in a property as fee simple
owner, life estate holder, or encumbrancer.



   PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on
privately owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient
size to store 1 standard automobile.



   PASTURE. Areas where grass or other growing plants are used for
grazing, and where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetation
cover is maintained during the growing season.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public or private right-of-way across or within a
block or tract to be used by pedestrians.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. The minimum development standards adopted by the
city that apply to all lots or uses, in addition to the other specific
regulations which apply to the individual lot or use.



   PERSON. Any person, corporation, or association, including governmental
agencies and political entities.



   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Surface materials that admit the passage of water.



   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building, together with its accessory buildings and
uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is
maintained and controlled through ownership by a religious body organized to
sustain worship.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. All developments having 2 or more principal
uses on a single parcel of land; may include townhomes, multi-use structures,
recreational uses, mixed residential and commercial type developments,
commercial type developments, and industrial type developments.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The duly appointed planning commission of the city.



   PLANT NURSERY, COMMERCIAL. A building or premises used primarily for
the retail sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, or other plants which may not have
been grown or raised on the property.



   PLANT NURSERY, WHOLESALE. A building or premises used primarily for the
growing and wholesale sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants.



   PLATTED LAND. Lands with legal descriptions described as lot, block,
and plat name.



   PRIME FARMLAND. Land that has the best combination of physical and
chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed
crops.



   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. The primary or predominant use for which a
lot and structure, if any located thereon, is conducted or maintained, as
contrasted to an accessory use or structure.



   PROTECTIVE OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. A contract entered into between
private parties that constitute a restriction of the use of a particular
parcel of property.



   PUBLIC COMPOSTING FACILITY. Any site operated, controlled or contracted
by the city for the purpose of providing for the collecting and composting of
garden waste, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, shrub and tree waste and
providing for the disposition of same.



   PUBLIC LAND. Land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit,
including school districts.



   PUBLIC WATERS. All lakes, ponds, swamps, streams, drainageways, flood
plains, floodways, natural water courses, underground water resources, and
similar features involving, directly or indirectly, the use of water within
the community as defined by the Department of Natural Resources.



   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. Land intended to accommodate uses that provide
active and passive recreational opportunities on a use and/or membership fee
basis. Land designated for commercial recreation use differs from land guided
for park and recreation use in that it is privately owned land, rather than
being publicly owned.



   RECREATION EQUIPMENT. Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides,
sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers not exceeding 30
feet in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar
equipment or structures, but not including tree houses, swimming pools, play
houses exceeding 25 square feet in door area, or sheds utilized for storage
of equipment.



   RECREATION, PUBLIC. Land intended to accommodate uses that provide
active and passive recreational opportunities, whether or not on a use and/or
membership fee basis. Land designated for public recreation use differs from
land guided for commercial recreation use in that it is publicly owned land,
rather than being privately owned. Typical uses include tot lots,
neighborhood parks, community parks, ball fields, public golf courses, public
gardens, greenways and trail corridors, beaches, and community centers.



   RECREATION VEHICLE (RV). Any vehicle or structure designed and used for
temporary, seasonal human living quarters which meets all of the following
qualifications: is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or
occupant; is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant
while engaged in recreation or vacation activities; or is towed or
self-propelled on public streets or highways incidental to the recreation or
vacation activities. Examples of the vehicles include van campers, tent
camping trailers, self-contained travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping
buses, and self-contained and self-propelled truck chassis mounted vehicles
providing living accommodations.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials that are separated from mixed municipal
solid waste for the purpose of recycling. For the purpose of this chapter,
these materials are limited to paper, glass, plastics, and metals. Refuse
derived fuel (RDF) is not a recyclable material under the provisions of this
chapter.



   RECYCLING. The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials
and reusing the materials in their original form, or using them in
manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable
materials in a manner that precludes further use.



   RECYCLING CENTER. A facility where recyclable materials are collected,
stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled prior to shipment to others who will
use those materials to manufacture new products.



   REFUSE. Perishable and non-perishable solid wastes, including garbage,
rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, and
market and industrial solid wastes, and including municipal treatment wastes
which do not contain free moisture.



   RESEARCH. Medical, chemical, electrical, metallurgical, or other
scientific research and quality control conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY, LICENSED. Any facility required to be licensed by
a governmental agency, public or private, which for gain or otherwise
regularly provides 1 or more persons with 24 hours per day substitute care,
food, lodging, training, education, supervision, habilitation,
rehabilitation, and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be
furnished in the person’s own home.



   RESORT FACILITY. Any structure containing 1 or more dwelling units or
separate living quarters or group of structures containing more than 2
dwelling units or separate living quarters designed or intended to serve as
seasonal or temporary dwellings on a rental or lease basis for profit with
the primary purpose of the structure or structures being recreational in
nature. Uses may include a grocery for guests only, fish cleaning house,
marine service, campground, boat landing and rental, recreational area and
equipment, and similar uses normally associated with a resort operation.



   RESTAURANT FAST FOOD. Any restaurant that meets some or all of the
following requirements:



      (1)   Customarily provides quick service to its customers;



      (2)   Offers to its customers a limited, standardized choice
of inexpensive food and/or beverages;



      (3)   Serves its customers from a counter and customarily does
not serve its customers at tables by a wait person;



      (4)   Packages and serves its food and beverages in disposable
wrappers, containers, cartons, boxes and/or bags;



      (5)   Expects customers to dispose of their used food serving
and packaging containers in trash, litter, or garbage cans;



      (6)   Prepares a considerable amount of its food in volume in
advance of ordering by customers;



      (7)   Offers food to customers by way of signs, placards,
posters, valances, or boards rather than on menus given to customers.



   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. A business establishment whose principal
business is the preparing, selling, and serving of unpackaged food to
customers seated at counters or tables in a ready-to-consume state.



   RETAIL/OFFICE/MULTI-TENANT STRUCTURE. Any grouping of 2 or more
principal retail uses, whether on a single lot or on abutting lots under
multiple or single ownership.



   RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES. Stores and shops selling goods over the
counter for use away from the point of purchase or offers services available
on the premises. Large items, such as motor vehicles and boats, or exterior
sales lots and repair garages, are not included in this category of uses.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. An area for public use owned and maintained by a
government jurisdiction.



   RUNWAY. A surface of an airport landing strip.



   RUNWAY INSTRUMENT. A runway equipped with air navigation facilities
suitable to permit the landing of aircraft by an instrument approach under
restricted visibility conditions.



   SCENIC RESOURCES. That part of the landscape that provides a
picturesque view and may contain outstanding recreational, natural, historic,
scientific, and manmade values.



   SCHOOL. A facility that provides a curriculum of preschool, elementary,
secondary, post-secondary, or other instruction, including, but not limited
to, licensed daycare facilities, kindergartens, elementary, junior high, high
schools, and technical or college instruction.



   SCHOOL, HOME. A school within a residential dwelling educating children
residing in the residential dwelling.



   SCHOOL, SPECIALTY. A facility that provides specialized instruction for
dance, music, art, karate, or similar educational activities.



   SCREENING. Includes earth mounds, berms, or ground forms, fences and
walls, or landscaping (plant materials) or landscaped fixtures (such as
timbers) used in combination or singularly so as to block direct visual
access to an object throughout the year.



   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE. A structure or structures containing separate
storage spaces of varying sizes that are leased or rented individually.



   SEPTIC PERMIT. A permit required from the county for the installation
of any new or replacement of on-site sewage disposal system.



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and street
right-of-way, lot line, or other reference point as provided by this chapter.
Distances are to be measured perpendicularly from the property line to the
most outwardly extended portion of the structure.



   SHOPPING CENTER. See RETAIL/OFFICE/ MULTI-TENANT STRUCTURE.



   SIGN. See §§ 153.205et seq.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.  A wireless facility that:



      (1)   Meets both of the following qualifications:



         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within
an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or



      (2)   A micro wireless facility.



   STORY. See adopted Building Code for definition.



   STREET. A public vehicular right-of-way which affords a primary means
of access to abutting property, except in the case of streets with a high
volume of vehicular traffic where access may be restricted and an alternative
access may be required.



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan, which serves or is designed to serve heavy flows of
traffic, and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street that serves or is designed to
serve as a traffic way for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major road and
designated as a collector street on the City Comprehensive Plan.



      (3)   LOCAL STREET. A street intended to serve primarily as an
access to abutting properties.



      (4)   PRIVATE STREET. A private street that has been approved
by the city. The street must support emergency vehicles, and specify that
provisions must exist for the ongoing maintenance of the street.



      (5)   STREET PAVEMENT. The wearing or exposed surface of the
roadway used by vehicular traffic.



      (6)   STREET, PUBLIC. A street owned and maintained by a
government jurisdiction.



      (7)   WIDTH OF STREET. The width of the right-of-way measured
at right angles to the centerline of the street.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which
would affect or prolong the life of the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations.



   STRUCTURE. Something built or constructed, the use of which requires a
location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the
ground, including buildings, advertising signs, billboards, or fences over 5
feet in height, swimming pools, and towers.



   STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING. See NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE.



   SUBDIVISION. The process of dividing land into 2 or more parcels for
the purpose of transfer of ownership, building development, or tax assessment
purposes by platting, replatting, registered land survey, conveyance sale,
contract for sale, or other means by which a beneficial interest in land is
transferred.



   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of 4 or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of an existing
street and not in conflict with any provisions or portion of the
Comprehensive Plan, Official Zoning Map, Zoning Regulations, or these
regulations.



   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. Any subdivision containing 3 or less lots fronting
on an existing street and not involving any new street or road or the
extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property
and not in conflict with any provisions or portion of the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Zoning Map, Zoning Regulations, or these regulations.



   TAPROOM.  Location where on-sale malt liquor produced by a brewer is
available for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewer
location owned by the brewer.



   TAVERN or BAR. A building with facilities for the serving of beer,
liquor, wine, set-ups, and short order foods.



   TEMPORARY/SEASONAL SALES. A facility or area for temporary or seasonal
sales of goods, wares, or merchandise (see § 153.096(HH)).



   TOPSOIL REMOVAL. The excavation and subsequent off-site removal of more
than 50 cubic yards of surface soil, usually including the organic layer in
which plants have most of their roots. TOPSOIL REMOVAL does not include the
removal of sand, aggregate, gravel, or mineral deposits.



   TOWER. A ground or roof mounted pole; spire; free standing,
self-supporting lattice or monopole structure; or combination thereof taller
than 35 feet, including but not limited to supporting lines, cables, wires,
braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purposes of mounting an
antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade. This
definition does not include wireless support structures for small wireless
facilities governed by M.S. § 237.163 and located in the public right-of-way.



   TOWER ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure located at the base of the tower.



      APPARATUS. Any equipment mounted on or attached to a new or
existing tower, including platforms, antennas, rotors, emergency sirens,
lights, and the like.



   TRANSPORTATION/MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which
freight brought by truck is assembled and/or stored for routing or
reshipment, or in which semi-trailers, including tractor or trailer units and
other trucks, are parked or stored.



   TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL. Taxi, bus, train, and mass transit terminal
and related ticketing, passenger waiting, parking, and storage areas.



   TRASH ENCLOSURE SERVICE STRUCTURE. A covered or uncovered structure
screening and containing trash receptacles and maintenance equipment used
on-site.



   TRAVEL TRAILER/RV CAMPGROUND/MARINA. An area or premises operated as a
commercial enterprise on a seasonal basis and generally providing space for
seasonal accommodations for transient occupancy or use by transients
occupying camping trailers, self-propelled campers, and tents.



   TRUCK STOP. A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of
tractor-trailer units and trucks, and which may include eating and/or
sleeping facilities.



   USE. The function for which property can be used.



      (1)   ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to and serving the
principal use or structure on the same lot and incidental to the principal
use. See §§ 153.110et seq.



      (2)   CONDITIONAL USE. Either a public or private use as
listed which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After consideration,
in each case, of the impact of the use upon neighboring land, and of the
public need for the particular use at the particular location, the
"conditional use" may or may not be granted by the Council. See § 153.034.



      (3)   INTERIM USE. A temporary use of property until a
particular date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until the use
is no longer allowed by zoning regulations.



      (4)   NONCONFORMING USE. See NONCONFORMING USE.



      (5)   OPEN SPACE USE. The use of land without a structure or
including a structure incidental to the open space.



      (6)   PERMITTED USE. A use that is or may be lawfully
established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms to
all requirements, regulations, and performance standards of the district.



      (7)   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A PRINCIPAL USE may be
either permitted or conditional.



   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter
as applied to a specific lot or property, except that modification in the
allowable uses in the district in which the property is located shall not be
allowed as a variance.



   VEGETATION, NATURAL. Plant life which is native to the location and
which would normally grow if the ground were left undisturbed.



   VETERINARY. Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and
medical care of animals, including animal or pet hospitals.



   WAREHOUSING. The storage, packing, and crating of materials or
equipment within an enclosed building or structure.



   WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION. A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.



   WETLAND.



      (1)   Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic
systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land
is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this chapter, WETLANDS must:



         (a)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;



         (b)   Be inundated or saturated by surface water or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and



         (c)   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence
of hydrophytic vegetation.



      (2)   WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and
similar areas.



   WHOLESALING. The selling of goods, equipment, and materials by bulk to
another person who in turn sells the same to customers.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM. One tower with rotors and motors with 1
conversion generator.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  A new or existing structure located in a
public right-of-way designed to support, or capable of supporting, small
wireless facilities, as determined by the city.



   YARD. The open space on a lot that is not covered by any structure from
its lowest ground level to the sky except as expressly permitted in this
chapter. A YARD shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to the lot
line to a depth or width specified in the zoning regulations for the district
in which the lot is located. (See LOT.)



      (1)   FRONT YARD. A yard extending along the toll width of the
front of the lot between the side lot lines and extending from the abutting
front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the zoning regulations
for the district in which the lot is located lying between the front line of
the lot and the nearest allowable building line.



      (2)   REAR YARD. A yard extending along the full width of the
rear of the lot between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot
lines for a depth as specified in the zoning regulations for the district in
which the lot is located and lying between the rear line of the lot and the
nearest allowable building line.



      (3)   REQUIRED YARD. A yard area which may not be built on or
covered by structures because of the dimensional setbacks for the structures
within the zoning district.



      (4)   SIDE YARD. A yard between the side line of the lot and
the nearest allowable building line. A yard extending along a side lot line
between the front and rear yards having a width as specified in the zoning
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.



   YARD WASTE FACILITY. Any site used for the composting of garden waste,
leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, shrub and tree waste, and prunings generated
off-site. Yard wastes generated on-site and used on the same site are not
included in this definition.



   YIELD PLAN. A subdivision plan, drawn to scale, containing sufficient
information showing the maximum number of lots that could be permitted using
the performance standards for lots in a conventional subdivision in
accordance with this chapter and Comprehensive Plan.



   ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the city in
which the regulations and requirements of this chapter are applied uniformly.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 602, passed 11-8-2010; Am. Ord. 607, passed
5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am.
Ord. 663, passed --; Am. Ord. 676, passed 7-9-2018)



APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES



§ 153.025  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter describes the required applications and procedures for
development, redevelopment, and changes in use of property in the city.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.026  GENERAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Applications. Applications must be submitted to the city by
the property owner or designated agent on forms provided by the city. Within
15 days following the receipt of the application, the city shall determine if
the application is complete and notify applicants of an incomplete
application. If the application is deemed incomplete, the application shall
not be placed on the Planning Commission agenda until the application is made
complete.



   (B)   Fees. Every application shall be accompanied by the required
fee as established and modified, from time to time, by the City Council. An
application shall be deemed to be incomplete if it is not accompanied by the
required fee. The failure to pay such fee when due shall be grounds for
refusing to process the application, and for denying or revoking any permit
or approval for the subject property. No fees shall be waived, and no fees
shall be refunded, except those authorized by the City Council at its sole
discretion.



   (C)   Schedule. Upon receipt of an application that contains all
required information, the city shall schedule the matter for review by the
Planning Commission. From the date the city receives the application
containing all required information, the City Council must approve or deny
the application within 60 days. The city may extend the 60 day period by
providing written notice of the extension to the applicant before the end of
the initial 60 day period. This notification must state the reason for the
extension and its anticipated length, which may not exceed an additional 60
days.



   (D)   Notification. All applications for development proposals
requiring a public hearing must be advertised to allow informed participation
by all interested parties and to comply with applicable state statutes. The
applicant shall be required to post a sign on the subject property prior to
all public hearings in accordance with the following provisions:



      (1)   Location and time period for posting signs. The required
posting period shall be no less than 15 consecutive days, but no more than 30
days, prior to the public hearing or site plan review public meeting. The
sign shall be posted at a prominent location on the property, near the
sidewalk or public right-of-way, so that it is visible to passing pedestrians
and motorists. Properties with more than 1 street frontage shall be required
to post 1 sign visible from each street frontage.



      (2)   Applicant’s responsibility for posting signs. The
applicant shall obtain the required sign from the City of Forest Lake. It is
the applicant’s responsibility to erect the sign on the property and
maintain it during the required period.



      (3)   Failure to post. Failure to post for the required time
shall constitute grounds for suspension or discontinuance of the approval
process.



   (E)   Applications that require a public hearing. The following
applications require public hearings:



      (1)   Zoning text and map amendments;



      (2)   Conditional use permits, amendments, and revocations;



      (3)   Variances;



      (4)   Preliminary plats;



      (5)   Minor subdivisions;



      (6)   Planned Unit Developments (PUDs);



      (7)   Interim use permits, amendments, and revocations; and



      (8)   Vacations of public right-of-way or drainage easement.



   (F)   Public examination and copying of applications and other
documents. During normal business hours, any person may examine the
application and material submitted in support of, or in opposition to, the
application, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Freedom of
Information Act. Upon reasonable request, any person shall be entitled to
copies of the application and related documents. The city shall make copies
of such materials for a fee as specified by the city.



   (G)   Withdrawal of application. An applicant shall have the right
to withdraw an application at any time prior to the decision on the
application by the city, commission, or board, including the ability to
withdraw the application if it has been tabled by a commission or board.
There shall be no refund of fees. Requests for withdrawal shall be in writing
by the applicant and submitted to the city for record.



   (H)   Planning Commission and City Council action.



      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend such actions or
conditions relating to the application as it deems necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   The City Council may adopt, modify, or reject any
recommendation of the Planning Commission.



      (3)   The City Council may table a recommendation for further
consideration within time periods set by state statute.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.027  ZONING INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Purpose. This interpretation authority is not intended to add
or change the essential content of this chapter. The interpretation authority
is intended to recognize that the provisions of this chapter, though detailed
and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific zoning
issue. Such issues may often be addressed by reference to general
circumstances that the specific provision was intended to address.



   (B)   Initiation. Applications for zoning interpretations may be
filed by an owner of any property in the city. In addition, the City Council
or the Planning Commission may request that the Community Development
Department render an interpretation. All applications for interpretations
shall be filed with the city in accordance with § 153.027. No person may
request an interpretation for purely academic purposes. The interpretation
must be for the purpose of furthering some actual development or active
zoning issue.



   (C)   Procedure. The Community Development Department shall review a
request for an interpretation and render the interpretation within 30
business days. The city shall have the ability to request additional
information prior to rendering an interpretation.



   (D)   Authority and execution. The Community Development Department
and City Attorney shall review and make final decisions on requests for
interpretations. Nothing in this section shall require the Community
Development Department or City Attorney to make an interpretation if they are
of the opinion that the exposure to liability for the city on account of the
interpretation outweighs the benefit to the requestor. Such final
interpretations shall be brought before the City Council.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.028  REQUIRED NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS.



   (A)   Neighborhood meetings are held for applications for
preliminary plats, conditional use permits, Planned Unit Developments, and/or
rezoning proposals that are located adjacent to or within a residential
zoning district. After the formal application is submitted and accepted as
complete for review by the city, but before the request is reviewed by the
Planning Commission, the city requires the applicant to hold a neighborhood
informational meeting.



   (B)   The applicant shall schedule the meeting and send out meeting
notices to property owners and their tenants within 350 feet of the property
proposed for development. This distance is increased to 1,000 feet for sites
in the Conservancy, Rural Residential and Agricultural zoning districts. The
purpose of this meeting is to provide information about the application and
for area property owners to ask questions about the project and the
development process before the application is discussed by City Advisory
Commissions and the City Council. It is important for citizens to get
involved at this state to ensure that concerns are addressed early in the
process. Therefore, it is the applicant’s responsibility to hold a
neighborhood meeting in accordance with the procedure described in the
following paragraphs.



      (1)   The applicant shall send out meeting notices to property
owners and their tenants at least 10 days prior to the scheduled meeting
date. Meetings shall be scheduled Monday through Thursday evenings starting
at 6:30 p.m. and not on a holiday, evening proceeding a holiday, or on
Halloween. The applicant shall host the meeting within the City of Forest
Lake and present the project for questions and concerns. Verification that
the meeting notice was mailed is required before the application will be
scheduled on an agenda for review by the Planning Commission.



      (2)   The meeting shall be held a minimum of 10 days prior to
the Planning Commission meeting at which the proposed application will be
discussed. At the completion of the meeting the applicant shall submit a list
of attendees and minutes of the meeting to the Community Development staff.



      (3)   Notices and/or invitations to the neighborhood shall be
sent to those names and addresses listed on the public hearing notice list as
well as Community Development staff, Planning Commission, Parks, Trails, and
Lakes Commission, and City Council members.



      (4)   The Planning Commission liaison from the City Council
shall attend all neighborhood meetings as an observer when possible.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 640, passed 6-8-2015; Am. Ord. 642,
passed 6-22-2015)



§ 153.029  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the certificate of compliance
provisions of this chapter is to administratively authorize and regulate uses
in zoning districts that require a certificate of compliance. The certificate
of compliance documents that a proposed development will meet all development
standards if the project proceeds in accordance with such plans.



   (B)   Application. Whenever this chapter requires a certificate of
compliance as specified for a particular use or within a specific zoning
district, a written application shall be filed with the city. The application
shall be accompanied by development plans of the proposed use showing such
information as may be reasonably required by the city.



   (C)   Compliance. The use shall conform to the regulations and or
conditions specified in this chapter and all other conditions of the
certificate of compliance.



   (D)   Issuance and conditions. If the city determines that the use
is in compliance with the requirements contained in this chapter and all
other necessary conditions, then the city shall issue the certificate.
Standards required by this chapter and all other conditions shall be applied
to the issuance of the certificate of compliance and a periodic review of the
certificate and proposed use may be required.



   (E)   Record of certificates of compliance. The city shall maintain
a record of all certificates of compliance issued, including information on
the use, location, and conditions imposed as part of the permit such as time
limits, review dates, and such other information as may be appropriate.



   (F)   Appeals to denial of certificates of compliance. If the
request for a certificate of compliance is denied, if conditions are imposed,
or if revoked, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals. The procedures to be followed in presenting the
appeal shall be the same as those followed for an appeal of any
administrative decision made by the city.



   (G)   Expiration of certificates of compliance. A certificate of
compliance shall expire and be considered null and void 1 year after it has
been issued if the use has not been established.



   (H)   Revocation. A violation of any condition set forth in a
certificate of compliance shall be a violation of this chapter. Failure to
correct the violation within 30 days of written notice from the city shall
terminate the certificate of compliance unless an appeal is filed pursuant to
division (F) of this section.



   (I)   Existing uses. All uses existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter that required a certificate of compliance but do not have a
certificate of compliance may continue in the same manner of the operation as
the use did upon the effective date of this chapter. Any enlargement,
structural alteration, or intensification of use shall require a new
certificate of compliance as provided for above along with other permits and
approvals. The city may impose additional, reasonable conditions for the
continuation of the use in accordance with the regulations set forth in this
chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.030  BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   No structure, except those which are governed by the
provisions relating to a certificate of compliance, hereafter shall be
erected or structurally altered until a building permit is issued indicating
that the existing or proposed structure and the use of the land comply with
this chapter and all pertinent building codes.



   (B)   All applications for building permits pertaining to the
erection or alteration of a structure shall be made to the city on forms
furnished by the city.



   (C)   No site preparation work, including rough grading, driveway
construction, footing excavation, tree removal, or other physical changes to
the site shall occur prior to city approval.



   (D)   Building permit shall expire 1 year after issuance. The permit
may be renewed any amount of times as long as progress is being made by the
applicant as required in the Building Code, unless prior arrangements have
been made by the city and the applicant.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.031  DRIVEWAY ACCESS APPROVAL.



   (A)   County. Access drives onto county roads shall require an
access permit from the Washington County Public Works Department. This permit
shall be issued before issuance of any building permits. The County Engineer
shall determine the appropriate location, size, and design of the access
drives and may limit the number of access drives in the interest of public
safety and efficient traffic flow. A copy of all documentation shall be
submitted to the city for record.



   (B)   State. Access onto any state highway shall require the
approval of a permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT).
This permit shall be issued before issuance of any building permits. The
state shall determine the appropriate location, size, and design of the
access drives and may limit the number of access drives in the interest of
public safety and efficient traffic flow. A copy of all documentation shall
be submitted to the city for record.



   (C)   City. Access onto any local city street shall require approval
of the City Engineer. The city shall determine the appropriate location,
size, and design of the access drives and may limit the number of access
drives in the interest of public safety and efficient traffic flow. This
approval shall be granted prior to the issuance of any building permits and
in writing. A copy of all documentation shall be on file at the city.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.032  ON-SITE WASTE DISPOSAL PERMITS.



   (A)   In areas without public sewer facilities, no building permit
for any use requiring sub-surface sewage treatment and disposal shall be
issued until an on-site waste disposal permit has been issued by Washington
County.



   (B)   An on-site waste disposal permit shall be issued only after
the applicant furnishes proof that a suitable on-site waste treatment and
disposal system can be installed on the site. The system shall conform to all
of the requirements of the current subsurface sewage treatment system
regulations of Washington County, including percolation tests and borings.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.033  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or structure, or portion of a building or
structure, constructed, erected, enlarged, altered, converted, or moved onto
a lot within the city until a certificate of occupancy has been issued.



   (B)   A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 business
days after the Building Official has determined the building or structure and
use are in conformance with all provisions of this chapter and that all
conditions for issuance have been met. A record shall be kept of all
certificates issued.



   (C)   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. Conditions
may be imposed on the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy in
order to ensure compliance with this chapter, including posting a bond or
other financial security acceptable to the city. Issuance of a temporary
certificate shall not alter the rights or obligations of the owner, tenant,
or city with respect to full compliance with the requirements of this chapter
or other provisions of the City Code.



   (D)   A certificate of occupancy may be revoked if the building or
use is no longer in compliance with this chapter. The city shall have
authority to enforce the revocation of the certificate of occupancy by
appropriate means. Upon revocation, the building or structure shall not be
used for any purposes until issuance of a new certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.034  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a conditional use permit (CUP) is to
authorize and regulate uses that are permitted by this chapter if certain
conditions, having been designated by this chapter or by the Planning
Commission, are met. The use shall comply with all standards of this chapter
and any additional conditions, including conditions of operation, location,
arrangement, and construction, as may be necessary to protect public health,
safety, or welfare.



   (B)   Application. Application for a CUP shall be made to the city
on an official city application form. An application for a CUP shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by the City Council. The application
shall also include written and graphic materials fully explaining the
proposed change, development, or use. The city may require that the applicant
submit the following information before the application can be deemed
complete:



      (1)   Legal description of the subject property;



      (2)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



      (3)   General location map;



      (4)   Principal land uses within 350 feet of the property;



      (5)   Certificate of survey, to scale, showing applicable
existing and proposed conditions, including property lines and dimensions,
building location and setbacks, dimensions of building, curb cuts, driveways,
access roads, parking, off-street loading areas, septic system, and well;



      (6)   Landscape plan drawn to scale showing applicable
existing and proposed vegetation and plantings, plant schedule, including
information about the plant size, quantity, type and root condition, and
groundcover;



      (7)   Grading and drainage plan;



      (8)   Soil conditions;



      (9)   Building floor plans, elevations, and sections;



      (10)   Description of type of business or activity and
proposed number of employees;



      (11)   Other information as may be required by the city.



   (C)   Notice.



      (1)   Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, an application for a CUP
shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date of its official and
complete submission. The 60- day review period can be extended an additional
60 days pursuant to M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time. If
the initial 60-day review period is extended, the city must provide written
notice of the extension to the applicant before the end of the initial review
period.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by
the city and following preliminary staff analysis of the application, the
city shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission and establish a time
for hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Written
notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the
hearing to all owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property
in question.



      (3)   Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall
not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply with the provisions of this chapter
has been made. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent shall be made a part of the record.



   (D)   Procedure.



      (1)   The Planning Commission shall consider if the proposed
use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   The impact of the proposed use on the health,
safety, and general welfare of the occupants of the surrounding lands;



         (b)   Existing and anticipated traffic conditions,
including parking facilities on adjacent streets and lands;



         (c)   The effect of the proposed use on public utilities;



         (d)   The effect of the proposed use on property values
and scenic views in the surrounding area;



         (e)   The effect of the proposed use on the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (f)   The ability of the proposed use to meet the
standards of this chapter;



         (g)   The results of a market feasibility study, if
requested by the city, when the purpose for which the conditional use is
being requested relies on a business market for its success;



         (h)   The effects of the proposed use on ground water,
surface water, and air quality; and



         (i)   Whether the proposed use is allowed with a CUP in
the zoning district in which it is proposed.



      (2)   The Planning Commission and city staff shall have the
authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning
operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the
expense of the applicant.



      (3)   The applicant or the applicant's representative may
appear before the Planning Commission in order to present information and
answer questions concerning the proposed request.



      (4)   After receiving a report and recommendation from the
Community Development Department and holding a public hearing on the
application, the Planning Commission shall issue its written final decision
granting or denying the application supported by findings of fact. The
Planning Commission may approve conditions relating to the request as it
deems necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.



      (5)   In connection with the issuance of CUPs in nonconforming
situations, the city may require nonconformities to conform to the
regulations contained in the zoning regulations and may impose such
additional restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary to protect the
public interest. When appropriate, restrictive covenants may be imposed
regarding such matters.



      (6)   The city may impose and the applicant shall pay costs
incurred by the city for monitoring compliance with the conditions of the CUP.



   (E)   Certification of taxes paid. Prior to approving an application
for a CUP, the applicant shall provide certification to the city that there
are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or city
utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the CUP application relates.



   (F)   Length of conditional use. Any use permitted under the terms
of any CUP shall be established and conducted in conformity with the terms of
the permit and of any conditions imposed in connection therewith. CUPs shall
remain in effect for so long as the conditions agreed upon are observed,
provided that nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Council from
enacting or amending official controls to change the status of conditional
uses.



   (G)   Revocation.



      (1)   A violation of any condition set forth in a CUP shall be
a violation of this chapter, and failure to correct the violation within 30
days of written notice from the city shall terminate the permit.



      (2)   Revocation shall not occur earlier than 10 city working
days from the time the written notice of revocation is served upon the
permittee, or, if a hearing is requested, until written notice of the
revocation issued by Planning Commission action subsequent to the hearing has
been served on the permittee.



      (3)   Notice to the permittee shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail at the address designated in the permit
application. The written notice of revocation shall contain the effective
date of the revocation, the nature of the violation or violations
constituting the basis of the revocation, the facts which support the
conclusions that a violation or violations have occurred, and a statement
that if the permittee desires to appeal, he or she must, within 10 days,
exclusive of the day of service, file a request for a hearing with the City
Administrator.



      (4)   The hearing request shall be in writing, stating the
grounds for appeal and served personally or by registered or certified mail
on the city by midnight of the tenth day following service of the notice of
revocation.



      (5)   Following the receipt of a request for a hearing, the
city shall set a time and place for the hearing, which shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures to appeal decisions of the city as set forth
in this chapter.



   (H)   Records of conditional uses. A certified copy of any CUP shall
be filed with the Washington County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The city
shall maintain a record of all CUPs issued, including information on the use,
location, conditions imposed by the City Council, time limits, review dates,
and such other information as may be appropriate. A copy of the filed permit,
bearing notation of the filing date, shall be mailed to the applicant.



   (I)   Amendment. Holders of a CUP may propose amendments to the
permit at any time, following the procedures for a new permit set forth in
this chapter. No significant changes in the circumstances or the scope of the
permitted uses shall be undertaken without approval of those amendments by
the Planning Commission. The city shall determine what constitutes
significant change. Significant changes include, but are not limited to,
hours of operation, number of employees, expansion of structures and/or
premises, and operational modifications resulting in increased external
activities and traffic, and the like. The Planning Commission may approve
significant changes and modifications to CUPs, including the application of
additional or revised conditions.



   (J)   Expiration. Unless the Planning Commission specifically
approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request,
permits which have been issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire without further action by the Planning Commission unless the applicant
commences the authorized uses within 1 year of the date the CUP is issued,
or, unless before the expiration of the 1-year period, the applicant shall
apply for an extension thereof by completing and submitting a request for
extension. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith
attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the CUP. A request for an
extension not exceeding 1 year shall be subject to the review and approval of
the city. Should the applicant request a second extension or any extension of
time longer than 1 year, it shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
a final decision.



   (K)   Reapplication. No application for a CUP for a particular use
on a particular parcel shall be resubmitted for a period of 1 year from the
date of the denial of the previous application unless a decision to
reconsider the matter is made by a majority vote of the full Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 636,
passed 3-24- 2014)



§ 153.035  INTERIM USES.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim
uses is:



      (1)   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a
permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under
construction.



      (2)   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by
the city but that with anticipated development or redevelopment will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.



      (3)   To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated
long-range change to an area and which is in compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan provided that said use maintains harmony and compatibility
with surrounding uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and
design standards of existing uses and development.



   (B)   Procedures. Uses defined as interim uses which do not
presently exist within a respective zoning district shall be processed
according to the following standards and procedures.



      (1)   The applicant(s) shall submit a completed application
and all required materials to the city. The Planning Commission and city
staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the
applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with
the consent and at the expense of the applicant.



      (2)   Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, an application for an
interim use shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date of its
official and complete submission. The 60 day review period can be extended an
additional 60 days pursuant to M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time
to time. If the initial 60 day review period is extended, the city must
provide written notice of the extension to the applicant before the end of
the initial review period.



      (3)   Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by
the city and following preliminary staff analysis of the application, the
city shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission and establish a time
for hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the hearing. Written
notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the
hearing to all owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property
in question.



      (4)   Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall
not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply with the provisions of this chapter
has been made. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent shall be made a part of the record.



      (5)   The Planning Commission shall take public testimony at
the public hearing and review the submitted application and recommendation
from city staff and make a recommendation to City Council for denial or
approval. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall include all
conditions or modifications to the application.



      (6)   The City Council shall review the submitted application
and recommendation from the Planning Commission and city staff and make a
final decision. The final decision of the City Council shall include all
conditions or modifications to the application. The Planning Commission, in
making a recommendation, and the City Council, in acting upon an interim use
application, shall consider the following general standards.



   (C)   General standards. An interim use shall comply with the
following:



      (1)   Meet the standards of a conditional use permit set forth
in § 153.034 of this chapter;



      (2)   Conform to the applicable standards of §§ 153.315
through 153.335 and the applicable zoning district standards;



      (3)   The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective
zoning district;



      (4)   The date or event that will terminate the use can be
identified with certainty;



      (5)   The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on
the public;



      (6)   The user agrees to any conditions that the Planning
Commission deems appropriate for permission of the use.



   (D)   Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening
of any of the following events, whichever occurs first:



      (1)   The date stated in the permit;



      (2)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was
issued;



      (3)   Upon change in the city's zoning regulations which
renders the use nonconforming;



      (4)   The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it
is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective
zoning district.



   (E)   Revocation.



      (1)   A violation of any condition set forth in an Interim Use
Permit shall be a violation of this chapter, and failure to correct the
violation within 30 days of written notice from the city shall terminate the
permit.



      (2)   Revocation shall not occur earlier than 10 city working
days from the time the written notice of revocation is served upon the
permittee, or if a hearing is requested, until written notice of the Planning
Commission action has been served on the permittee.



      (3)   Notice to the permittee shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail at the address designated in the permit
application. The written notice of revocation shall contain the effective
date of the revocation, the nature of the violation or violations
constituting the basis of the revocation, the facts which support the
conclusions that a violation or violations have occurred, and a statement
that if the permittee desires a hearing to contest the revocation, the
permittee must, within 10 days, exclusive of the day of service, file a
request for a hearing.



      (4)   The hearing request shall be in writing, stating the
grounds for appeal and served personally or by registered or certified mail
on the city by midnight of the tenth day following service of the notice of
revocation.



      (5)   Following the receipt of a request for a hearing, the
city shall set a time and place for the hearing which shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures to appeal decisions of the city as set forth
in this chapter.



   (F)   Amendment. Holders of an IUP may propose amendments to the
permit at any time following the procedures for a new permit set forth in
this chapter. No significant changes in the circumstances or the scope of the
permitted uses shall be undertaken without approval of those amendments by
the Planning Commission. The city shall determine what constitutes
significant change. Significant changes include, but are not limited to,
hours of operation, number of employees, expansion of structures and/or
premises, and operational modifications resulting in increased external
activities and traffic, and the like. The Planning Commission may approve
significant changes and modifications to IUPs, including the application of
additional or revised conditions.



   (G)   Expiration. Unless the Planning Commission specifically
approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request,
permits which have been issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire without further action by the Planning Commission unless the applicant
commences the authorized uses within 1 year of the date the IUP is issued,
or, unless before the expiration of the 1-year period, the applicant shall
apply for an extension thereof by completing and submitting a request for
extension. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith
attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the IUP. A request for an
extension not exceeding 1 year shall be subject to the review and approval of
the city. Should the applicant request a second extension or any extension of
time longer than 1 year, it shall be presented to the Planning Commission for
a decision.



   (H)   Reapplication. No application for an IUP for a particular use
on a particular parcel shall be resubmitted for a period of 1 year from the
date of the denial of the previous application unless a decision to
reconsider the matter is made by a majority vote of the full Planning
Commission.



   (I)   Certification of taxes paid. Prior to approving an application
for an interim use permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the
city that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments,
interest, or city utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the
interim use permit application relates.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-24-2014; Am. Ord. 648,
passed 9-28-2015)



§ 153.036  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the variance provisions of this
chapter is to provide for deviations or variations from the provisions of
this chapter in instances where their strict enforcement would cause
practical difficulties because of circumstances unique to the individual
property under consideration, and when it is demonstrated that such actions
would be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and with the
Comprehensive Plan. As used in connection with the granting of a variance,
PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES means that the property owner proposes to use the
property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning code. Any use
that is not allowed under this chapter for property in the zone where the
affected person's land is located may not be permitted by a variance.



   (B)   Application. Application for a variance shall be made to the
city on forms provided by the city. An application for a variance shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City Code. The application shall
also include written and graphic materials fully explaining the requested
variance. The city may require that the applicant submit the following
information before the application can be deemed complete:



      (1)   A certificate of survey or map of the property that
shows all lot lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways and parking
areas, significant topographical features, and significant trees;



      (2)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property and
its legal description;



      (3)   A written description of the variance request, including
an explanation of compliance with the variance criteria set forth in this
chapter;



      (4)   Building floor plans, elevations, and sections;



      (5)   Grading and drainage plan; and



      (6)   Other information as may be required by the city.



   (C)   Notice.



      (1)   Pursuant to Minnesota Statute, an application for a
variance shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date of its
official and complete submission. The 60 day review period can be extended an
additional 60 days pursuant to M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time
to time. If the initial 60-day review period is extended, the city must
provide written notice of the extension to the applicant before the end of
the initial review period.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by
the city, and following preliminary staff analysis of the application, the
city, shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission acting as a board of
appeals and adjustments pursuant to M.S. § 362.357, Subd. 6(2) and establish
a time for the hearing on the application. At least 10 days before the date
of the meeting, a written notice of the meeting shall be published in the
official newspaper and mailed to all owners of land within 350 feet of the
boundary of the property in question.



      (3)   Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall
not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply with the provisions of this chapter
has been made. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent shall be made a part of the record.



   (D)   Procedure.



      (1)   The Planning Commission shall not approve a variance
application unless it finds failure to grant the variance will result in
practical difficulties for the applicant and, as may be applicable, the
following practical difficulty criteria shall be considered:



         (a)   Because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape, or topographical conditions unique to the specific parcel of land
involved, a practical difficulty to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be
carried out;



         (b)   The property owner proposes to use the property in
question in a reasonable manner not permitted by this chapter. Economic
considerations alone (or desire to increase the value or income potential of
the land) shall not constitute practical difficulties if reasonable use of
the property exists under the terms of this chapter;



         (c)   The plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner;



         (d)   The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements
in the vicinity of the parcel or land, nor shall it alter the essential
character of the locality;



         (e)   The proposed variance is in keeping with the
spirit and intent of this chapter and thus approval of the variance will not:



            1.   Impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property;



            2.    Substantially increase the congestion of the
public streets;



            3.   Increase the danger of fire;



            4.   Endanger the public safety; or



            5.    Substantially diminish or impair property
values within the neighborhood; or



            6.   Cause drainage issues for an adjacent
property.



      (2)   Inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy
systems may be considered a practical difficulty. Variances shall be granted
for earth sheltered construction, as defined in M.S. § 216C.06, Subd. 14,
when in harmony with this chapter.



      (3)   The city shall have the authority to request additional
information from the applicant.



      (4)   The applicant or the applicant's representative may
appear before the Planning Commission to present information and answer
questions concerning the request.



      (5)   The Planning Commission shall issue its final decision
granting or denying the request supported by findings of fact.



      (6)   In granting a variance, the Planning Commission, after
considering the recommendations of the city staff, shall impose such
conditions as it deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. A
condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality
to the impact created by the variance.



   (E)   Expiration. Any variance granted by the city shall run with
the land and shall be perpetual. However, if no building permit has been
issued or substantial work performed on the project within 1 year of
approval, then the variance shall be null and void. The Planning Commission
may extend the period for construction upon finding that the interest of the
owners of neighboring properties will not be adversely affected by the
extension. If the variance is part of an approved site and building plan,
extension of the time for construction shall be contingent upon a similar
extension of the time for the site and building plan by the Planning
Commission as required by this chapter. Once the project is completed as
approved, the variance becomes perpetual.



   (F)   Specific project. A variance shall be valid only for the
project for which it was granted. Construction of any project shall be in
substantial compliance with the building plans and specifications reviewed
and approved by the city.



   (G)   Certification of taxes paid. Prior to approving an application
for a variance, the applicant shall provide certification to the city that
there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or
city utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the variance
application relates.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 610,
passed 9-12-2011; Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-24-2014; Am. Ord. 648, passed
9-28-2015)



§ 153.037  ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section specifies the procedures for amendments
to the text of this chapter or associated Official Zoning Map.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   An amendment to the text of this chapter or a change in
the boundaries or designations in the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by
a simple majority of the City Council or Planning Commission. Any persons
owning property within the city, or their designated agent, may initiate an
application to amend the district boundaries or designation on the Official
Zoning Map for property in which they have a real estate interest.



      (2)   A request for an amendment to the text of this chapter
or a change in the boundaries or designations in the Official Zoning Map
shall be filed with the city on an official application form. The application
shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in a resolution by the City
Council. The application shall include detailed written and graphic materials
fully explaining the request. The city may require that the applicant submit
the following information before the application can be deemed complete:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant or
applicants;



         (b)   The legal description of the area proposed to be
rezoned, the name and addresses of all the owners of property lying within
such area, and a description of the property owned by each;



         (c)   The present zone classification of the area and
the proposed zone classification;



         (d)   A description of the present use of each
separately owned parcel within the area and the intended use of any parcel of
land therein;



         (e)   If determined by the city, a site plan showing the
location and extent of the proposed building, parking, loading, access
drives, landscaping, and other improvements;



         (f)   A statement of how the rezoning would fit in with
the general zoning pattern of the neighborhood and the zoning plan of the
entire city;



         (g)   A survey showing the property to be rezoned and
the present zoning of the surrounding area for at least a distance of 350
feet, including the street pattern of the area, together with an
abstractor’s certificate with the names and addresses of the owners of the
land in each area;



         (h)   Proof of ownership of the property; and



         (i)   Such other information as the city may require.



   (C)   Notice.



      (1)   Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, an application for an
amendment to the text of this chapter or a change in the boundaries or
designations in the Official Zoning Map shall be approved or denied within 60
days from the date of its official and complete submission. The 60 day review
period can be extended an additional 60 days pursuant to Minnesota Statute.
If the initial 60 day review period is extended, the city must provide
written notice of the extension to the applicant before the end of the
initial review period.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by
the city, and following preliminary staff analysis of the application, the
city, when appropriate, shall set a public hearing following proper hearing
notification. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the
hearing shall also be mailed at least 10 days prior to the hearing to all
owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property in question.
This distance is increased to 1,000 feet for sites in the Conservancy, Rural
Residential and Agricultural zoning districts.



      (3)   Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall
not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply with the provisions of this chapter
has been made. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent shall be made a part of the record.



   (D)   Procedure.



      (1)   Findings of fact. The Planning Commission recommendation
and City Council decision on any zoning amendment, whether text or map
amendment, is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by
any particular standard. However, in making their recommendation and
decision, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the
following standards, as set forth in division (E).



      (2)   The Planning Commission and city staff shall have the
authority to request additional information from the applicant.



      (3)   The applicant or the applicant’s representative may
appear before the Planning Commission in order to present information and
answer questions concerning the proposed request.



      (4)   The Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and
make a recommendation on the request. The recommendation shall be in writing
and accompanied by the report and recommendation of the city staff.



      (5)   Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the
Planning Commission and the city staff, the city shall schedule the
application for consideration by the City Council. The reports and
recommendations shall be entered in and made a part of the permanent record
of the City Council meeting.



      (6)   Approval of a request shall require passage by a
majority vote of the entire City Council, except an amendment changing a
district from residential to commercial or industrial that shall require a
2/3 majority vote.



   (E)   Standards for zoning amendments.



 


 

Map Amendments

 

Text Amendments





The existing use and zoning of nearby property.
 

x

 





The extent to which the proposed amendment promotes the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city.
 

x

 





The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the
applicant.
 

x

 

x



The suitability of the property for the purposes for which it is presently
zoned, i.e. the feasibility of developing the property in question for 1 or
more of the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification.
 

x

 





The length of time that the property in question has been vacant, as
presently zoned, considered in the context of development in the area where
the property is located.
 

x

 





The evidence, or lack of evidence, of community need for the use proposed by
the applicant.
 

x

 





The consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan.
 

x

 

x



The consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent and general
regulations of this chapter.
 



 

x



Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or omission, adds
clarification to existing requirements, or reflects a change in policy.
 



 

x



Whether the proposed amendment provides a more workable way to achieve the
intent and purposes of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.
 



 

x



That the proposed amendment will benefit the residents of the city as a
whole, and not just the applicant, property owner(s), neighbors of any
property under consideration, or other special interest groups, and the
extent to which the proposed use would be in the public interest.
 

x

 

x



The extent to which the proposed amendment creates nonconformities.
 

x

 

x



The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in
question.
 

x

 





Whether adequate public facilities are available including, but not limited
to, schools, parks, police and fire protection, roads, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, and water lines, or are reasonably capable of being provided prior to
the development of the uses, which would be permitted on the subject property
if the amendment were adopted.
 

x

 





The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the overall
structure and organization of this chapter.
 



 

x



That there is an adequate buffer or transition between potentially
incompatible districts.
 

x

 





That the proposed action will not adversely affect property values.
 

x

 







 



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.038  SITE PLAN APPROVAL.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a formal
site plan review procedure that will assist the city in achieving safe,
functional, and attractive development. Site plan review is required for
uses, other than the exempted uses below, prior to issuance of a building
permit for new construction or additions or changes to a building’s
exterior and is required in conjunction with an application for a:



      (1)   Conditional use permit;



      (2)   Plat;



      (3)   Residential subdivision;



      (4)   Commercial development;



      (5)   Variance;



      (6)   Rezoning;



      (7)   Planned Unit Development;



      (8)   Subdivision; and



      (9)   Interim use permit.



   (B)   Exemptions from review. The following uses shall be exempted
from the site plan review requirements:



      (1)   Agricultural uses in the AP, C, A, and RR Districts;



      (2)   Single-family detached and two-family dwellings; and



      (3)   Single-family attached dwellings approved by Planned
Unit Development and/or subdivision unless otherwise required by the city.



   (C)   Preliminary review. Prior to developing a final site plan for
submission, applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the city for
review and comment. City staff shall have the authority to refer the sketch
plan to the Planning Commission and/or City Council for discussion, review,
and informal comment. Any opinions, comments, or suggestions offered in this
preliminary review shall not constitute a binding decision on the request.



   (D)   Application. The following data shall be submitted in
conjunction with an application for final site plan review. The city may
waive some requirements depending on the complexity of the proposal.



      (1)   Certificate of survey. Shall be drawn to scale of not
more than 1 inch equals 50 feet and include the following information:



         (a)   The date, north point, map scale, name and address
of the applicant, owner, operator, surveyor, engineer and designer, including
their license numbers and seals;



         (b)   A correct boundary survey and legal description of
the subject property;



         (c)   Depiction of all existing watercourses, lakes,
wetlands, wooded areas, and rock outcrops - see §§ 153.295et seq. and §
153.343 for woodland and shoreland requirements;



         (d)   The location, right-of-way width, dimensions and
names of existing or dedicated streets or other public lands, permanent
buildings and structures, easements, section and corporate lines within the
subject property and within a distance of 100 feet from the property
boundaries;



         (e)   Descriptions, reference ties, and elevations of
all benchmarks;



         (f)   Location of all monuments existing at the time of
the survey and those which the surveyor shall have located at the corners of
the subject property;



         (g)   Reference to and relations of municipal, township,
county, or section lines to lines of the subject property by distances,
angles, radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings, and
lengths of all arcs; and



         (h)   Boundary lines of adjoining property within 100
feet, identifying owners.



      (2)   Site plan. Shall be drawn to scale of not more than 1
inch equals 50 feet and include the following information:



         (a)   Boundaries with dimensions and angles and ties to
section lines;



         (b)   Existing buildings on the site and within 100 feet;



         (c)   Proposed buildings, additions, or demolitions;



         (d)   Existing and proposed curbs, curb cuts and
driveways, curb and driveway cross-sections;



         (e)   Existing and proposed parking and loading
facilities, parking lot cross sections;



         (f)   Trash and waste storage facilities;



         (g)   Pedestrian circulation system with cross-section;



         (h)   Screening (fences, walls, landscaping, and berms)
with construction details; and



         (i)   Tabulation of pertinent site data to aid in
evaluating compliance with zoning requirements.



      (3)   Lighting plan. Shall include the following information:



         (a)   Location of all exterior lighting;



         (b)   Illumination pattern and data on lighting fixtures;



         (c)   Details of lighting fixtures; and



         (d)   Relationship to lighting on abutting properties.



      (4)   Grading and drainage plan. Shall include the following
information:



         (a)   Existing and proposed topography;



         (b)   Existing and proposed drainage facilities;



         (c)   Delineation of topography of subject property with
contour intervals of not more than 2 feet and supplemental of 1 foot in
extremely flat areas;



         (d)   Calculations to determine sizing of pipes,
structures, and water storage areas;



         (e)   Gradients and invert elevations of surface
drainage and pipes;



         (f)   Erosion control measures; and



         (g)   Drainage easements.



      (5)   Utilities plan. Shall include the following information:



         (a)   Existing and proposed sanitary sewer and water
systems;



         (b)   Elevations, gradients, and sizing of all
components; and



         (c)   Utility easements.



      (6)   Landscape plan. Shall include the following information:



         (a)   Location, size, and species of all proposed plant
materials;



         (b)   Location, size, and species of all existing plant
materials over 4 inches in diameter at 4.5 feet above ground level measuring
a minimum of 6 inches in diameter for all hardwood deciduous trees or a
minimum of 12 inches in diameter for all softwood deciduous trees or a
minimum of 12 feet in height for all coniferous trees;



         (c)   Plant schedule;



         (d)   Planting details; and



         (e)   Existing plants to be removed.



      (7)   Sign plan. Shall include the following information:



         (a)   Site plan locating all freestanding signs;



         (b)   Diagrams of sign copy with dimensions and color;



         (c)   Dimensions of all signs, including sign structures
and mounting systems;



         (d)   Height of all signs;



         (e)   Sign illumination system; and



         (f)   Structural plans showing materials, fabrication,
and mounting system.



      (8)   Building plan. Shall include the following information:



         (a)   Elevation drawings, sections, or illustrations
indicating the architectural treatment of all proposed buildings and
structures;



         (b)   Floor plans of all proposed buildings and
structures;



         (c)   Type of use, number of employees, users, or
occupants expected;



         (d)   Type, location, and treatment of exterior
mechanical devices, such as vent exhaust fans, air conditioners, and
elevators;



         (e)   Type of exterior building materials;



         (f)   Exterior colors of all building materials; and



         (g)   Outline specifications.



      (9)   Identification of variances. All variances must be
clearly shown.



   (E)   Procedure. Once preliminary review of a sketch plan has been
reviewed, the applicant shall submit an application to the city for final
site plan review. The final site plan review process shall be as follows:



      (1)   The applicant(s) shall submit a completed application
and all required final site plan review materials to the city.



      (2)   The city staff shall review the application and forward
a report and recommendation, including all conditions, to the Planning
Commission.



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall review the submitted final
site plan application and recommendation from city staff and make a final
decision, prior to issuance of a building permit for new construction,
building additions, or significant changes to a building’s exterior. The
Planning Commission shall have the authority to make final decisions on final
site plan applications within previously approved Planned Unit Developments.
The final decision of the Planning Commission shall include all conditions or
modifications to the final site plan application.



      (4)   The Planning Commission may remove, alter, or impose
additional conditions to the final site plan application.



      (5)   The decision of the Planning Commission approving or
denying final site plan approval along with its findings shall be formally
recorded.



      (6)   In evaluating its recommendation and approval, the
Planning Commission shall take into consideration the following:



         (a)   Consistency with the City Comprehensive Plan;



         (b)   Compliance with this chapter;



         (c)   The preservation of the site in its natural state
to the extent practicable by minimizing tree loss, soil removal, and grading;



         (d)   The harmonious relationships between buildings,
open spaces, natural site features, architectural details, and vehicular and
pedestrian circulations; and



         (e)   The protection of adjacent and neighboring
properties.



   (F)   Amendments to approved site plan reviews.



      (1)   Application. An application for an amendment to an
approved site plan shall be submitted to the city. Amendment applications
shall include a written description of the proposed change, including the
reason for such change, and a notation of the location on the approved site
plan.



      (2)   Determination of type of change. Upon receipt of a
complete application and using the following criteria, the Community
Development Department shall determine within 15 business days whether the
proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major change to an approved site
plan. Major changes to an approved site plan shall include, but are not
limited to:



         (a)   An increase in the gross floor area;



         (b)   A change in architectural design and/or materials;



         (c)   A change in building location;



         (d)   A change in building height;



         (e)   A change in the number of dwelling units;



         (f)   A reduction in open space or required yards;



         (g)   A reduction in the number of parking spaces or an
increase of more than 4 parking spaces;



         (h)   A change in the number and/or location of accesses
to public streets or alleys;



         (i)   A change in excess of 5 feet in the location of
walkways, vehicle circulation ways, and parking areas;



         (j)   A change in the landscape plan that results in a
reduction in the net amount of plant material.



      (3)   Approved site plan major change review procedure.



         (a)   Once accepted, the Community Development
Department shall forward the complete application to the Planning Commission
for recommendation to the City Council.



         (b)   The Planning Commission shall consider amendment
applications within 60 days of receipt of a complete application. If, in the
Planning Commission’s judgment, the application does not contain sufficient
information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its
responsibilities, the Commission may request additional information from the
applicant. The City Council may approve a site plan amendment request by a
majority vote of all its members. If the City Council denies the site plan
amendment request it must state in writing the reasons for the denial at the
time that it denies the request. If a written statement is not adopted at the
same time as the denial, it must be adopted at the next meeting following the
denial of the request but before the expiration of the time allowed for
making the decision. The written statement must be consistent with the
reasons stated in the record at the time of denial. The written response of
denial or approval with conditions meets the 60-day time limit if the city
can document that the response was sent within 60 days of receipt of the
complete written application.



      (4)   Approved site plan review minor change procedure.



         (a)   The Community Development Department shall approve
minor changes to the approved site plans within 15 business days of receipt
of the complete application. The 15 business days timeframe shall commence
after the determination that the change is a minor change. If the Community
Development Department determines the application does not contain sufficient
information, the Community Development Department may request additional
information from the applicant. In that event, the 15 business day period
shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information.



         (b)   The Community Development Department may also, at
its discretion, determine that a proposed change to an approved site plan
constitutes a major change and, as such, must be submitted to the Planning
Commission in accordance with the procedures for a major change.



         (c)   If the Community Development Department does not
approve the minor change, the applicant may appeal the decision to the
Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures for a major change.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 636,
passed 3-24- 2014; Am. Ord. 648, passed 9-28-2015)



NONCONFORMITIES



§ 153.050  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Within the zoning districts established by this chapter, or
amendments that may later be adopted, situations may occur where, as a result
of the requirements contained in this chapter, an existing lot, structure,
site improvement, or use does not conform to 1 or more of the requirements of
this chapter.



   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the nonconforming
situations to accomplish the following:



      (1)   Recognize the existence of uses, dimensional and
intensity characteristics of structures, properties, and site features that
were lawful when established before the effective date of this chapter, but
which no longer meet all of the chapter requirements;



      (2)   Regulate the enlargement, expansion, intensification, or
extension of any nonconformity or any increase in the impact of a
nonconformity on adjacent properties; and



      (3)   Encourage the elimination of nonconforming uses or
reduction of their impact on adjacent properties.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.051  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A nonconforming use may continue at the size, intensity, and in the
manner of operation existing upon the date it became nonconforming subject to
the following and as permitted by Minnesota State Statute.



   (A)   Agricultural and livestock operations. All agricultural,
farming, and livestock operations being conducted in compliance with the
terms of this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use or a violation
of this chapter notwithstanding the fact that there may have been changes in
the surrounding character of the area.



   (B)   There shall be no expansion, enlargement, intensification,
replacement, structural change, alteration, or relocation of any use or any
site element of any nonconforming land use except to make it conforming or as
allowed by Minnesota State Statutes or this chapter;



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a nonconforming
use may be repaired, replaced, maintained, or improved, but not expanded;



   (D)   Regulation and expansion of nonconforming uses. The city may
impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to prevent and abate
nuisances and to protect the public health, welfare, or safety. Legally
established nonconforming uses may be expanded with a Conditional Use Permit
as follows: nonconforming uses in residential zoning districts may be
expanded with a conditional use permit.



   (E)   A nonconforming use may not be changed to a different
nonconforming use;



   (F)   When any nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming
use, it may not be later changed to a nonconforming use;



   (G)   A nonconforming use may be changed to lessen the
nonconformity, but once lessened, the use may not be changed to increase the
nonconformity;



   (H)   A nonconforming use may not be re-established if discontinued
for a continuous period of 1 year from the date of discontinuance. Following
the expiration of this time period, only those uses classified as permitted
or conditional, if approved by the City Council, may be allowed by this
chapter;



   (I)   Any nonconforming use that requires a license, permit, or
other evidence of city approval initially issued lawfully prior to the
nonconformity may be conducted in accordance with the terms of the city’s
approval, provided that the use has not been abandoned for a continuous
period of 1 year or more. The license, permit, or other evidence of city
approval ceases at the time the nonconformity ceases to exist; and



   (J)   If a structure housing a nonconforming use is destroyed by
fire or other peril to the extent greater than 50% of its market value, and
no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property
is damaged, then a municipality may impose reasonable conditions upon a
building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent
property.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 669, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 153.052  NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD.



   Any separate lot or parcel that was legally created and is of record
with the Washington County Recorder’s office but became nonconforming as a
result of the adoption of this chapter may be used for the legal use for
which it is zoned subject to the following:



   (A)   The lot or parcel shall have frontage on an improved public
road or on a private road approved by the City Council. The City Council
must, by resolution, specify the private road, indicate the private road is
capable of supporting emergency vehicles, and specify that provisions exist
for ongoing maintenance of the private road;



   (B)   A vacant lot or parcel served by public sewer may be used for
a permitted use by the provision of the zoning district, provided that all
setback and lot coverage requirements can be met;



   (C)   A vacant lot or parcel not served by public sewer can be used
for a permitted use, provided it has at least 1 acre of buildable area and it
can be demonstrated that a safe and adequate sewage treatment system can be
installed to serve the use and meet required setbacks and lot coverage;



   (D)   If in the case of 2 or more contiguous lots or parcels of land
under single ownership (not located in the Shoreland Overlay Zone) any
individual lot or parcel does not meet the minimum requirements of this
chapter, the individual lot or parcel shall not he considered as a separate
parcel of land for purposes of sale or development, but must be combined with
adjacent lots so that the combination of lots will equal 1 or more parcels of
land meeting the full requirements of this section or the provisions of the
zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is more
restrictive. In no circumstances will there be approval of any proposal for
multiple lot developments based upon lots of record and not conforming with
the provisions of the existing zoning district;



   (E)   Two or more contiguous lots or parcels of land under single
ownership located in the Shoreland Overlay Zone may be considered a separate
parcel for purposes of sale or development as long as it meets the following
requirements:



      (1)   The lot of record is 66% of the state shoreland
dimensional width and size standards in Minnesota Rules Ch. 6120;



      (2)   The lot of record is connected to a public sewer, if
available, or otherwise suitable to have a Type 1 sewer treatment system
installed that meets the requirements of Minnesota Rules Ch. 7080 and other
local controls;



      (3)   The lot of record does not exceed 25% impervious surface
by area;



      (4)   Development of the lot would be consistent with an
adopted local comprehensive plan.



   (F)   A conforming lot shall not be reduced in size so that it
becomes nonconforming in any respect under the premises of this chapter. A
nonconforming lot shall not be reduced in size;



   (G)   Additions to principal or accessory buildings or structures
located on nonconforming lots may be permitted without a variance, provided
that any such addition meets all minimum setback and lot coverage
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and that long term
sewage disposal needs can be met;



   (H)   Nonconforming lots may be combined for tax purposes with a
contiguous lot or lots, but may not be re-subdivided into a nonconforming lot
even if the division is consistent with the original lot configuration;



   (I)   A structure destroyed or damaged by any means may be
reconstructed on a nonconforming lot within 1 year of the date of the
destruction of the original structure, and reasonable progress shall be made
in completing the project for this section to be applicable. A building
permit must be obtained prior to construction of a new structure, and it
shall be constructed in compliance with all other applicable codes and
regulations.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.053  NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   Any structure existing on the effective date of this chapter which is
not in conformity with the regulations contained in this chapter shall be
allowed to continue subject to the following:



   (A)   An existing residential structure of any type meeting a
minimum of 60% of the required side yard setback, but not less than 6 feet
may be considered conforming. The conforming structure shall meet the
required setbacks from the public right-of-way, rear lot line, wetland, lake,
sewer treatment system, and well;



   (B)   Nonconforming structures may not be enlarged or altered in a
way that increases their nonconformity unless in compliance with the
following:



      (1)   Expansion or alteration of a structure found to be
nonconforming might be permitted, provided the expansion complies with the
requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Additions to detached single-family and two-family
dwellings not meeting the required side yard setback, but not less than 6
feet from the side lot line, may have an addition at the existing side yard
setback;



      (3)   Long-term sewage disposal needs can be met on lots that
are not served by public sewer.



   (C)   Should a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 50% of its market value at time of destruction, the building may be
reconstructed to its original condition provided that a building permit has
been applied for within 180 days of the damage or destruction. After 180
days, its shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter;



   (D)   All construction projects for which a valid building permit
was granted before the effective date of this chapter may be completed even
if the structure will not meet the newly adopted provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.054  NONCONFORMING SITE AND BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Upon any change in occupancy, nonconforming paved parking
areas may continue to be used without improvement if the number of parking
spaces supplied remains adequate according to the regulations of this
chapter, and the surface has not, in the city’s judgment, deteriorated so
as to be beyond repair. If the parking lot is beyond repair or not paved,
then the parking lot surface must be replaced or otherwise brought into
conformance with this chapter.



   (B)   A building permit may be issued for a portion of a multiple
occupancy building without bringing the existing site improvements for the
entire property into compliance with this chapter if the nonconformity is not
increased.



   (C)   If a multiple occupancy building becomes completely vacant,
its site improvements must be brought into compliance with this chapter
before any future occupancy.



   (D)   When expansion of an existing nonconforming site improvement
is required, the newly constructed portion of the site improvement must meet
all requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   When an existing building is expanded at or over 50% of the
existing square footage or building value (based on latest assessed value),
whichever is less, the entire building including the existing facade and new
expansion shall meet the building design requirements as determined by this
chapter including the Forest Lake design requirements.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



§ 153.065  APPLICABILITY.



   General development regulations apply to all lots or uses and must be
met in addition to other specific regulations that apply to the individual
lot or use.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.066  INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.



   All applicants for a use or building permit in any district not served
by public sanitary sewer must demonstrate that an on-site sewage treatment
system can be installed in accordance with Washington County Subsurface
Sewage Treatment System regulations.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.067  SLOPING OR ERODIBLE BUILDING SITES.



   A structure constructed on-sites with slopes of greater than 3:1 or
33%, or on easily erodible soils as defined on the community soils maps and
compiled by the Washington County Soil and Water Conservation District shall
be approved by the City Engineer and the Building Official.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.068  REQUIRED YARDS AND OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   Minimum standards. No yard or other open space shall be
reduced in area or dimension so as to make the yard or other open space less
than the minimum required by this chapter unless approved by variance. If the
existing yard or other open space is less than the minimum required, it shall
be considered nonconforming and shall meet the requirement of §§ 153.050et
seq.



   (B)   No double allocation of yards and other open space. No
required yard or other open space allocated to 1 lot or parcel shall be used
to satisfy minimum yard or open space requirements for another lot or parcel.



   (C)   Encroachments into required yards. The following shall be
permitted encroachments into required yards and building setbacks:



      (1)   Flues, chimneys, fireplaces, mechanical equipment,
eaves, awnings, belt courses, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
gutters, and cornices may extend up to 3 feet into any required setback;



      (2)   Cantilevered bay windows and bay doors may extend a
maximum of 2 feet into any required setback. The maximum length of such bay
window or door is 10 feet. Additionally, a maximum 3 foot by 3 foot landing
may serve as access to a bay door; however, the landing may not be enclosed
or roofed;



      (3)   Steps, sidewalks, terraces, and unenclosed stoops may
extend 3 feet into any required setback;



      (4)   Retaining walls, window wells, trees, shrubs, and other
plantings may be placed in any yard except in drainage ways and street
rights-of-way;



      (5)   Unenclosed porches and decks may project 10 feet into a
required rear yard setback;



      (6)   Fences are permitted in any yard meeting the
requirements of §§ 153.147et seq.; and



      (7)   Exposed wheelchair ramps with a maximum width of 4 feet
may be placed in any required yard.



   (D)   Encroachment in yards on corner lots/traffic visibility
triangle. Nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of 3 and 10 feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets to a distance such that a clear
line of vision is possible of the intersecting street from a distance of 30
feet from all local streets. All distances from county and state highways
shall be approved by its permitting authority.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.069  MINIMUM DWELLING REQUIREMENTS.



   In all districts where dwellings are permitted, except in approved
manufactured home parks, the following standards shall apply. An exception to
these regulations may be granted if part of an affordable housing project or
units meet the city’s affordable housing goals stated in its Comprehensive
Plan.



   (A)   The minimum width of the main portion of a single-family
structure, including townhomes, shall be not less than 22 feet.



   (B)   All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation and
anchored to resist overturning, uplift, and sliding in compliance with the
Minnesota State Building Code.



   (C)   The minimum living space in a 1 story single-family
residential dwelling, including individual townhomes and duplex units
(exclusive of basement and garage areas), shall be 960 square feet. The
minimum living space in a multiple story single-family residential dwelling,
including individual townhomes and duplex units (exclusive of basement and
garage stalls), shall be 800 square feet on the first floor.



   (D)   Dwelling units in multi-family buildings containing 3 or more
dwelling units shall have the following minimum floor areas per dwelling unit:



      (1)   Efficiency and one-bedroom apartments and condominiums:
600 square feet;



      (2)   Two-bedroom apartments and condominiums: 720 square feet.



      (3)   More than two-bedroom apartments and condominiums: an
additional 120 square feet for each additional bedroom.



      (4)   The minimum floor areas for the dwelling units as
specified above shall not include areas occupied by stairs, hallways, entry
ways, and utility rooms. Closet space in excess of 15% of the above minimum
floor area as aforementioned shall not be included. No multiple-family
dwelling unit shall have efficiency and 1-bedroom dwelling units in excess of
20% of the total number of dwelling units in the building.



   (E)   Each single-family residential dwelling, including individual
townhomes and duplex units, shall have at a minimum a 528 square foot garage.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.070  USABLE ATTIC SPACE.



   Attic space shall not be occupied or actively utilized. Under the
provisions of this chapter, the space shall not constitute a story and shall
not be included in space calculations for parking.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.071  CODE COMPLIANCE.



   All principal buildings shall meet or exceed the minimum standards of
the:



   (A)   Minnesota Building Code, except that manufactured homes shall
meet or exceed the requirements of the State of Minnesota Manufactured Home
Building Code in lieu of the Minnesota State Building Code;



   (B)   Minnesota State Fire Code;



   (C)   Minnesota Department of Health;



   (D)   Minnesota Pollution Control Agency; and



   (E)   Washington County subsurface sewage treatment system
regulations.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.072  BUILDABLE LOT AREA, NET.



   (A)   Lots not served by public sanitary sewer. All new parcels
created which are not served by public sanitary sewer must have at least 1
contiguous acre of accessible buildable land.



   (B)   Lots served by public sewer. All new lots created which are
served by public sewer must contain at least 3,400 square feet of buildable
area.



   (C)   Lots within the Shoreland District. Properties situated within
the Shoreland District are also subject to the requirements of the Shoreland
Overlay District.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.073  NUMBER OF STRUCTURES.



   Except in Planned Unit Developments (PUDs), there shall be no more than
1 principal structure on any 1 parcel of land.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.074  PROHIBITED DWELLING UNITS.



   No cellar, garage, recreational vehicle or trailer, houseboat, basement
with unfinished exterior above, or accessory building shall be used at any
time as a dwelling unit.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.075  OCCUPANCY OF SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.



   No more than 6 persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption can
reside in a single-family residential dwelling.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.076  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   The traffic generated by any use shall be controlled so as to prevent
congestion of the public streets, traffic hazards, and excessive traffic
through residential areas, particularly truck traffic. Internal traffic shall
be regulated so as to ensure its safe and orderly flow. Traffic into and out
of all uses, except single-family and townhouse areas, shall be forward
moving with no backing into public streets.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.077  PRIVATE ROADS.



   Private roads are not allowed in any new subdivisions created after the
effective date of this chapter. Existing lots of record on private roads will
be subject to the same standards as public roads unless regulated by an
approved Planned Unit Development.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.078  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.



   No structure shall exceed the maximum height permitted for the zoning
district in which it is located, or as otherwise determined by this chapter,
except that church spires, chimneys, agriculture silos, flagpoles and similar
structures as determined by the city may have a height of up to 45 feet.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.079  SETBACKS ALONG UNCLASSIFIED WATER BODIES.



   All lots having frontage on or containing an unclassified water body as
defined in the provisions of the Shoreland Overlay District shall be subject
to the setback regulations for unclassified water bodies as established in
the Shoreland Overlay District, unless regulated by Watershed District
adopted rules.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



GENERAL STANDARDS FOR USE REGULATIONS



§ 153.095  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards and
regulations for the establishment and use of permitted uses, accessory uses,
and conditional uses within the zoning districts for the city.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.096  STANDARDS FOR USES.



   All of the following uses must comply with the listed standards as well
as the rules and regulations of federal, state, and county agencies.
Additional standards may be required for specific applications.



   (A)   Accessory apartments (permitted to increase affordable housing
options).



      (1)   There shall be no more than 1 accessory apartment within
a single-family dwelling unit.



      (2)   Access to the accessory apartment shall be from within
the single-family dwelling.



      (3)   The structure in which an accessory apartment is located
shall be owner occupied.



      (4)   No separate curb cut or driveway shall be permitted for
the accessory apartment unit.



      (5)   Accessory apartments shall maintain a floor area of no
less than 300 square feet and no more than 600 square feet containing no more
than 1 kitchen, 1 bath, 1 bedroom, and related living space.



      (6)   Accessory apartments shall not be considered a dwelling
unit for the purpose of density.



   (B)   Accessory storage containers.



      (1)   Accessory storage containers can be used in the MU-2,
B-2, B-3, and I Districts only, and only as allowed under this section.



      (2)   The accessory storage container shall be located in a
manner consistent with the setback requirements for accessory structures in
the applicable district, unless the city determines that due to the size and
configuration of the lot and/or location of existing buildings on the lot,
the placement is not feasible.



      (3)   The accessory storage container shall not displace any
required parking spaces used to meet the parking standards of this chapter.



      (4)   The accessory storage container shall not be placed in
any location where it will create pedestrian or vehicular traffic hazards or
interfere with orderly traffic circulation or drainage.



      (5)   The accessory storage container shall be structurally
sound. Its exterior surfaces shall be free of rust, holes, sharp edges, torn
or damaged siding, exposed wiring, or any other defects that could endanger
health or safety.



      (6)   No accessory storage container shall exceed 14 feet in
height, 9 feet in width, or 55 feet in length.



      (7)   Areas around the accessory storage container shall be
free of weeds and debris.



      (8)   Placement of containers shall be out of public view
unless approved by the city.



   (C)   Assisted living facility, independent living facility, and
nursing home. Assisted living facilities, independent living facilities, and
nursing homes shall meet all federal, state, and local requirements
including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety, and Building Code
requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required:



      (1)   The location, design, and operation of the facility
shall be compatible with, and shall not adversely affect, adjacent properties
and the surrounding area.



      (2)   The facility shall be harmonious with surrounding
buildings, in respect to scale, architectural design, and building placement.
If located within a residential district, the facility shall not alter the
residential character of the neighborhood.



      (3)   The surrounding street network shall be capable of
accommodating the traffic generated by the facility.



   (D)   Agricultural business, seasonal.



      (1)   Agricultural business, seasonal is permitted in all
commercial districts as an accessory use with permission of the property
owner.



      (2)   The majority of product sold shall be grown or raised
locally. No sale of product shall take place on a road right-of-way.



      (3)   Any temporary structure placed on the property for such
sales must be removed at the end of the selling season. The size of the
temporary structure shall not exceed 100 square feet.



      (4)   If deemed necessary by the city, off-street parking may
be required.



      (5)   All structures, including temporary structures, shall
meet all minimum parking lot setback requirements of the zone in which it is
located.



      (6)   See division (X) of this section for additional seasonal
sales requirements.



   (E)   Bed and breakfast inn.



      (1)   Bed and breakfast inns shall be located no closer than
1,000 feet from each other.



      (2)   It is intended that bed and breakfast facilities be a
converted or a renovated single-family residence and that this principal
function be maintained. No structure shall be constructed for the sole
purpose of being utilized as a bed and breakfast facility; an existing
structure enlarged or expanded for the purpose of providing additional rooms
for guests must be specifically approved by the CUP. The exterior appearance
of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character.



      (3)   Primary entrance to the guest rooms shall be from within
the dwelling unit.



      (4)   Guests are limited to a length of stay of no more than
30 consecutive days.



      (5)   No food preparation or cooking shall be conducted within
any of the guest rooms. The only meal to be provided to guests shall be
morning breakfast, and it shall only be served to 10 guests taking lodging in
the facility.



      (6)   Activities, including luncheons, banquets, parties,
weddings, meetings, charitable fund raising, commercial or advertising
activities, or other gatherings for direct or indirect compensation, are
prohibited at a bed and breakfast facility.



      (7)   On-site parking, sufficient to handle all guest and
owner vehicles, shall be provided.



   (F)   Cemeteries.



      (1)   The minimum area of a cemetery shall be 5 acres unless
associated with a house of worship.



      (2)   The site proposed for a cemetery or cemetery expansion
shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger
streets in the vicinity of the site.



      (3)   Burial plots, grave markers, monuments, and buildings
operated in connection with a cemetery must meet the building setbacks and
structure height requirements of the underlying zoning district.



      (4)   Graves and structures used for interment shall be set
back 50 feet from wells.



      (5)   Cemeteries are prohibited in 100-year flood plain zones.



   (G)   Drive-thru facilities associated with principal uses.



      (1)   Stacking space and its access must be designed to
control traffic in a manner that does not encroach on pedestrian spaces,
parking space, or traffic.



      (2)   Facilities shall be planned so that traffic patterns to
and from the site will not interfere with through traffic and broader
circulation patterns.



   (H)   Day care commercial facility, adult and child. Day care
facilities shall meet all federal, state, and local requirements including,
but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements.
In addition, the following criteria shall be required:



      (1)   Adequate on-site drop off-zones, sidewalks, and exterior
lighting shall be provided.



      (2)   The amount of traffic or noise to be generated shall not
be excessive.



      (3)   Adequate open space and recreational area shall be
provided.



   (I)   Day care home, adult and child.



      (1)   Day care homes shall meet all state and local
requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety, and
building code requirements. In addition the following criteria shall be
required:



         (a)   Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks, and
exterior lighting shall be provided.



         (b)   The amount of traffic or noise to be generated
shall not be excessive.



         (c)   Adequate open space and recreational areas shall
be provided.



         (d)   The day care home shall retain a residential
character and the affect of the day care home shall not alter the residential
character of the neighborhood.



         (e)   The operation of the day care home shall not
adversely impact surrounding properties.



         (f)   In residential districts, day care homes shall be
subject to single-family residential use requirements of the district in
which they are located.



      (2)   Services are provided in a protective setting for more
than 3, up to a maximum of 14 children or adults for less than 24 hours per
day.



   (J)   Essential service - utility substation.



      (1)   Notwithstanding the prohibition against 2 or more uses
on an individual parcel, the lot area for essential service utility
substation can be acquired by lease; provided, however, the lot shall be
large enough so all structures/facilities comply with the required setbacks
for the zoning district.



      (2)   The approved lot, when no longer needed or used by the
utility, shall be returned to its original state. The city may require a bond
to ensure compliance with this standard.



      (3)   The site shall be landscaped to screen the facility from
view from property lines and road(s).



      (4)   Utility substations or any other essential services as
defined above containing antennas and towers greater than 45 feet in height
must comply with division (KK) of this section.



   (K)   Golf courses/golf driving ranges.



      (1)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses to a golf course are
limited to a driving range, putting greens, a pro shop, a club house, locker
rooms, a restaurant and bar, maintenance buildings, and parking facilities.



      (2)   Screening and/or landscaping shall be installed as
regulated by the city.



      (3)   An environmental assessment worksheet may be required
for the development of a golf course facility. Costs associated with the
preparation of the environmental assessment worksheet shall be borne by the
applicant.



      (4)   Minimum lot area of 35 acres is required for the golf
course. The parcel shall be a separate parcel of record.



      (5)   Hours shall be 7:00 a.m. to dusk.



      (6)   No lighting except security lighting is permitted.



      (7)   The site shall be large enough so that safety netting is
kept to a minimum to keep golf balls on the property.



      (8)   A maximum of 25 tees are permitted for the driving range.



      (9)   A public address system is prohibited.



      (10)   Sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the Minnesota State Building Code.



      (11)   The facility shall be an open-air type facility. A
domed or any other type of covered facility is prohibited.



      (12)   Flags shall be used for markers.



   (L)   Home occupations.



      (1)   No person, other than the residents of the premises,
shall be engaged in a home occupation. The home occupation shall be located
in the main principal structure or permitted accessory structures.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic and parking shall not be increased by
more than 1 additional vehicle at a time.



      (3)   Any sign associated with the home occupation shall be in
compliance with §§ 153.207et seq.



      (4)   The home occupation shall not generate hazardous waste
unless a plan for off-site disposal of the waste is approved.



      (5)   A home occupation at a dwelling with an on-site sewage
treatment system shall only generate normal domestic household waste unless a
plan for off-site disposal of the waste is approved.



      (6)   The home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the total
floor area of the principal building (except home day care uses).



      (7)   The home occupation shall not be established prior to
the member(s) of the family conducting the home occupation taking possession
of, and residing in, the dwelling.



      (8)   The home occupation shall not change the fire rating of
the structure.



      (9)   The receipt, sale, or shipment of deliveries shall not
be permitted on or from the premises, with the exception of regular U.S. Mail
and/or an express shipping service that is characteristic of service to
residential neighborhoods.



      (10)   No exterior alteration that changes the residential
character of the principal building shall be permitted.



      (11)   The home occupation shall not constitute, create, or
increase a nuisance to the criteria and standards established in this chapter.



      (12)   There shall be no outdoor display or storage of goods,
equipment, or materials for the home occupation.



      (13)   Parking needs generated by the home occupation shall be
provided on-site.



      (14)   Any type of motor vehicle service and repair is a
prohibited home occupation.



      (15)   Home day cares shall comply with requirements in
division (H).



   (M)   Horse training facilities.



      (1)   Horse training facilities shall meet the setback
requirements for detached domesticated farm animal buildings and agricultural
farm buildings.



      (2)   Horse training facilities equipped with wash stalls
shall be provided with a drainage and septic system separate from the
principal structure.



      (3)   All horse training facilities must meet the animal
density per acre and livestock operation requirements described in division
(O) of this section.



      (4)   All accessory buildings must meet the requirements for
size described in §§ 153.110et seq.



      (5)   A manure management plan may be required by the city.



      (6)   Horse training facilities are considered accessory to
residential or farm dwellings.



      (7)   Private horse training facilities may not be used for
human living quarters, preparing of meals, or for similar personal living
activities.



      (8)   One full-time employee for the horse training facility
may reside at the property, including the stable. Living quarters for the
employee must meet the standards of the Building Code.



      (9)   Every commercial horse training facility, or portion
thereof, where the public is served shall be provided sanitary facilities.



      (10)   The property owner of land to be used for a horse show
must provide information on traffic volume, number of participants, sanitary
service, and human and animal waste disposal.



   (N)   Kennel, commercial.



      (1)   Commercial kennels are used for boarding, grooming,
training, breeding, and the sale of domestic animals over 6 months of age.



      (2)   Commercial kennels in commercial and industrial
districts shall meet the underlying zoning requirements.



      (3)   Commercial kennels in rural residential and agricultural
zoning districts shall be placed on a lot of not less than 5 acres and be
setback 100 feet from all property lines.



      (4)   Commercial kennels in rural residential and agriculture
zoning districts are considered an accessory use and home occupation.



      (5)   Commercial kennels must be connected to public sewer or
an on-site treatment system to handle the waste.



      (6)   The harboring of non-domestic pets is not permitted in
any district.



      (7)   Kennels and runs shall provide protection against
weather and be enclosed. Floors of runs shall be made of impervious material
to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting.



      (8)   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept in a clean,
dry, and sanitary condition.



      (9)   Fencing surrounding exercise areas and/or runs shall be
of a sufficient height to prevent escape and shall be buried as part of
installation to prevent escape by digging beneath the fence posts.



      (10)   Kennel noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a
public nuisance for adjoining properties. This shall exclude noise from
exercise or training while outdoors during the daytime. Kennels shall comply
with all local noise regulations.



   (O)   Kennel, private.



      (1)   Private kennels for 3 or fewer domestic animals over 6
months of age.



         (a)   Kennels shall be considered an accessory structure
for setback purposes.



         (b)   Domestic animals held in a kennel must be owned by
a member of the household.



         (c)   Kennels may only be located in the rear yard.



         (d)   The harboring of non-domestic pets is not
permitted.



         (e)   Kennel enclosure shall consist of a concrete slab
surrounded by fencing with a roof or other protection from the elements.



         (f)   Kennels must be clean and maintained at all times.



      (2)   Private kennels for 4 or more of any type of domestic
pets over 6 months of age.



         (a)   Pets must be owned by a member of the household.



         (b)   Private kennels are accessory to the principal use
of the property.



         (c)   The harboring of non-domestic pets is not
permitted.



         (d)   Private kennels may only be located in the rear
yard and must have a setback of 100 feet from all property lines.



         (e)   Kennels structures shall consist of a concrete
slab surrounded by fencing with a roof or other protection from the elements.



         (f)   The keeping of 4 or more pets in a residential
dwelling unit shall be considered a private kennel for the purpose of this
chapter. The residential dwelling unit shall meet the required setbacks for a
private kennel.



   (P)   Livestock and livestock operations.



      (1)   Livestock may be allowed in C, A, and RR Districts. See
§ 153.051 for requirements regarding nonconforming livestock and livestock
operations in other districts. The harboring of non-domestic pets is not
permitted in any district.



      (2)   No livestock shall be placed on any site of less than 5
acres, except chickens located on single-family properties located in
residential zoning districts meeting additional requirements in §
153.096(OO).



      (3)   The following shall be the minimum setback requirements
for feedlots:



         (a)   Parks: 300 feet;



         (b)   DNR protected watercourse or lake: 300 feet;



         (c)   Wetlands: 200 feet;



         (d)   Private well: 100 feet.



      (4)   The following equivalents shall apply when determining
animal units:



 


Animal

 

Animal Units





One mature dairy cow
 

1.4



One slaughter steer or heifer
 

1.0



One horse
 

1.0



One swine over 55 pounds
 

0.4



One goose or duck
 

0.2



One goat or sheep
 

0.1



One swine under 55 pounds
 

0.05



One turkey
 

0.018



One chicken
 

0.01





 



For animals not listed above, the number of animal units shall be defined as
the average weight of the animal divided by 1,000 pounds.



      (5)   (a)   A minimum of 2 grazable acres shall be provided
for each animal unit or its equivalent. “Grazable acres” shall be defined
as open, non-treed acreage currently providing enough pasture or other
agricultural crops capable of supporting summer grazing at the density stated
above.



         (b)   The keeping of livestock in a greater density than
allowed as stated above shall be considered a feedlot and require a
conditional use permit (CUP). To obtain such a permit, the applicant must
demonstrate that they have improved pastures and/or facilities present and
appropriate practices are being employed to preclude surface or ground water
contamination, excessive manure accumulation, odor, noise, and other
nuisances.



      (6)   The construction of an earthen waste storage basin is
permitted, provided a CUP is issued.



         (a)   The structure shall not be used for the storage of
animal manure for a period in excess of 12 months or the time period for
which it was designed.



         (b)   The design of the structure shall be prepared and
designed by a registered professional engineer or staff from the Washington
County Soil and Water Conservation District qualified in the design of
earthen structures or prepared by other professionals specializing in the
design of the structures and with the proper training for the design and
signed by a registered professional engineer.



      (7)   Livestock may graze within Shoreland and Bluff Impact
Zones, provided permanent vegetation is maintained or a conservation plan has
been submitted to the city that is consistent with the technical guides of
the city and Washington County Soil and Water Conservation District.



      (8)   Domestic farm animal accessory structures:



         (a)   Domestic farm animal accessory structures must
meet the requirements of this section and the City Code.



         (b)   All domestic farm animal structures, feedlots, and
manure storage sites shall be set back as follows:



 


Natural/Man-Made Features

 

Horizontal Setbacks



Any property line
 

100 feet



Any existing well or residential structure on the same parcel
 

50 feet



Any existing well or residential structure on adjacent or nearby parcel
 

200 feet



Any body of seasonal or year-round surface water
 

200 feet




 



         (c)   Location:



            1.   Domestic farm animal feedlots or manure
storage shall not be placed on slopes that exceed 13%;



            2.   Evidence of seasonally high ground water
level or mottled soil shall not be closer than 3 feet to the natural surface
ground grade in any area within any proposed structure and/or feedlot;



            3.   No marsh or wetland (as established by the
predominant wetland vegetation and/or soils) shall be utilized for placement
of the proposed structure and feedlot, nor shall the structures and/or
feedlots be placed where surface runoff will be toward a marsh or wetland.



   (Q)   Manufacturing.



      (1)   Exterior storage is permitted as an accessory use to the
permitted use, provided it meets the following standards:



         (a)   The exterior storage area must be located to the
rear of the building;



         (b)   The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully
screened from view.



      (2)   A manufacturing facility may contain a retail sales
room, provided it meets the following standards:



         (a)   Retail sales are limited to those products that
are produced by the manufacturing use;



         (b)   Retail sales use shall not occupy more than 20% of
the manufacturing building;



         (c)   All loading and unloading areas to the facility
shall be located on the side or rear of the building, provided these areas
shall be screened from view.



   (R)   Motor vehicle dealership.



      (1)   A minimum lot area of 1 acre is required and the use
shall be on 1 lot or contiguous lots not separated by a public street or
other use.



      (2)   A minimum lot width of 100 feet is required.



      (3)   The parking area for the outside sales and storage area
shall be hard surfaced before the operation of business begins and maintained
to control dust, erosion, and drainage.



      (4)   Interior concrete or asphalt curbs shall be constructed
within the property to separate driving and parking surfaces from landscaped
areas.



      (5)   All areas of the property not devoted to building or
parking areas shall be landscaped.



      (6)   Electronic speaker devices shall be regulated as
provided in § 153.253 of this chapter and Chapter 96 of the City Code.



   (S)   Motor vehicle repair.



      (1)   The entire site, other than that devoted to structures
and landscaped areas, shall be an impervious surface and maintained for
control of dust, erosion, and drainage.



      (2)   Location and number of access driveways shall be
approved by the City Engineer.



      (3)   No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than
those utilized by employees, customers awaiting service, or as allowed
through a CUP. Storage of salvage vehicles shall be prohibited.



      (4)   All areas utilized for the storage and disposal of
trash, debris, discarded parts, and similar items shall be fully screened.
All structures and ground shall be maintained in an orderly, clean, and safe
manner.



      (5)   Screening shall be provided to buffer the use from
adjacent residential land uses.



   (T)   Motor vehicle service station.



      (1)   A minimum lot width of 150 feet is required.



      (2)   The setback of all buildings, canopies, and pump islands
shall be in compliance with the standards of the zoning district in which the
use is located.



      (3)   The total height of any overhead freestanding canopy
shall not exceed 20 feet in height. The canopy shall be designed to match the
principal building and materials.



      (4)   A system for collection of hazardous materials must be
installed.



      (5)   The entire site, other than that devoted to structures
and required landscape areas, shall be an impervious surface and maintained
for control of dust, erosion, and drainage.



      (6)   Wherever fuel pumps are installed, pump islands shall be
installed. Pump islands shall not be placed in the required yards.



      (7)   Interior concrete curbs shall be constructed within the
property to separate driving and parking surfaces from landscaped areas.



      (8)   Access drives onto a road must be approved by the City
Engineer.



      (9)   No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than
those utilized by employees, customers awaiting service, or as allowed
through a CUP. Storage of salvage vehicles shall be prohibited.



      (10)   Exterior storage shall be limited to vehicles, service
equipment, and items offered for sale on pump islands; exterior storage of
items offered for sale shall be within yard setback requirements and shall be
located in containers such as racks, metal trays, and similar structures
designed to display merchandise or as indicated by the CUP.



      (11)   All areas utilized for the storage and disposal of
trash, debris, discarded parts, and similar items shall be fully screened.
All structures and ground shall be maintained in an orderly, clean, and safe
manner.



      (12)   Electronic speaker devices shall be regulated as
provided in § 153.253 of this chapter and Chapter 96 of the City Code.



   (U)   Motor vehicle wash.



      (1)   The site shall be designed to provide additional parking
or car stacking space to accommodate that number of vehicles that can be
washed during a 15 minute period.



      (2)   The car wash shall be serviced with a public sanitary
sewer system.



      (3)   The city may impose additional requirements, with regard
to drip/dry time, to help reduce the negative icing impacts during the winter
months.



      (4)   The car wash shall be designed of the same materials as
the principal building.



      (5)   Neither the car wash nor accessory vacuum shall be
located within 300 feet of any residential land use or zoned property, unless
completely screened by a building or located across an arterial or major
collector roadway from residential land use or zoned property.



      (6)   Both the car wash and accessory vacuum shall conform to
noise regulations in § 153.253 of this chapter and Chapter 96 of the City
Code.



   (V)   Outdoor sidewalk seating.



      (1)   Seasonal expansion of a permitted restaurant,
delicatessen, or lunch shop.



         (a)   The dining area shall be separated from the public
walkway area by decorative bollards, planters, or fencing.



         (b)   Public sidewalk space between the defined dining
area and the curb shall not be less than 6 feet.



         (c)   Landscaping shall be either in planters or pots
that are removable in the off-season.



         (d)   Design of the dining area shall be compatible with
the main structure to which the facility is accessory.



         (e)   Food or beverages purchased at a seasonal
expansion sidewalk cafe shall be consumed on the premises.



         (f)   There shall not be less than 15 square feet per
seat in the outdoor dining area.



      (2)   Sites for either type of outdoor sidewalk cafe shall be
maintained in an orderly, clean, and sanitary manner and be free of debris at
all times.



         (a)   Trash containers and staffing shall be available
at all times to facilitate this condition.



         (b)   Litter shall be picked up on a daily basis.



         (c)   Maintenance of all private facilities on public
property shall be the owner’s responsibility.



      (3)   Owners of sidewalk cafes shall hold the city harmless
from all liability associated with the operation and maintenance of the
outdoor sidewalk seating.



   (W)   Pigeons, keeping of. Domesticated racing, fancy and sporting
pigeons are permitted to be kept on any single family lot within the city
with a certificate of compliance subject to the following:



      (1)   All premises in which pigeons are kept or maintained
shall be kept reasonably clean from filth, garbage and any substances which
attract rodents. The loft or structure in which the pigeons are kept and its
surroundings must be cleaned daily.



      (2)   The loft must be constructed and maintained so as to be
rodent proof.



      (3)   All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft
in which the pigeons are housed. The pigeons shall be confined to the loft
except when they are released for exercise, performance, training, or to
return from areas outside the premises for the purpose of engaging in a race
or returning from training flights.



      (4)   All grains and food stored for the use of the pigeons
shall be kept in a rodent proof container.



      (5)   Pigeons shall not be kept in such a manner as to
constitute a nuisance to the occupants of adjacent property.



      (6)   Lofts will be located in the rear yard only and shall be
at least 50 feet from habitable structures located on adjacent properties.



      (7)   The loft shall provide a minimum of 1 square foot of
floor space per bird.



      (8)   The property on which the pigeons are kept or maintained
shall meet all accessory structure requirements of the City Code including
those pertaining to location, size, number, height, use and design.



      (9)   The certificate of compliance shall state the number of
pigeons which may be maintained on the premises. In no case shall the number
of pigeons exceed 100 birds.



      (10)   The City may enter and inspect any property or loft at
any reasonable time for the purpose of investigating either an actual or
suspected violation or to ascertain compliance or noncompliance with the
certificate of compliance and the City Code.



   (X)   Place of worship.



      (1)   The minimum lot area required is 1 acre.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be installed to buffer the use from
adjacent residential land uses and to provide screening. A landscape plan, as
required by §§ 153.230et seq., shall be submitted to the city at the time
of application for a CUP.



      (3)   All accessory residential or school uses upon the
premises shall be subject to all requirements of this chapter. A Planned Unit
Development is required when the use requires more than 1 building and an
accessory storage building meeting the requirements of the underlying zoning
district.



      (4)   Places of worship shall be designed so that the location
of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and
loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and
adverse impacts on adjoining properties.



   (Y)   Plant nurseries, wholesale.



      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.



      (2)   The majority of product sold on the property shall be
grown or raised on the property.



      (3)   The exterior storage of landscape equipment and storage
areas shall be screened from view of all streets and property lines.



      (4)   Commercial plant nurseries shall meet the requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located.



   (Z)   Recreational, commercial.



      (1)   A minimum lot area of 2 acres shall be provided.



      (2)   All structures (including backstops, goal posts, and the
like) shall meet the required setbacks for the district in which it is
located.



      (3)   There shall be no overnight accommodations provided for
the guests or visitors of the recreation area.



      (4)   Food service may be permitted on the property provided
it only serves food and refreshments to guests and visitors of the facility.



      (5)   Information shall be provided regarding the recreational
activities provided, number of members and participants in the recreation
programs, sanitary facilities and waste disposal, security, lighting, and
hours of operation.



      (6)   Screening may be required to buffer the use from
adjacent residential land use.



      (7)   A transportation management plan shall be submitted to
the city at the time of application. This plan shall address off-street
parking and traffic control, including the mitigation of overflow parking and
traffic movement to the public street system and impact on the surrounding
roadways.



      (8)   A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted. The
standards of the city and the Watershed District must be met.



      (9)   A caretaker dwelling unit is permitted. The residence is
to be used strictly for the caretaker and the caretaker’s family. No
separate driveway or curb cut shall be permitted for the residence from any
roadway.



   (AA)   Recycling center.



      (1)   Landscaping shall be installed to buffer the use from
adjacent residential land uses and to provide screening from all roads. A
landscape plan shall be submitted to the city at the time of application for
a CUP.



      (2)   The processing equipment shall be enclosed within a
structure.



      (3)   Recyclable material may be stored outside, provided the
materials are stored in a covered container. Exterior storage areas shall be
surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious surface material
approved by the city. Exterior storage areas shall not be located in areas
where storm water runoff from the storage area can enter the storm sewer,
sanitary sewer, or other surface or ground waters.



      (4)   Exterior storage must be screened from view of all
adjacent properties.



      (5)   An all-weather road negotiable by loaded collection
vehicles or other transportation units shall be provided from the entrance
gate of the facility to loading and unloading areas. Access to the site shall
be controlled to prevent unauthorized dumping.



      (6)   In the event the business ceases operation, the owner or
operator must close the recycling center in a manner that prevents the escape
of pollutants to ground water or surface waters, to soils, or to the
atmosphere during post-closure period. Where the facility is regulated by
closure rules of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), the closure
rules must be complied with.



      (7)   The owner or operator shall submit a financial guarantee
to the city to ensure compliance with the permit and the closure requirements.



   (BB)   Residential facility, licensed.



      (1)   A residential facility serving 1 to 10 individuals and
appropriate staff shall be allowed in all residential and agricultural
districts.



      (2)   A residential facility serving over 11 individuals and
appropriate staff shall be allowed with a CUP in all commercial and
industrial districts.



      (3)   All appropriate licenses must be obtained from state and
county agencies.



      (4)   The facade facing the public right-of-way or roadway of
any dwelling unit used for a residential care facility in the agricultural
and residential districts shall be maintained as a residential dwelling.



      (5)   No residential facility shall provide accommodations to
persons whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health and
safety of other individuals.



The facility cannot accept court ordered referrals for treatment in lieu of
incarceration without adequate security.



      (6)   Off-street parking standards of this chapter must be met.



      (7)   Adequate utilities, including sewage disposal, must be
available.



      (8)   All building and fire codes must be met.



      (9)   Residential care facilities shall not be closer than
1,000 feet to each other.



   (CC)   Resort facility.



      (1)   Permitted uses:



         (a)   Overnight lodging to serve visitors of the resort;



         (b)   Recreational facilities, including, but not
limited to, golf course, racquet sports facilities, nature trails, bike paths
and ski areas;



         (c)   Meeting rooms;



         (d)   Restaurant and lounge.



      (2)   The resort shall be located on a site of at least 50
acres.



      (3)   At least 50% of the site shall be dedicated to permanent
open space excluding streets and parking areas.



      (4)   No more than 50 units of overnight lodging shall be
provided.



      (5)   The maximum density shall not exceed 1 guest room per
acre.



      (6)   Setbacks and height shall be in accordance with the
underlying zoning district.



      (7)   Meeting/conference facilities shall be limited to 100
persons.



      (8)   All uses in the resort shall be harmonious with each
other through the use of special design, placement, or screening.
Architecturally, the structures shall blend in with the natural environment.



   (DD)   Schools.



      (1)   The minimum lot area required for schools is 1 acre.



      (2)   Landscaping may be required to be installed to buffer
the use from adjacent land uses, provide screening, and reduce noise.



   (EE)   Self-service storage facility.



      (1)   Units are to be used for dead storage only. Units are
not to be used for retailing, auto repair, human habitation, or any
commercial activity. Storage of any flammable or hazardous material is
prohibited.



      (2)   One off-street parking space is required for each 10
storage units, and 2 spaces are required for the live-in manager if 1 is
provided for. Interior drives must be wide enough to accommodate a parked car
and traffic that must pass.



      (3)   No outside storage is allowed.



      (4)   An on-site manager may be allowed, provided adequate
sanitary facilities are provided.



      (5)   The facility shall be secured by either the walls of the
structure and/or fencing. All doors on the units shall face inward and away
from the street.



      (6)   Only 1 entrance and exit to the facility are allowed
except for an additional emergency exit.



   (FF)   Temporary dwelling care facility.



      (1)   The property is limited to 1 temporary care facility.



      (2)   Minimum lot size is 10 acres.



      (3)   The temporary care facility will be an accessory
dwelling unit to be occupied by persons who are:



         (a)   Infirm to the extent that they require
extraordinary care;



         (b)   That such care can only be provided by family
members residing in the principal dwelling house on the premises; and



         (c)   In the infirmity, and the need for care required
by (a) and (b) above shall be verified by written statement of a physician.



      (4)   The temporary care facility shall use the existing road
access drive of the principal dwelling unit.



      (5)   The structure is subject to the same zoning dimensional
setbacks as the principal dwelling unit. The structure shall not be closer to
the road right-of-way than the principal building. The structure shall be
located to the side or rear of the principal building and shall be screened
from view of the road right-of-way.



      (6)   The unit must be connected to an approved on-site waste
disposal system.



      (7)   The property owner shall submit a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure the structure will be removed upon termination of the IUP.
The amount of guarantee shall be determined by the city.



      (8)   The IUP shall be conditioned that it will expire and
terminate at such time as the care facility is no longer the residence of the
person or persons suffering from the infirmity that requires such care, or at
such time as such care is no longer required. At the time of termination of
the IUP, the temporary dwelling/care facility shall be removed from the
premises within 30 days.



      (9)   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subd.
9, the city opts-out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines
and regulates temporary family health care dwellings.



   (GG)   Temporary dwelling during construction.



      (1)   Temporary dwellings during construction are allowed in
all zoning districts with a IUP in emergency situations such as fire,
tornado, and storm damage.



      (2)   The property is limited to 1 temporary dwelling unit
during construction.



      (3)   The dwelling can only be occupied by persons who are the
present occupants of the single-family residence being constructed,
reconstructed, or altered.



      (4)   The IUP is issued only after the building permit has
been obtained for the proposed construction.



      (5)   The temporary dwelling unit shall use the existing road
access drive of the principal dwelling unit under construction and shall meet
all required setbacks.



      (6)   The unit must be connected to an approved sewage system.



      (7)   The property owner shall submit a financial guarantee to
the city to ensure that the structure will be removed upon termination of the
IUP. The amount of the guarantee shall be determined by the city.



      (8)   The IUP shall expire when construction is completed or
within 180 days from the date of issuance, whichever is less. Renewal of the
permit may be approved by the city. At the termination of the certificate of
compliance, the temporary dwelling shall be removed from the premises within
30 days.



   (HH)   Temporary/seasonal sales.



      (1)   Temporary/seasonal sales shall require approval of a
certificate of compliance and a license from the city (if applicable) to
operate.



      (2)   Approval of the local Fire Marshal is required.



      (3)   Sales area may operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.



      (4)   A site plan shall be provided illustrating that the
location of the temporary/seasonal sales facility meets all required parking
lot setbacks, unless otherwise determined by the city.



      (5)   A temporary/seasonal sales area must be located in a
commercial district. It may not be placed in the public right-of-way, nor
shall it impair traffic visibility (see § 153.076).



      (6)   Must be placed on an approved dustless surface such as
bituminous or concrete.



      (7)   Parking shall be available to those purchasing goods
from the temporary/seasonal sales area (see §§ 153.125et seq. for parking
requirements).



      (8)   Temporary/seasonal sales facilities may not be
permanently connected to permanent utilities, including electric, gas, sewer,
water, and phone.



      (9)   One temporary banner not exceeding 40 square feet may be
used in conjunction with the temporary/seasonal sales operation and will be
considered special event signage for the principal use and/or property owner
hosting the temporary/seasonal sales area as defined in § 153.210.



      (10)   Trash containers shall be provided on-site for debris.



      (11)   All waste from the operation shall be properly disposed
of.



      (12)   Temporary/seasonal sales may occur up to 2 times a year
on a specific property of a business or businesses and no longer than 60
consecutive days with 60 days between events.



      (13)   Copies of all applicable permits from the state and
county shall be provided to the city.



      (14)   The owner of the property on which the sales facility
is placed shall not be in violation of any code or ordinance or have unpaid
taxes or utility bills.



      (15)   The city reserves the right under this chapter to shut
down a temporary seasonal sales operation even after the granting of approval
if the operation is posing safety concerns, has become a nuisance, or has
violated any requirement of this section.



      (16)   See division (C) of this section for seasonal
agricultural businesses.



   (II)   Towers.



      (1)   General standards for all towers.



         (a)   Requirements. The construction of a new tower in
excess of 35 feet, or the addition of a new apparatus on an existing tower or
building, may be allowed in certain zoning districts following the issuance
of a certificate of compliance, IUP, or a CUP.



         (b)   Nonconformities. Any existing tower that becomes
nonconforming as a result of this section may continue its use. Additional
apparatus may be attached to the tower structure. The apparatus shall meet
all requirements of this chapter. If the tower needs to be replaced, it may
be permitted with a certificate of compliance so long as it is of the same
type (guyed, self-support, or monopole), same height, same marking (lighting
and painting), and will be located within 10 feet of the tower to be
replaced. The only permitted reasons for replacement of an existing,
nonconforming tower will be to increase the structural integrity of the
structure. If a tower requires replacement for any other reasons, the
replacement tower shall meet all of the standards of this chapter or as
required by Minnesota State Statute.



         (c)   Exception. In any district, a proposed tower 200
feet high or less located within the easement of overhead high voltage
transmission lines with towers 75 feet in height or higher or within 50 feet
of the transmission line easement on the same side of the road will not be
required to meet the standards of divisions (II)(2)(n), (II)(3)(a), and
(II)(6)(a) hereof, but will be required to meet all other standards. This
exception does not apply in the Shoreland Overlay District.



         (d)   Other requirements.



            1.   All rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
must be met and complied with.



            2.   In the event of revocation of a permit or the
apparatus is no longer in use, the tower, apparatus, and all accessory
structures must be removed and the site restored to its original condition
within 120 days. Failure to do so will result in the city completing the
removal and site restoration; the city’s cost shall be assessed against the
property and collected as real estate tax.



      (2)   Performance standards for all towers.



         (a)   On any parcel of land zoned for agricultural or
residential purposes, the minimum lot size for construction of a tower shall
be 10 acres. On a vacant parcel of land zoned for commercial/industrial
purposes, the minimum lot size is 2.5 acres. On a parcel of land on which a
principal use exists, a tower shall be considered an accessory use and a
smaller parcel of land may be leased, provided all standards contained in
this chapter can be met. (See additional requirements for wind energy
conversion systems, division (II)(7) of this section).



         (b)   A single tower on a parcel shall not be included
in the allowed number or square footage for detached accessory structures.



         (c)   Towers shall be designed and engineered to
collapse progressively within the distance between the tower and property
line. The application for any tower shall submit written documentation
explaining tower construction and possible failure and provide assurance that
blowing or falling ice can be contained on the subject property.



         (d)   A tower shall be located on a parcel of land so as
to have the least impact on adjoining properties; any negative impacts of the
tower shall be confined as much as possible to the property on which the
tower is located.



         (e)   The tower location shall provide the maximum
amount of screening for off-site views of the facility. The city reserves the
right to require creative design measures to camouflage facilities by
integrating them with existing buildings and among other existing uses.
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practicable.



         (f)   Structural design and mounting and installation of
apparatus and tower shall be in compliance with manufacturer’s
specifications. The plans shall be approved and certified by a registered
professional engineer.



         (g)   In general, self-supporting towers (i.e. those
without the use of wires, cables, beams, or other means) are preferred. The
use of a guyed tower is permitted for new tower construction if there is an
aesthetic and/or apparatus supporting capability advantage. Anchors for the
guyed wires must meet underlying setback requirements.



         (h)   Associated base equipment must be located within a
structure. The base of the tower and any accessory structures shall be
landscaped where practical. Tower accessory structures shall be constructed
of materials designed to minimize visibility to the neighborhood.



         (i)   The tower shall be a color demonstrated to
minimize visibility unless otherwise required by FAA regulations.



         (j)   Metal towers shall be constructed of or treated
with corrosive resistant material.



         (k)   Generally, only 1 tower is permitted on a parcel
of land. If in the opinion of the city a particular parcel is well suited for
more than 1 tower, the additional tower may be allowed following the issuance
of a CUP or IUP. All other standards contained in this chapter must be met.
(See division (II)(7) of this section for wind energy conversion system
apparatus.)



         (l)   All towers shall be reasonably protected against
unauthorized climbing. The bottom of the tower from ground level to 12 feet
above ground shall be designed in a manner to preclude unauthorized clinching
or shall be enclosed by a 6 feet high chain link fence with a locked gate.



         (m)   Tower owners shall be required to conduct an
annual inspection of their facilities by a qualified professional to insure
continuing compliance with this chapter. A copy of the annual inspection
report shall be available to the city for review. All defects shall be
reported to the city for review.



         (n)   The tower shall be located twice the tower height
to any residential dwelling other than the dwelling on the parcel on which
the tower is to be located or a minimum of the tower height from any property
line. However, towers must meet the setback in the zoning district they are
located in if the setback is greater than the height of the tower.



      (3)   Prohibitions for all towers.



         (a)   No temporary mobile cell sites are permitted
except in the case of equipment failure, equipment testing, or in the case of
an emergency situation as authorized by the Public Safety Director. Use of
temporary mobile cell sites for testing purposes shall be limited to 24
hours, use of temporary mobile cell sites for equipment failure or in the
case of emergency situations shall be limited to a term of 30 days. These
limits may be extended by the Public Safety Director.



         (b)   Permanent platforms or structures other than those
necessary for safety purposes or for tower maintenance are prohibited.



         (c)   No tower shall have lights, reflectors, flashers,
daytime strobes, steady night time red lights, or other illuminating devices
affixed or attached to it unless required by the FAA or FCC.



         (d)   No advertising or identification signs shall be
placed on towers.



      (4)   Application - tower and apparatus.



         (a)   In the event that an application is only to add a
new apparatus to an existing tower or structure, the city may waive some of
the requirements of this section.



         (b)   In addition to the submittal requirements required
elsewhere in this chapter, applications for CUPs, IUPs, or certificates of
compliance for new towers and apparatus shall be accompanied by the following
information.



            1.   A report from a registered professional
engineer that:



               a.    Describes the tower height and design,
including a cross-section and elevation;



               b.    Certifies the tower’s compliance
with structural and electrical standards;



               c.    Describes the tower’s capacity,
including the potential number and type of apparatus that it can accommodate;



               d.    Certifies that the applicant will not
cause destructive interference to established communications, frequencies,
and equipment;



               e.    Describes the lighting to be placed on
the tower if the lighting is required by the FCC or FAA;



               f.    Specifies the distance to any
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) protected lake or river, any boundary
of a park, and/or structures within 1,000 feet of the parcel boundary that a
tower is located on.



            2.   Written acknowledgment by the landowner that
he will abide by all applicable CUP or certificate of compliance conditions.



         (c)   The city may, at its discretion, require visual
impact demonstrations, including:



            1.   Mock-ups and/or photo montages;



            2.   Screening and painting plans;



            3.   Network maps;



            4.   Alternative site analysis;



            5.   Lists of other nearby other towers; or



            6.   Facility design alternatives for the proposed
tower.



         (d)   The city is authorized to employ/hire a consultant
to review technical materials submitted by the applicant or to prepare any
technical materials required but not submitted by the applicant. The
applicant shall pay the costs of the review and/or independent analysis. Any
proprietary information disclosed to the consultant hired shall remain
non-public and subject to the terms and conditions of a properly executed
non-disclosure agreement.



      (5)   Tower standards by districts. Towers are regulated
differently depending on the zoning district in which the property is
located. The following are the standards in each district:



         (a)   Agriculture, Conservancy, Agricultural Preserve
Overlay, and MXR-1 districts.



            1.   The following are permitted with a
certificate of compliance:



               a.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower not exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the
structure or tower;



               b.   A tower within the easement of a high
power overhead transmission line or within 50 feet of the easement on the
same side of a road to a maximum height of 200 feet.



            2.   The following are permitted with a CUP or IUP:



               a.   A freestanding tower not exceeding 160
feet in height;



               b.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the structure
or tower up to a total maximum height of 175 feet, including tower and
apparatus.



         (b)   Rural residential districts.



            1.   The following are permitted with a
certificate of compliance:



               a.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower not exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the
structure or lower;



               b.   A tower within the easement of a high
power overhead transmission line or within 50 feet of the transmission line
height of 200 feet.



            2.   The following are permitted with a CUP:



               a.   A freestanding tower not exceeding 100
feet in height;



               b.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the structure
or tower up to a maximum height of 115 feet, including tower and apparatus.



         (c)   Multiple-family and high density residential
districts.



            1.   The following are permitted with a
certificate of compliance:



               a.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower not exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the
structure or tower;



               b.   A tower within the easement of a high
power overhead transmission line or within 50 feet of the easement on the
same side of a road to a maximum height of 200 feet.



            2.   The following are permitted with a CUP:



               a.   A freestanding tower not exceeding 75
feet in height;



               b.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the structure
or tower up to a total maximum height of 90 feet, including tower and
apparatus.



         (d)   Commercial and industrial districts.



            1.   The following are permitted with a
certificate of compliance:



               a.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower not exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the
structure or tower;



               b.   A freestanding tower up to 153 feet;



               c.   A tower within the easement of a high
power overhead transmission line or within 50 feet of a transmission line
easement on the same side of a road up to a maximum height of 200 feet.



         2.   The following are permitted with a CUP:



               a.   A freestanding tower not exceeding 200
feet in height;



               b.    Apparatus attached to an existing
structure or tower exceeding 15 feet above the highest point of the structure
or tower up to a total maximum height of 15 feet, including tower and
apparatus.



      (6)   Additional standards for communication apparatus.



         (a)   A proposal for a new wireless communication
service shall not be approved unless it can be shown by the applicant that
the telecommunication equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated:



            1.   On an existing tower;



            2.   On a tower that has been permitted by the
city (even though it may not yet be constructed); or



            3.   On a tower whose application for a
certificate of compliance, IUP, or CUP is currently pending before the city.



         (b)   No tower shall be over 200 feet in height or
within 1 mile of another tower, regardless of municipal boundaries.



         (c)   The height of a tower shall allow for the
co-location of additional antennas as follows:



            1.   Structures from 100 to 125 feet, a minimum of
2 tenants;



            2.   Structures from 125 to 200 feet, a minimum of
3 tenants;



            3.   Structures above 200 feet but less than 300
feet, a minimum of 4 tenants.



         (d)   Antennas attached to a tower may consist of metal,
carbon fiber, or other electromagnetically conductive rods or elements. The
antennas are regulated to the extent the regulations are not preempted by the
FCC.



         (e)   If space is available on a tower, the tower owners
shall, in good faith, lease space to other users so long as there is no
disruption in the existing service provided by the towers existing users or
no negative structural impact upon the tower. If a dispute arises and as a
condition to any permit or certificate of compliance, the city, at its
discretion, reserves the right to act as arbiter in determining if a tower
owner is acting in good faith in leasing to other tenants.



         (f)   The criteria for granting a modification under
this section shall be the presentation of engineering data that demonstrates
that services cannot be provided to a specific area of the city.



      (7)   Additional standards for wind energy conversion
apparatus.



         (a)   The parcel on which a wind energy conversion
system is proposed to be located must be at least 10 acres in size. For more
than 1 tower, 40 acres minimum is required and a CUP is required regardless
of height. The ability to have more than 1 tower shall only be allowed in the
C, A, and RR zoning districts.



         (b)   Rotors shall have a clearance of 30 feet over any
tree or structure within 100 feet of the tower. Each wind energy conversion
system shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic breaking device
capable of stopping the wind energy conversion system in high winds (40 miles
per hour or greater).



         (c)   All state, county, and local noise standards must
be met. Applicable electrical permits/inspections must be obtained.



      (8)   Additional standards other than wind conversion or
communication apparatus. All other apparatus shall require a CUP regardless
of height.



      (9)   Amateur radio antenna. Amateur radio antenna shall be
subject to the applicable provisions of § 153.096(II), and shall also comply
with the following standards:



         (a)   Amateur radio antenna shall not exceed a height of
75 feet in any residential zoning district.



         (b)   The total area of the amateur radio antenna shall
not encompass more than 120 square feet.



         (c)   No amateur radio antenna shall be located within
the front yard of any Residential zoning district.



         (d)   Amateur radio antennas attached or mounted to
buildings shall comply with the requirements of the International Building
Code as adopted, wind design of the State Building Code, and such compliance
and method of attachment shall be certified by a registered state structural
engineer.



         (e)   The amateur radio antenna shall be located and
designed so as to minimize impact at street level from surrounding properties
and public streets.



         (f)   Freestanding amateur radio antennas, including
those attached to buildings for additional support, shall be set back from
the side and rear lot lines a distance at least equal to their height.



         (g)   Before erecting an amateur radio antenna, a
building permit shall be first secured from the city.



            1.   Application for the permit shall be in
writing and made to the City Building Official.



            2.   All persons proposing to erect, construct, or
locate Amateur Radio Antennas within the city shall apply for and obtain a
building permit according to the provisions in the City Code.



         (h)   No signs, pictures or messages shall be painted on
or attached to any amateur radio antennas.



   (JJ)   Transportation/motor freight terminal.



      (1)   The facility shall be used for office purposes and
storing and transferring of goods to and from vehicles only. On-site
maintenance of vehicles and fueling of vehicles is prohibited.



      (2)   All outside storage of vehicles/trailers shall be
screened from view from the road by berms, trees, fencing, or a combination
thereof.



      (3)   All structures and outside storage of vehicles/trailers
shall meet required setbacks.



   (KK)   Trash enclosure service structure.



      (1)   Shall be required for all commercial, mixed use,
industrial and multi-family uses.



      (2)   Shall be no larger than 400 square feet unless approved
by the city.



      (3)   Shall be built to maintain the color and style of the
principal buildings.



      (4)   The structure shall contain either a swinging door or
roll up door to contain debris.



      (5)   Shall meet the required setbacks of the underlying
zoning district.



      (6)   The structure shall not contain any vehicle storage
unless approved by the city.



   (LL)   Travel trailer/RV campground/marina.



      (1)   The minimum area for a trailer/RV park is 50 acres
(on-site sewer) and 10 acres (public sewer).



      (2)   All sanitary facilities must conform to Minnesota
Department of Health and Pollution Control Agency regulations.



      (3)   The sale, storage, use, or occupancy of any manufactured
home is prohibited.



      (4)   The density of unit spaces shall not exceed 10 spaces
per acre.



      (5)   All travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks shall be
sufficiently screened from public view.



      (6)   Individual lots are prohibited from being sold.



      (7)   One entrance is allowed into the campground. All
campsites must have direct access only to an internal circulation street. All
roads shall be blacktopped.



      (8)   Access to the campground shall be from an arterial or
collector street. Access shall be approved by the City Engineer.



      (9)   Travel trailer/RV campgrounds shall have at least 20% of
the land area (exclusive of internal streets) developed for recreational uses
(i.e., tennis courts, children’s play equipment, swimming pools, golf
greens, and the like) which shall be developed and maintained by the owner or
operator at the owner’s expense. All parks must have an area or areas set
aside for dead storage and "overload" parking.



      (10)   All utilities, such as sewer, water, fuel, electric,
telephone, and television antenna lead-ins, shall be buried, and there shall
be no overhead wires or support poles except those essential for street or
other lighting purposes.



      (11)   All land area shall be adequately drained and properly
maintained free of dust, refuse, garbage, rubbish, or debris. All centralized
refuse collection containers and equipment and park maintenance equipment
shall be stored in a screened and fenced service yard within the park.



      (12)   All permanent structures shall require a building
permit. The provisions of this section shall be enforced in addition to and
in conjunction with the provisions of the Building Code.



      (13)   A properly landscaped area shall be adequately
maintained around each trailer park. No trailer or building shall be located
within 50 feet of the exterior boundary of any park or within 40 feet of any
exterior existing public right-of-way.



      (14)   Each park must have 1 or more central community
building with central heating that must be maintained in a safe, clean, and
sanitary condition. The buildings shall be adequately lighted during all
hours of darkness and shall contain laundry washers, dryers, and drying
areas, in addition to public toilets and showers. Each park shall have a
building for the use of the operator distinctly marked "office," and the
marking shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness. An illuminated map
of the park shall be displayed at the office.



      (15)   An adult caretaker must be on duty at all times in the
park. The operator of every park shall maintain a register in the office of
the park indicating the name and address of the owner and occupants of each
trailer, the license number of each trailer and automobile of each occupant,
and the date of arrival and departure of each trailer. The corners of each
trailer lot shall be clearly marked and each lot shall be numbered. The
grounds of the park shall be adequately lighted from sunset to sunrise.



      (16)   Each lot shall abut or face a driveway or clear
unoccupied space of not less than 22 feet in width, which shall have
unobstructed access to the internal park road system.



      (17)   Each lot shall have 2 off-street parking spaces. No
parking spaces shall be closer than 10 feet to any side yard lot line.



      (18)   Each lot, or pair of lots, shall contain adequate
containers to store, collect, and dispose of refuse and garbage so as to
create no health hazards.



      (19)   Outdoor cooking or burning shall be confined to
fireplaces, pits, grills, or stoves that shall be permanently affixed to a
designated location on each lot as per the site plan. Each permanent cooking
or burning facility shall be placed on the lot so as to minimize fire hazards
and smoke nuisance.



      (20)   Any dockage must be approved by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resource.



   (MM)   Warehousing and distribution.



      (1)   The loading and exterior storage area must be located to
the rear of the building.



      (2)   All loading and exterior storage area must be fenced and
100% screened from roadways and all property lines.



      (3)   The retail sales are limited to those products that are
stored and distributed by the warehousing and distribution use.



      (4)   The retail sales use shall not occupy more than 20% of
the warehousing and distribution facility.



   (NN)   Yard waste facilities.



      (1)   The minimum lot area required for yard waste facilities
is 10 acres.



      (2)   Composting, storage, transfer, loading, and processing
activities must be setback as follows:



         (a)   Property lines: 50 feet;



         (b)   Existing residential uses not on the property: 100
feet;



         (c)   DNR protected watercourse: 200 feet;



         (d)   Wetland: 50 feet.



      (3)   The yard waste facility must be screened from view from
all adjacent properties and roadways.



      (4)   Access to the site shall be controlled to prevent
unauthorized dumping during non-business hours.



      (5)   (a)   The operator shall provide sufficient equipment
on-site to properly manage the composting process. At a minimum this shall
include a front end loader or similar machinery for loading, unloading,
turning, and aeration operations; a shredder for reducing new material to a
smaller particle size for faster decomposition; a source of water or watering
trucks; and a screen to improve the quality and marketability of the final
product.



         (b)   The operator shall provide plans showing all
equipment maintenance and storage areas. Plans shall show the location of all
fuel storage facilities, hazardous material storage, and hazardous waste
disposal.



      (6)   The materials which can be processed are limited to
garden waste, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, shrub and tree waste, and
prunings.



      (7)   The decomposition process shall be properly managed and
maintained in an aerobic condition to prevent all unnecessary odors. The yard
waste must be decomposed through a process that encompasses turning of the
yard waste on a periodic basis to aerate the yard waste, maintain
temperatures, and reduce pathogens. The composted yard waste must contain no
sharp objects greater than 1 inch in diameter.



      (8)   The operator shall provide information specifying the
volume of waste brought onto the property for composting.



      (9)   The facility shall operate only between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless the city specifically
authorizes other hours or days of operation. Retail sales are allowed on
Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless otherwise
prohibited by the city. Retail sales for purposes of this section shall mean
the sale of product to individuals for personal use and shall exclude
commercial hauling.



      (10)   (a)   Treated yard wastes shall not be allowed to
accumulate for longer than 3 years before being finished and removed from the
site. Compost that cannot be marketed shall be removed from the site a
minimum of once per week.



         (b)   By-products, including residuals and recyclables,
must be stored in a manner that prevents vector problems and aesthetic
degradation. Materials that are not composted must be stored and removed a
minimum of once per week.



      (11)   The owner shall maintain the site so that it is free of
litter and other nuisances.



      (12)   An attendant must be on-site during operating hours.



      (13)   The open burning and/or burying of waste are prohibited.



   (OO)   Chickens, keeping of. The keeping of domesticated chickens is
permitted on single-family residential properties less than 5 acres and
within all residential zoning districts subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Any person wishing to keep chickens in the city on a
property shall first obtain a certificate of compliance from the city;



      (2)   The principal use of the property shall be single-family
residential;



      (3)   The property shall contain 1 detached single-family
structure. Chickens shall not be permitted on vacant properties or those
containing multi-family residential buildings including duplexes, townhomes
and apartments;



      (4)   No more than 5 hen chickens shall be permitted;



      (5)   No person shall keep a rooster;



      (6)   All chickens shall be of the subspecies Gollus gallus
domesticus and tolerant of local climate conditions;



      (7)   Chickens shall not be kept inside the principal
structure;



      (8)   No person shall slaughter chickens on-site except when
in an area of the property not visible to the public;



      (9)   Chicken coops and attached exercise pens shall be
provided for all chickens;



      (10)   Coops and pens shall be fully enclosed including
overhead and constructed of durable materials;



      (11)   The floor area of the coop shall be a minimum of 2
square feet in area per chicken;



      (12)   The floor area of the attached pen shall be a minimum
of 6 square feet in area per chicken;



      (13)   Coops and pens shall meet all accessory structure
setback requirements;.



      (14)   Coops and pens shall be located in rear yards only;



      (15)   Coops larger than 120 square feet in area shall meet
all accessory structure requirements of the City Code including those
pertaining to location, size, number, height, use and design;



      (16)   Chickens shall be kept in coops and/or pens at all
times unless in fully fenced-in back yards while under supervision;



      (17)   All food stored for chickens shall be kept in rodent
proof containers stored inside coops or other buildings;



      (18)   All premises in which chickens are kept or maintained,
including coops and pens, shall be kept reasonably clean from filth, garbage
and any substances which attract rodents. All feces shall be collected and
properly disposed of on a regular basis;



      (19)   Chickens shall not be kept in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance as defined by the City Code of Forest Lake;



      (20)   The city may enter and inspect any property, including
the coop and back yard, at any reasonable time for the purpose of
investigating either an actual or suspected violation or to ascertain
compliance or noncompliance with the certificate of compliance and the City
Code.



   (PP)   Small wireless facilities.



      (1)   Wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities are permitted uses in the public right-of-way in accordance with
the following provisions in all zoning districts except in the C, A, RR, SF,
MXR-1, MXR-2, and MXR-3 residential zoning districts where new wireless
support structures require a conditional use permit.



         (a)   Small wireless facilities located in the
right-of-way shall only be located on wireless support structures, including
utility poles but excluding stop lights.



         (b)   Approval of the collocation of small wireless
facilities on a decorative wireless support structure may be conditioned on
compliance with reasonable accommodations for decorative wireless support
structures. If an applicant refuses to comply with such reasonable
accommodations, the city may prohibit small wireless facility attachment to
the decorative wireless support structure.



         (c)   Small wireless facilities shall not interfere with
public safety communication equipment located on the wireless support
structure or with the original use of the wireless support structure, and
shall not block light emanating from utility poles.



         (d)   If the small wireless facility is to be attached
to a city-owned wireless support structure, the applicant shall execute the
city's standard collocation agreement and such attachment shall be made in
accordance with the terms of that agreement.



         (e)   The small wireless facility shall, to the greatest
extent possible, match the wireless support structure in color, material, and
design, and the small wireless facility design shall, to the greatest extent
possible, minimize exposed cables, wires, and other attachment hardware.



         (f)   The small wireless facility shall not extend above
the top of an existing wireless support structure by more than 10 feet and
the maximum height of a wireless support structure itself shall be 50 feet.



         (g)   The small wireless facility shall be no larger
than 6 cubic feet.



         (h)   The small wireless facility shall not extend
outward from the wireless support structure by more than 3 feet.



         (i)   The wireless support structure shall have adequate
structural capacity to carry the proposed small wireless facility and proof
of the same shall be provided to the city.



         (j)   The wireless support structure and any small
wireless facilities shall be removed and relocated in compliance with any
requirements set forth in the right-of- way permit, collocation agreement,
and Chapter 98 of this code, if the city or road authority for the public
right-of-way in which it is located requires removal or relocation of the
wireless support structure for a public project.



         (k)   Written approval for attachment of the small
wireless facility to the wireless support structure from the owner of the
wireless support structure shall be provided to the city if the city is not
the owner of the wireless support structure.



         (l)   The small wireless facility applicant shall obtain
any and all necessary permits and approvals from the road authority for the
public right-or-way in which the wireless support structure and small
wireless facility shall be located.



         (m)   Small wireless facility applicants must be a
telecommunications right-of-way user as defined in M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4.



         (n)   Wireless support structures shall not be located
in a manner that causes interference with or impedes the use of trails,
sidewalks, or pedestrian ways.



         (o)   Small wireless facilities shall be located at
least 12 feet above the ground.



         (p)   No advertising sign or identifying logo shall be
displayed on the wireless support structure or small wireless facility. All
equipment manufacturers' decals, logos, or other identification information
shall be removed unless required for warranty purposes.



         (q)   Small wireless facilities and wireless supports
structure shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
ordinances, statutes, and regulations.



         (r)   New wireless support structures shall be made of
formed or cast aluminum or similar material, with color finalized upon
individual reviews.



      (2)   New wireless support structures for the siting of small
wireless facilities located in a public right-of-way are a conditional use in
the C, A, RR, SF, MXR-1, MXR-2, and MXR-3 residential zoning districts
subject to the requirements of § 153.034 and in accordance with the
following provisions.



         (a)   The maximum height of a wireless support structure
accommodating a small wireless facility shall be 50 feet and the small
wireless facility shall not extend above the top of the wireless support
structure by more than 10 feet.



         (b)   Approval of the collocation of small wireless
facilities on a decorative wireless support structure may be conditioned on
compliance with reasonable accommodations for decorative wireless support
structures. If an applicant refuses to comply with such reasonable
accommodations, the city may prohibit small wireless facility attachment to
the decorative wireless support structure.



         (c)   The small wireless facility shall, to the greatest
extent possible, match the wireless support structure in color, material, and
design, and the small wireless facility design shall, to the greatest extent
possible, minimize exposed cables, wires, and other attachment hardware.



         (d)   The small wireless facility shall be no larger
than 6 cubic feet and shall not extend outward from the wireless support
structure by more than 3 feet.



         (e)   If the small wireless facility is to be attached
to a city-owned wireless support structure, the applicant shall execute the
city's standard collocation agreement and such attachment shall be made in
accordance with the terms of that agreement.



         (f)   Small wireless facilities shall not interfere with
public safety communication equipment located on the wireless support
structure and shall not block light emanating from utility poles.



         (g)   Evidence shall be provided to the city that the
wireless support structure has adequate structural capacity to carry the
small wireless facility.



         (h)   The small wireless facility applicant shall obtain
any and all necessary permits and approvals from the road authority for the
public right-of-way in which the wireless support structure and small
wireless facility shall be located.



         (i)   The wireless support structure and any small
wireless facilities shall be removed and relocated in compliance with any
requirements set forth in the right-of- way permit, collocation agreement,
and Chapter 98 of this code, if the city or road authority for the public
right-of-way in which it is located requires removal or relocation of the
wireless support structure for a public project.



         (j)   Wireless support structures shall not be located
in a manner that causes interference with or impedes the use of trails,
sidewalks, or pedestrian ways.



         (k)   No advertising sign or identifying logo shall be
displayed on the wireless support structure or small wireless facility. All
equipment manufacturers' decals, logos, or other identification information
shall be removed unless required for warranty purposes.



         (l)   Written approval for attachment of the small
wireless facility to the wireless support structure from the owner of the
wireless support structure shall be provided to the city if the city is not
the owner of the wireless support structure.



         (m)   Small wireless facility applicants must be a
telecommunications right-of-way user as defined in M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4.



         (n)   Small wireless facilities shall be located at
least 12 feet above the ground.



         (o)   The small wireless facility and support structure
shall be installed at the residential lot's corner in the right-of-way.



         (p)   Small wireless facilities and wireless support
structures shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
ordinances, statutes, and regulations.



         (q)   New wireless support structures shall be made of
formed or cast aluminum or similar material, with color finalized upon
individual reviews.



   (QQ)   Accessory structures on adjacent non-riparian lots located
within 100 feet of a riparian lot containing a principal structure.



      (1)   Accessory structures on non-riparian lots, also known as
tier 2 lots, without a principal structure are allowed with a conditional use
permit in the SF and RR zoning districts as provided by this section.



      (2)   The accessory must be located on a separate non-riparian
lot located within 100 feet of a riparian lot on which a principal structure
is located, and both the riparian lot and non-riparian lot must be owned by
the same person(s) or entity.



      (3)   The accessory structure must meet the required side and
rear yard structure setbacks for accessory structures.



      (4)   The accessory structure must meet the front yard setback
requirement for principal structures.



      (5)   The accessory structure shall have a maximum floor area
of 800 square feet or the floor area of the principal structure located on
the riparian lot, whichever is smaller, and shall comply with all other
applicable requirements for accessory structures found in § 153.110.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 607, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 627, passed
3-25-2013; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 660, passed 8-22-2016;Am.
Ord. 670, passed 12-4-2017; Am. Ord. 676, passed 7-9-2018)



DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE REGULATIONS



§ 153.110  DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN C, A, RR, SF, MXR-1, MXR-2,
MXR-3, MU-1, MU-2, AND BP DISTRICTS.



   Garages, storage buildings or sheds, and children’s playhouses are
examples of accessory structures and shall meet the following requirements.



   (A)   Required permits. A building permit is required for all
accessory structures except agricultural buildings on a commercial farm, as
defined in M.S. § 273.13, Subd. 23, as it may be amended from time to time,
and accessory structures less than 120 square feet. A certificate of
compliance is required for all agricultural buildings.



   (B)   Time of construction. No accessory structure shall be
constructed on a lot prior to construction of the principal structure unless
the property is a commercial farm property containing 40 acres or more, or
unless the accessory structure is permitted as a conditional use on an
adjacent non-riparian lot located within 100 feet of a riparian lot under
common ownership which contains a principal structure. An agricultural
building must be related to a commercial farming operation on the parcel that
the building is located unless approved by a conditional use permit (CUP).



   (C)   Location.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures shall have a minimum
building separation of 6 feet from the principal structure.



      (2)   See the zoning district setback requirements.



      (3)   Accessory structures located on through lots may be
located between the rear of the principal structure and the public
right-of-way.



      (4)   Accessory structures may be placed between the principal
structure and the public right-of-way on lakeshore lots meeting all required
setbacks and lot coverage.



      (5)   Accessory structures shall not be placed between the
principal structure and the lakeshore, except 1 structure no larger than 120
square feet meeting all the required setbacks for the applicable district
shall be permitted.



      (6)   Accessory structures shall be limited in height to the
standards for detached accessory standards in the applicable zoning district.



   (D)   Size. The maximum allowable total or accumulated floor area of
all detached accessory structures on a lot shall be as follows:



      (1)   Lots less than 2.5 acres: 1,500 square feet;



      (2)   Lots 2.5 acres to 5 acres: 2,500 square feet;



      (3)   Lots greater than 5 acres to 10 acres: 3,000 square feet;



      (4)   Lots greater than 10 acres to 20 acres: 3,500 square
feet;



      (5)   Lots greater than 20 acres: no limit;



      (6)   The square footage of above grade or below grade
swimming pools and 1 storage shed of not more than 120 square feet shall not
be included in the calculation of maximum allowable area of accessory
structures;



      (7)   No land shall be subdivided so as to have a larger
accessory structure total or accumulated floor area than permitted by this
chapter.



   (E)   Number. The maximum number of accessory structures is as
follows:



      (1)   On parcels of 2.5 acres or less, 1 accessory structure
is allowed with 1 additional single story storage shed of 120 square feet or
less;



      (2)   On parcels greater than 2.5 acres to 20 acres, a maximum
of 2 accessory structures are allowed with 1 additional single story storage
shed of 120 square feet or less;



      (3)   On parcels greater than 20 acres, there is no limit on
the number of accessory structures, provided they are agricultural buildings;



      (4)   No land shall be subdivided so as to exceed the total
number of structures permitted by this chapter.



   (F)   Height. Accessory structures shall be limited to the permitted
building height for accessory structures in the respective zoning district.
The height of accessory structures permitted pursuant to §§ 153.333(H),
153.334(Q), and 153.335(R) shall not exceed 1 story.



   (G)   Use of accessory structures. In agricultural or residential
districts, accessory structures are to be used for personal use or
agricultural use only, and no commercial use or commercial related storage is
allowed except that home occupations are permitted in an accessory structure
as provided in § 153.096(L).



   (H)   Accessory structures for domestic farm animals. All domestic
farm animal structures, feedlots, and manure storage sites must meet the
requirements of this section and § 153.096(P).



   (I)   Fish houses. No more than 1 fish house shall be permitted on a
residential lot.



   (J)   Temporary pole and canvas like storage structures may be used
to cover and protect recreational equipment from the elements between
Halloween and April 15th. No more than 1 shall be permitted on any
residential property at any one time. Structures shall not exceed 200 square
feet and meet all accessory structure requirements. These types of structures
are not permitted for year round storage or use and must be removed from
residential properties during the time period of April 15th through Halloween
and stored in a permanent structure. The city shall have the authority to
require the removal of this type of structure if it causes a nuisance, is
viewed as excessive use of the parcel it is located on, or is being used for
something other than recreational equipment storage during the allowable time
period.



   (K)   Residential yard accessories and/or equipment. Recreation
equipment such as play apparatus, swing sets and slides, sandboxes, poles for
nets, tree houses, above or in-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, play houses
exceeding 25 square feet in floor area, sheds utilized for storage of
equipment, landscape water features and man-made ponds/streams and detached
arbors or trellises, shall be subject to accessory structure setbacks.



   (L)   A detached elevated walkway or deck surrounding a pool or hot
tub must meet the setback requirements for an accessory structure of the
applicable zoning district. Pool or hot tub decks are not subject to the 10
foot encroachment applicable to other decks into the required rear yard.



   (M)   Exterior design and color of accessory structures.



      (1)   The exterior design and color of the accessory structure
shall be compatible with the exterior design and color of the principal
building except in AP, C, A, and RR Zoning Districts.



      (2)   In the RR Zoning District, pole-type accessory
structures shall be allowed to the rear of the principal building. The
exterior design and color of accessory structures located between the road
and the principal building shall be compatible with the exterior design and
color of the principal building.



      (3)   Pole-type accessory structures shall be allowed in AP,
C, and A Zoning Districts. The color of an accessory structure located
between the road and the principal building must be compatible with the color
of the principal building.



   (N)   Exterior walls and the like. Every exterior wall, foundation,
and roof of any accessory structure or structure shall be reasonably
watertight, weather tight, and rodent proof and shall be kept in a good state
of maintenance and repair. Exterior walls shall be maintained free from
extensive dilapidation due to cracks, tears, or breaks of deteriorated
plaster, stucco, brick, wood, and other material.



   (O)   Exterior wood surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and from decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. A protective surface of
an accessory structure or structure shall be deemed to be out of repair if
more than 25% of the exterior surface area is unpainted or paint blistered
and shall be painted. If 25% or more of the exterior surface of the pointing
of any brick, block, or stone wall is loose or has fallen out, the surface
shall be repaired.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 669,
passed 12-4-2017; Am. Ord. 670, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 153.111  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   A building permit is required for any accessory structure over
120 square feet. Required trash enclosure service structures shall not be
considered an accessory structure.



   (B)   Detached garages shall have front yard setbacks of not less
than that required for principal structures and side and rear yards of not
less than 10 feet. Access to detached garages shall be from the interior of
the site.



   (C)   The location, access, materials, color, screening, and related
landscaping of multiple-family detached accessory structures shall be
reviewed and approved as proposed or with changes in the site plan review or
Planned Unit Development (PUD) review process.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.112 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Building permit. A building permit is required for any
accessory structure over 120 square feet. Required trash enclosure service
structures shall not be considered an accessory structure.



   (B)   Number of structures. One accessory structure (in addition to
the required trash enclosure service structures) is allowed on a parcel in
the B-2, B-3, and I Zoning Districts, provided it is used solely for storage
related to the principal use of the property. An accessory structure related
to a principal use requires a CUP.



   (C)   Location. The accessory structure must be placed to the rear
of the principal building and conform to setback requirements and lot
coverage standards for the principal building in the applicable zoning
district. The purpose of these standards is to enhance the visual character
of business and industrial development.



   (D)   All accessory structures. In business or industrial districts,
the location, access, materials, color, screening, and related landscaping
will be reviewed and approved as proposed or with changes in the site plan
review or PUD review process.



   (E)   Accessory structures shall be limited in height to the
standards for detached accessory structure standards in the applicable zoning
district.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS



§ 153.125  PURPOSE.



   This section is intended to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the
public by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking and
loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with use of various
parcels of land and/or structures.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.126  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall apply within
all zoning districts for uses and structures, except as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.127  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The following provisions apply in all districts:



   (A)   Maintaining existing spaces. Upon effective date of this
chapter, existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces shall not be
reduced in number unless the number exceeds requirements set forth herein for
a similar use.



   (B)   Damaged or destroyed buildings. Buildings, structures, or uses
in existence upon the effective date of this chapter that are subsequently
damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause may be re-established in
compliance with §§ 153.050et seq., except that in doing so any off-street
parking or loading which existed must be retained. If the building,
structure, or use is altered by changing the use, floor area, seating
capacity, or other facilities which would affect the requirement for parking
or loading spaces, the number of spaces may be reduced if excess spaces are
available or the number of spaces shall be enlarged if additional spaces are
required.



   (C)   Prohibited uses in required parking areas. Required off-street
parking space in any district shall not be used for open storage of goods.
Temporary/seasonal sales areas are allowed in off-street parking areas of 20
spaces, but not more than 5% of the total parking spaces (see § 153.096).



   (D)   Accessible parking. All parking shall comply with the
accessibility requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.128  DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Design. All parking lots, spaces, driving aisles, and
circulation patterns shall be designed in conformance with the minimal
dimensional requirements and layout configurations in § 153.135.



   (B)   Location of parking spaces. All required off-street parking
spaces in all districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building,
unless allowed through the issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP).



   (C)   Queuing of vehicles. Parking and circulation shall be designed
to avoid the queuing of vehicles within the public right-of-way. Gates or
other access limiting devices shall not be installed until the city finds
that the devices will have no adverse impact on the public right-of-way.



   (D)   Circulation design. Parking areas shall be so designed that
circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated
parking lot. Parking area design that requires backing into the public street
is prohibited.



   (E)   Access to parking spaces. All off-street parking spaces shall
have access from private driveways or parking lot aisles and shall not depend
on a public street for access to parking spaces or for circulation within the
parking lot. Backing onto a public street from a parking space, other than
for parallel parking spaces on the street, is prohibited. This requirement
applies to parking for all uses except single and two-family dwellings and
townhouses where parking is accessed by individual driveways. The width of
the driveways and aisles shall conform to the minimal dimensional
requirements as regulated in § 153.135 and shall be so located as to cause
the least interference with traffic movement.



   (F)   Fire access lanes. Fire access lanes shall be provided as
required by the Building and Fire Codes.



   (G)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area shall be in accordance with §§ 153.185et seq.



   (H)   Curbing. All open off-street parking areas designed to have
head-in parking along the property line shall provide a curb not less than 5
feet from the property line. The curbing requirement applies to parking in
all uses except private single and two-family dwellings and townhomes unless
requested by the City Engineer for drainage purposes.



   (I)   Landscaping. Landscaping design requirements and maintenance
shall comply with §§ 153.230et seq.



   (J)   Non-residential surface and drainage. Off-street parking areas
and driveways in commercial districts, industrial districts, mixed use
districts and non-residential uses in residential districts shall be improved
with a durable and dustless surface such as concrete or bituminous. The city
may consider the use of permeable pavers, pervious asphalt, or other surface
technology to improve storm water management as part of an overall system.



   (K)   All surfacing for driveways in SF, MXR-1, MXR-2, MXR-3, and MF
Districts furnishing access to a dwelling unit or garage and all parking
areas shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous material so as to be dust
free. Off-street parking areas and driveways in C, AP, A and RR Districts may
be surfaced with a crushed rock material or other approved material. All
surfacing must be completed prior to occupancy of the structure unless other
arrangements have been made with the city. Parking lots and adjoining areas
shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water accumulation
within the parking area. Plans for surfacing and drainage shall be subject to
approval of the City Engineer.



   (L)   Marking of spaces. To assure full parking capacity as
designed, except in single-family, two-family, and townhouse development,
spaces shall be marked with painted lines 4 inches wide in accordance with
the approved site plan. Accessible parking spaces shall be marked with a
symbol that is in accordance with the adopted Building Codes.



   (M)   Signs. No signs shall be located in any parking area except as
necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.



   (N)   Screening. Screening of parking lots and driveways into
parking lots shall be required as specified in § 153.146.



   (O)   Maintenance of off-street parking spaces. It shall be the
joint responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses,
and/or building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking
spaces, drive aisles, landscaping, screening, and fences.



   (P)   Approval of parking plans. Except for single-family and
two-family dwellings, before any construction occurs on any new, enlarged,
reduced, reconfigured, or altered parking lot, plans for the parking lots
shall require review and approval by the city through the site plan approval
process. When the parking lot is in conjunction with an application for a new
structure, expansion of an existing structure, or expansion of a use of land,
parking lot plans shall be a part of the site plan review and approval
process as specified in § 153.038. The parking lot plans shall be shown on a
site plan drawn to scale and shall include: a layout of spaces, accessible
spaces, drive aisles and access drives with dimensions; construction
materials; grading and drainage; screening; landscaping; signage; lighting;
and a tabulation of the number of spaces required relative to square footages
of specific uses on the site and the number of spaces provided.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.129  PARKING PROVISIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   The following provisions shall apply to parking in all residential
districts unless otherwise stated.



   (A)   Location of parking spaces and driveway aisles.



      (1)   Same lot as principal building. Required off-street
parking space in all residential districts shall be on the same lot as the
principal building, and multiple-family dwellings shall have their required
parking within 200 feet of the main entrance to the principal building being
served.



      (2)   Parking setbacks.



         (a)   Front yard. Off-street parking shall not be
located in required front yards unless located on a designated driveway
leading directly into a garage or 1 surfaced space located on the side of a
driveway adjacent to the dwelling meeting the required driveway setback. The
extra space shall be surfaced as required in § 153.128(J).



         (b)   Corner lots. Off-street parking shall not be
located in required side yards abutting a street on a corner lot.



         (c)   Side or rear yards. Off-street parking and
driveways shall not be located within 5 feet of any side or rear lot line and
cannot impede drainage. Off-street parking and driveways, if placed in an
easement, must be approved in writing by the holder of the easement.



   (B)   Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking shall be used
solely for the parking of vehicles not to exceed 1 ton carrying capacity.
(See § 153.260 for additional requirements.)



   (C)   Screening of parking facilities.



      (1)   All parking and driveways to parking areas for
multiple-family dwellings shall be screened, as required in §§ 153.146et
seq., from all adjacent property.



      (2)   All parking and driveways to parking areas for
non-residential uses in residential districts shall be screened, as required
in § 153.146, from all adjacent property.



   (D)   Parking related to affordable housing. The city shall allow
through the development process flexibility to all its parking standards for
residential developments that meet the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan to achieve affordable housing.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.130  PARKING PROVISIONS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   The following provisions shall apply in all business districts.



   (A)   Same lot as principal building. Required off-street parking
spaces in all business districts shall be on the same lot as the principal
building.



   (B)   Parking setbacks.



      (1)   Front: 10 feet;



      (2)   Side: 5 feet;



      (3)   Rear: 5 feet.



   (C)   Exemptions. Commercial uses located east of Centennial Drive,
south of 2nd Avenue NE, and north of 2nd Avenue SE, are exempt front the
off-street parking requirements of this chapter. Uses with requirements for
substantial parking, e.g., theaters and restaurants, are encouraged to
provide off-street parking for their patrons.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.131  PARKING PROVISIONS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   The following provisions shall apply in all industrial districts.



   (A)   Same lot as principal building. Required off-street parking
space in all industrial districts shall be on the same lot as the principal
building.



   (B)   Parking setbacks.



      (1)   Front: 10 feet;



      (2)   Side: 5 feet;



      (3)   Rear: 5 feet.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.132  PARKING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS IN ALL BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL, MIXED
USE, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Parking area design. To break up the appearance of large
impervious areas, all parking lots in business, commercial, industrial and
multiple-family residential zoning districts and non-residential uses in
residential districts shall be subject to the following design standards.



      (1)   Parking lot islands shall be required at the beginning
and end of each parking row to break up longer rows.



      (2)   Continuous landscaped medians shall be provided every 3
(or fewer) banks of parking. Medians shall have a landscaped area at least 9
feet in width. Type and quantity of landscaping shall comply with § 153.232.



      (3)   Parking spaces shall not be located between the front
facade line of buildings and a street edge.



      (4)   Parking areas greater than 50,000 square feet shall be
divided both visually and functionally into smaller parking courts.



      (5)   Parking spaces and rows shall be organized to provide
consolidated soft landscaped areas and opportunity for on-site storm water
management.



      (6)   Parking rows shall be limited to a maximum length of 22
spaces. Longer rows shall include landscaped breaks, such as islands, with
shade trees.



      (7)   The total area calculated for landscaping within the
parking lot is calculated as part of the overall landscape requirements of
the site. In the event that a parking lot may not have adequate space for
landscaping islands, the landscaped areas internal of the parking area and
adjacent to the building may be counted towards the required landscaped
percentages within a parking lot.



   (B)   Pedestrian circulation. All parking lots in business,
commercial, mixed use, industrial, multiple-family and non-residential uses
in residential zoning districts shall be subject to the following standards
to provide a safe pedestrian environment:



      (1)   Parking areas shall include a direct and continuous
pedestrian network within and adjacent to parking lots to connect building
entrances, parking spaces, public sidewalks, transit stops, and other
pedestrian destinations.



      (2)   At least 1 pedestrian route shall be provided between
the main building entrance and the public sidewalk that is uninterrupted by
surface parking and driveways.



      (3)   In larger parking lots or where parking lots serve more
than 1 building or destination, designated pedestrian pathways for safe
travel through the parking lot shall be provided.



      (4)   All pedestrian routes within a parking lot shall include
a clear division from vehicular areas, with a change in grade, soft
landscaping, or a change in surface materials.



      (5)   Where pedestrian routes cross street access driveways
and other major drive aisles, crossings shall be clearly marked and sight
distance for both pedestrian and vehicles shall be unobstructed.



      (6)   Parking area island landscape standards. All parking lot
islands or medians in business, commercial, mixed use, industrial,
multiple-family and non-residential uses in residential zoning districts
shall be landscaped in accordance with § 153.230.



   (C)   Parking area storm water management design requirements.



      (1)   Rainwater and snowmelt shall be managed to encourage
infiltration, evapotranspiration, and water re-uses to achieve water quality
and quantity measures specified in the Surface Water Management Plan. Design
practices for managing storm water may include, but are not limited to, the
following practices:



         (a)   Permeable paving for parking spaces, drive aisles,
overflow parking, snow storage areas, and other hard surfaces in the parking
lot;



         (b)   Planting of trees, shrubs, and other absorbent
landscaping throughout the parking lot to provide shade and places for water
uptake;



         (c)   Creation of bio-retention areas, such as swales,
vegetated islands, and overflow ponds;



         (d)   Inclusion catch basin restrictors and oil/grit
separators as appropriate;



         (e)   Creation of opportunities to harvest rainwater
from rooftops and other hard surfaces for landscape irrigation;



      (2)   Where installed, bio-retention areas shall be
appropriately designed and located to filter, store, and/or convey the
expected storm water flows from surrounding paved areas.



      (3)   The appropriate Watershed District shall have final
review and permitting authority for all surface water management measures
proposed.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.133  REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES AND GARAGES.



   (A)   General factors that determine the required number of parking
spaces for specified uses. The number of parking spaces required is based on
several primary factors:



      (1)   For residential uses, the number of dwelling units;



      (2)   For most office and business uses, the floor area in
square feet of a specific use;



      (3)   For some industrial and public service uses, the number
of employees (usually on the major shift);



      (4)   For service businesses (clinics, mortuaries, and the
like), the number of offices, vehicles, or other operational unit;



      (5)   For gathering places, the seating capacity;



      (6)   For multiple function uses (including uses that may have
more than 1 sub-use), the sum of the individual requirements.



   (B)   Calculation of parking requirements.



      (1)   Floor area. For the purpose of determining off-street
parking requirements, the term “floor area” shall mean the sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, including
interior balconies, mezzanines, basements, and attached accessory buildings,
but exempting that area primarily devoted to window display, storage, fitting
rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings
utilized for dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street
parking, or loading space. Measurements shall be made from the inside of
exterior walls.



      (2)   Multiple types of use in a single building, or in a
complex of several buildings on a single site.



         (a)   In instances where more than 1 type of use
occupies the same building or parcel, the total number of required spaces
shall be based upon the parking requirements for each use. Parking need will
be based on existing and potential uses of the building.



         (b)   In cases where potential future uses will generate
additional parking demand, the city may require proof of parking plan for the
difference between the immediate and potential parking needs. In cases where
potential users are unknown, parking shall be calculated using 80% of the
gross floor area of the building.



      (3)   Bench seating. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and
other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews,
or other similar seating facilities, each 18 inches of the seating facilities
shall constitute 1 seat for the purpose of calculating required parking.



      (4)   Reduced parking requirement. The city recognizes reuse
of sites and that the strict interpretation of the parking standards of this
section may not be appropriate for each specific use or lot. Therefore, the
City Council may approve alternative parking standards through the city
review process provided the applicant can demonstrate, based upon documented
parking studies and site specific analysis, that a need exists to provide
more or fewer parking stalls than the maximum or minimum parking standards or
to deviate from pervious paving/paver system standards. Factors to be
considered in such determination include (without limitation) national
parking standards, parking standards for similar businesses or land uses,
size of building, type of use, number of employees, expected volume and
turnover of customer traffic, expected frequency and number of delivery or
service vehicles, and appropriate soils and/or site conditions to support
pervious paving/paver systems.



      (5)   Joint parking facilities.



         (a)   Off-street joint parking facilities. Off-street
parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures, or uses
may be provided collectively in any business, commercial, mixed use or
industrial district in which separate parking facilities for each separate
building, structure, or use would be required, provided that the total number
of spaces provided shall equal the sum of the separate requirements of each
use and properties are contiguous to each other. The joint use of parking
facilities shall be protected by a recorded covenant acceptable to the city.



         (b)   Joint parking facility reductions. The City
Council may, after receiving a report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission, approve a plan and or written agreement for 1 or more businesses
that would allow the number of required spaces to be reduced if the following
conditions are found to exist:



            1.   Entertainment uses. Up to 50% of the parking
facilities required for a theater, bowling alley, or similar commercial
recreational facility may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities
provided by type of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in division
(B)(5)(b)4 below.



            2.   Nighttime or Sunday uses. Up to 50% of the
off-street parking facilities required for any use specified under division
(B)(5)(b)4 below as primarily daytime uses may be supplied by the parking
facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums
incidental to public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, theaters,
or apartments.



            3.   Schools, auditorium, and church uses. Up to
80% of the parking facilities required by this section for a church or an
auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the
off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under division
(B)(5)(b)4 below as primarily daytime uses.



            4.   Daytime uses. For the purpose of this
section, the following uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: banks,
business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, service shops,
manufacturing, wholesale, and similar uses.



            5.   Additional criteria for joint parking. In
addition to the preceding requirements, the following conditions are required
for joint parking usage:



               a.   Proximity. The building or use for
which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities
provided by another building or use shall be located within 300 feet of the
parking facilities.



               b.   Conflict in hours. The applicant shall
demonstrate in documented fashion that there is no substantial conflict in
the principal operation hours of the 2 buildings or uses for which joint use
of off-street parking facilities is proposed.



               c.   Written consent and agreement. A
legally binding instrument, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use
of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to title of grantors or
lessors, and form and manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be
filed with the city and recorded with the Washington County Recorder or
Registrar of Titles, and a certified copy of the recorded document shall be
filed with the city within 60 days after approval of the joint parking use by
the city.



      (6)   Proof of parking.



         (a)   The city may permit parking banking of up to 25%
of the required parking spaces through the site plan review process.



         (b)   Sufficient evidence shall be provided by the
applicant that supports the reduced parking needs.



         (c)   The area proposed for banking of parking spaces
shall be an area suitable for parking at a future time.



         (d)   Landscaping of the banked area shall be in full
compliance of the zoning regulations and at a minimum landscaped with turf.
As a result of the site plan review process, the city may require additional
landscaping of the land-banked area.



         (e)   The parking banking area cannot be used for any
other use without amendment of the site plan.



         (f)   As part of the site plan review process, the
applicant shall show the area to be banked on the site plan and marked as
"banked future parking."



         (g)   The city, on the basis of increased parking demand
for the use, shall require the conversion of all or part of the banked area
to off-street parking spaces.



      (7)   Garage size. The minimum garage size for single and
two-family dwellings attached or detached, shall be 528 square feet (22 feet
by 24 feet) for each dwelling unit. Garages of a reduced size of 440 square
feet will be permitted when a project meets an affordable housing goal of the
Comprehensive Plan and provided that 1 off-street (drive-way) space is also
provided.



      (8)   Parking requirements for uses not specified herein. In
the event this chapter does not specify the number of parking spaces for a
specific use, the determination of required parking spaces shall be made
using the following criteria:



         (a)   The number of parking spaces required for a use in
terms of the parking demand anticipated to be generated;



         (b)   The square footage to be occupied by the proposed
use;



         (c)   The number of employees and patrons that are
anticipated for the proposed use.



      (9)   Fractional spaces. When the calculation of required
number of spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of 1/2 or more shall
constitute another space.



      (10)   Required minimum parking. The minimum number of parking
spaces for each use shall be as follows:



         (a)   Residential. (Residential minimum parking
requirements shall have flexibility through the development process if a
project meets the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan to achieve
affordable housing).



            1.   Single and two-family dwellings. Each
dwelling unit shall include 2 enclosed spaces and 2 surfaced spaces.



            2.   Townhouses. Each dwelling unit shall include
2 enclosed spaces and 2 surfaced spaces, plus an additional 1/2 parking space
per dwelling unit for visitors. Visitor parking may be consolidated in key
areas of the townhouse development or it may be located in driveways leading
to garages, provided that the visitor parking space will not interfere with
circulation.



            3.   Multiple-family dwellings. Two spaces per
dwelling unit, 1 of which must be enclosed, plus an additional 1/2 parking
space per every 5 dwelling units for visitors.



            4.   Senior housing. In connection with multiple
dwelling units that restrict occupancy to senior citizens, the city may grant
a variance reducing the parking requirement to a minimum of 1.25 spaces per
dwelling unit, 1 of which must be enclosed for each 3 dwelling units. In
connection with the variance, the city will require that the landowner, for
him or herself, his or her successors and assignees, agree to expand
available parking to the full amount required by this section if the
occupancy is not restricted to senior citizens. Adequate land area shall be
designated and set aside for future expansion of the parking to the full
amount required by this section, if needed. For the purpose this section,
senior citizens are defined as persons 55 years of age or older.



            5.   Manufactured home park. Two parking spaces
per unit plus 1/2 parking space for visitors. Visitor parking may be
consolidated in key locations of the manufactured home park development.



         (b)   Bed and breakfast establishments. Two spaces for
the principal dwelling unit plus 1 space for each rental unit.



         (c)   Residential facilities. One space for each bed,
plus 1 space for each 3 employees at maximum shift other than doctors.



         (d)   Hotel, motel. One space for each rental unit plus
1 space for each employee at maximum shift, plus 1 space per 3 persons to the
maximum occupancy load of each public meeting and/or banquet room plus 50% of
the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (e.g. restaurants and bars).



         (e)   Nursing home, sanitarium, convalescent, rest home,
or institution. One space for each 6 beds for which accommodations are
offered, plus 1 space for each 2 employees at maximum shift.



         (f)   Schools, elementary and junior high. Three spaces
for each classroom.



         (g)   Schools, high school through college. One space
for each 4 students based on design capacity, plus 3 additional spaces for
each classroom.



         (h)   Place of worship and other places of assembly. One
space for each 3 seats.



         (i)   Theatre. One space per 4 patrons at the maximum
occupancy load of the facility, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work
shift.



         (j)   Hospital. One space for each 3 hospital beds, plus
1 space for each 4 employees other than doctors at maximum shift, plus 1
parking space for each resident and regular staff doctor. Bassinets shall not
be counted as beds.



         (k)   Medical or dental clinic. Six spaces per staff
doctor or dentist.



         (l)   Health club. One space for each 200 square feet of
floor area.



         (m)   Bowling alley. Six parking spaces for each alley,
plus additional spaces as may be required for related uses such as
restaurant/bar.



         (n)   Vehicle related retail/service. Two spaces plus 3
spaces for each service stall, plus l space for each 250 square feet of
building used for the sale of goods and services, plus adequate stacking and
maneuvering space for pump island areas.



         (o)   Restaurant, cafe, bar, tavern, night club. One
space for each 2.5 seats based on design capacity and 1 space per employee
based on largest working shift or as determined by the business plan and
approved by the city.



         (p)   Restaurant, drive-in or take out. One space for
each 15 square feet of floor area allocated to patron service and counter
area, plus 1 space for every 2.5 seats based on design capacity.



         (q)   Retail stores. Five spaces for each 1,000 square
feet of floor area.



         (r)   Office. One space for each 200 square feet of
floor area.



         (s)   Funeral homes. Eight spaces for each chapel or
parlor, plus 1 space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises.
Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral
procession.



         (t)   Furniture store, wholesale, auto sales, repair
shops. Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area. Open sales lots
shall provide 2 spaces for each 5,000 square feet of lot area, but not less
than 3 spaces.



         (u)   Industrial, warehouse, storage, handling of bulk
goods. One space for each employee on maximum shift or 1 space for each 2,000
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.



         (v)   Shopping centers. Five spaces for every 1,000
square feet of floor area.



         (w)   Marinas. One and 1/2 spaces per slip plus 1 space
per employee and a minimum of 20 12-by-25 foot trailer stalls.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.134  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS.



   (A)   Required loading berths. In connection with any structure
which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the
receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by vehicles, there shall
be provided adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used
incidental to the operation of the use as determined by the city. The size of
the berths will depend upon the size of the vehicles to be used. Upon
receiving an application for a particular use for a parcel or building which
is not adequately provided with loading and unloading facilities, and which,
in the opinion of the city, is to receive or distribute goods or services
which will necessitate the use of trucking to the extent that special
consideration should be given to the request, it shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for study and the City Council for determination.



   (B)   Location. All required loading berths shall be off-street and
shall be located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. A
loading berth shall not be located less than 25 feet from the intersection of
2 street rights-of-way, nor less than 50 feet from a residential district
unless within a building. Loading berths shall not be located in a required
front yard.



   (C)   Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with the
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner
that will least interfere with traffic.



   (D)   Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be
improved with a durable material to control the dust and drainage according
to a plan approved by the City Engineer.



   (E)   Other uses not allowed. Any space allocated as a loading berth
or access drive as required by this chapter shall not be used for the storage
of goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as part of the space
requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.



   (F)   Screening. Screening of loading areas, waste storage areas,
and parking from pedestrian activity shall be required as provided in §§
153.146et seq.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.135  MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   Table. The parking dimensions for parking stalls, parking
lots, and parking drive aisles shall meet the following:



 


Angle of Parking

 

Stall Width

 

Stall Length

 

Curb Length Per Car

 

Stall Depth

 

Aisle Width One-Way

 

Aisle Width Two-Way



0 degrees (parallel)
 

9'

 

20'

 

23'

 

9'

 

12'

 

24'



30 degrees
 

9'

 

20'

 

18'

 

17' 4"

 

12'

 

24'



45 degrees
 

9'

 

20'

 

12' 9"

 

19' 10"

 

13'

 

24'



60 degrees
 

9'

 

20'

 

10' 5"

 

21'

 

18'

 

24'



90 degrees (perpendicular)
 

9'

 

20'

 

9'

 

20'

 

24'

 

24'




 



   (B)   Parking stall length reduction. Parking stall length may be
reduced to 18 feet if sufficient room is provided beyond the parking stall
for automobile overhang. The overhangs shall not detrimentally impact or
interfere with adjacent landscaping or pedestrian movement and shall be free
from surrounding obstructions.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



EXTERIOR STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; SCREENING AND FENCE REGULATIONS



§ 153.145  EXTERIOR STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All material and equipment related to and located on
agricultural and residential property shall be stored within a building or
fully screened, as required herein, so as not to be visible from streets,
highways, or neighboring property except for the following:



      (1)   Construction and landscaping materials and equipment
currently being used on the premises;



      (2)   Recreational, play, and laundry equipment, if these are
used on the premises;



      (3)   Off-street parking of licensed and operable passenger
automobiles and pickup trucks. See § 153.260 for further requirements;



      (4)   Motorized or non-motorized recreational vehicles. See §
153.260 for further requirements;



      (5)   Agricultural equipment and materials in agricultural
zoning districts;



      (6)   Firewood piles that are neatly stacked and free from
vermin shall be stored in the rear and side yards only. In the case of corner
lots, both yards abutting a public right-of-way are considered a front yard.



   (B)   All parking and driveways to parking areas of multiple-family
dwellings shall be screened, as required herein, from adjacent property. See
§§ 153.125et seq. for further requirements.



   (C)   All parking and driveways to parking areas for non-residential
uses in residential districts shall be screened, as required herein, from
adjacent property. See §§ 153.125et seq. for further requirements.



   (D)   All multi-family structures shall be subject to the building
design requirements in § 153.323



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.146  SCREENING.



   (A)   Types of screening materials. Screening required in this
chapter shall consist of: earth mounds, berms, or ground forms; fences and
walls; or landscaping (plant materials) or landscaped fixtures (such as
timbers), used in combination or singularly, so as to block direct visual
access to an object from adjoining properties and public streets throughout
the year.



   (B)   Placement, height, and traffic visibility. The screening
required in this chapter shall not be less than 6 feet in height. All
screening shall be approved by the city. On a corner lot, no screening or
landscaping shall be placed in such a manner so as to pose a danger to
traffic by obscuring the view of approaching vehicular traffic or pedestrians
from any driveway or street right-of-way. Visibility shall be unobstructed
between a height of 3 feet and 10 feet above the center line grades of the
intersecting driveways and/or streets, within a triangular area described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the edge of an intersecting
driveway and/or curb line of an intersecting street right-of-way, thence to a
point 30 feet along the edge of the intersecting driveway or curb line,
thence diagonally to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning on the curb
line of the intersecting street right-of-way.



   (C)   Responsibility for screening. The owner or occupant of the
premises containing the use or features to be screened shall provide the
required screening.



   (D)   Approval for screening. Plans for screening shall be approved
in the site plan review process.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.147  FENCE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General. All fences in any district shall conform to the
following regulations. In the case where a fence is located in the Shoreland
Overlay District, refer to § 153.343 for further regulations.



      (1)   Fences within all districts shall require a certificate
of compliance.



      (2)   Barbed wire or electrical fences shall be prohibited,
except when located in an agriculture zone to confine livestock or protect
crops.



      (3)   Alternative forms of fencing in commercial areas may be
allowed upon approval by the city when safety or security is an issue.



   (B)   Residential fence material requirements.



      (1)   Fences shall only be constructed of the following
materials:



         (a)   Treated wood, cedar, or redwood;



         (b)   Simulated wood;



         (c)   Decorative brick or stone;



         (d)   Wrought iron or aluminum designed to simulate
wrought-iron;



         (e)   Coated or non-coated chain link;



         (f)   Split rail;



         (g)   Other materials or fence types as approved by the
city.



   (C)   Height.



      (1)   Fence height measurement. Fence height is measured from
the fence owner’s yard grade to the top of the fence.



      (2)   Fences greater than 6 feet in height. Fences greater
than 6 feet in height require a building permit and must conform to all the
setback and yard regulations in the same manner as building walls, unless
located in a commercial or industrial district and approved by a conditional
use permit.



      (3)   Fences 5 to 6 feet in height. Fences 5 to 6 feet in
height may be placed anywhere on a lot but not in a required front yard.



      (4)   Fences 4 feet in height and less. Fences 4 feet in
height and less may be placed anywhere on a lot, provided they comply with
traffic visibility requirements set forth herein.



   (D)   Fences around swimming pools. All swimming pools 24 inches or
greater in depth shall be fenced with a chain link or other type of
impenetrable barrier fence at least 4 feet in height and if equipped with a
self-locking gate, it must be self-closing and self-locking unless otherwise
stated in the Building Code.



   (E)   Placement of fences along property lines.



      (1)   Where a property line is not clearly defined, a
certificate of survey shall be required to establish the location of the
property line.



      (2)   Fences may be placed along a property line, provided no
physical damage of any kind results to abutting property.



      (3)   Fences on or within 3 feet of the property line shall
give consideration as to the maintenance of the fence and yard.



      (4)   Fences shall not restrict drainage. Solid wall style
fences shall be placed a minimum of 4 inches above finish grade to not impede
site drainage. A solid wall style fence may exceed its allowable height by 4
inches to facilitate drainage.



      (5)   The finished side of fences shall face abutting property.



      (6)   No fence shall be constructed on public rights-of-way.



   (F)   Fence maintenance. Every fence shall be constructed in a high
quality manner and of substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose
for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be maintained
in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not by reason of age, decay,
accident, or otherwise be allowed to become and remain in a state of
disrepair so as to be or tend to be a nuisance to the injury of the public or
any abutting property. Any fence that is dangerous by reason of its
construction or state of disrepair or is otherwise injurious to the public
safety, health, or welfare is a nuisance; any such fence that has become or
tends to be a nuisance shall be repaired or removed as necessary to abate the
nuisance caused.



   (G)   Traffic visibility. On a corner lot, no fence or landscaping
shall be placed in such a manner so as to pose a danger to traffic by
obscuring the view of approaching vehicular traffic or pedestrians from any
driveway or street right-of-way. Visibility shall be unobstructed between a
height of 3 and 10 feet above the center line grades of the intersecting
driveways and/or streets within a triangular area described as follows:
beginning at the intersection of the edge, an intersecting driveway, and/or
curb line of an intersecting street right-of-way, thence to a point 30 feet
along the edge of the intersecting driveway or curb line, thence diagonally
to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning on the curb line of the
intersecting street right-of-way.



   (H)   Hedges or plantings. In all residential districts, hedges or
plantings used as fences for screening or privacy shall be allowed without
height restrictions if the hedges or plantings comply with traffic visibility
requirements.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



LIGHTING REGULATIONS



§ 153.185  LIGHTING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create standards
for outdoor lighting so that it does not interfere with the reasonable use
and enjoyment of property within the city and with astronomical observations.
It is the intent of this chapter to encourage, through regulation of types,
kind, construction, installations, and use of outdoor electrically powered
illuminating devices, lighting practices and systems which will reduce light
pollution while increasing nighttime safety, utility, security, and
productivity.



   (B)   Exemptions. The standards of this section shall not apply to
the following.



      (1)   Temporary holiday lighting. This chapter does not
prohibit the use of temporary outdoor lighting used during customary holiday
seasons.



      (2)   Civic event lighting. This chapter does not prohibit the
use of temporary outdoor lighting used for civic celebrations and promotions.



      (3)   Airport lighting. Required for the safe operation of
airplanes.



      (4)   Emergency lighting. By police, fire, and rescue
authorities.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   All outdoor lighting fixtures lawfully existing and
legally installed prior to the effective date of this section are exempt from
the regulations contained in this section.



      (2)   Whenever an outdoor light fixture that was existing on
the effective date of this chapter is replaced by a new outdoor light
fixture, the new fixture must meet the standards of this chapter.



   (D)   Method of measuring light intensity. The footcandle level of a
light source shall be taken after dark with the light meter held 6 inches
above the ground with the meter facing the light source. A reading shall be
taken with the light source on, then with the light source off. The
difference between the 2 readings will be identified as the illumination
intensity.



   (E)   Performance standards.



      (1)   Residential/agricultural district standards. In all
residential/agriculture districts any lighting used to illuminate an
off-street parking area or other structure or area shall be arranged to
deflect light away from any adjoining residential property or from the public
street.



         (a)   Shielding. The light source shall be hooded or
controlled so as not to light adjacent property in excess of the maximum
intensity as defined below in division (E)(2) below. Bare light bulbs shall
not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way.



         (b)   Intensity. No light source or combination thereof
which cast light on a public street shall exceed 1 footcandle meter reading
as measured from the centerline of the street, nor shall any light source or
combination thereof which casts light on adjacent property exceed 0.4
footcandles as measured at the property line.



      (2)   Business, commercial, mixed use, industrial districts
and non-residential uses in residential districts. Any lighting used to
illuminate an off-street parking area or other structure or area shall be
arranged to deflect light away from any adjoining property or from the public
street.



         (a)   Shielding. The luminaire shall contain a cutoff
that directs and cuts off the light at an angle of 90 degrees or less.



         (b)   Intensity. No light source or combination thereof
which cast light on a public street shall exceed 1 footcandle meter reading
as measured from the centerline of the street, nor shall any light source or
combination thereof which cast light on adjacent property exceed 0.4
footcandles as measured at the property line.



         (c)   Height. The maximum height above the ground grade
permitted for light sources mounted on a pole is 25 feet except by
conditional use permit (CUP). A light source mounted on a building shall not
exceed the height of the building, and no light sources shall be located on
the roof unless the light enhances the architectural features of the building
and is approved by the Zoning Administrator.



         (d)   Location. The light source of an outdoor light
fixture shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from a street right-of-way and
5 feet from an interior side or rear lot line.



         (e)   Hours. The use of outdoor lighting for parking
lots serving commercial and industrial businesses is restricted according to
the following. Outdoor lighting that serves businesses that do not operate
after dark must be turned off 1 hour after closing except for approved
security lighting. For those businesses that offer services after dark,
outdoor lighting may be utilized during the nighttime hours, provided the
business is open for service. Once the business closes, the outdoor lighting
must be turned off 1 hour after closing except for security lighting.



         (f)   Symbols, statues, sculptures, and integrated
architectural features on buildings in business, mixed use, industrial, or
non-residential uses in residential zoning districts may be illuminated by
floodlights, provided the direct source of light is not visible from the
public right-of-way or the adjacent residential district.



         (g)   Light sources, either pole mounted or wall
mounted, located in the front or side yards, or other areas visible from
public street, shall be a decorative design that blends with the
architectural design of the building.



         (h)   Energy requirement. All new light fixtures must
use LED technology unless otherwise approved by the City Council.



      (3)   Outdoor recreation. Outdoor recreational uses, such as,
but not limited to, baseball fields, football fields, tennis courts, and snow
skiing areas have special requirements for nighttime lighting as follows.



         (a)   No outdoor recreation facility, whether public or
private, shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. unless the lighting fixtures
conform to this chapter.



         (b)   Off-street parking areas for outdoor recreation
uses which are illuminated shall meet the requirements stated in division
(B)(2).



   (F)   Prohibitions. The following outdoor light fixtures are
prohibited within the city:



      (1)   Search lights;



      (2)   Flashing lights.



   (G)   Submission of plans. The applicant for any permit requiring
outdoor lighting must submit evidence that the proposed outdoor lighting will
comply with this chapter. The submission shall contain the following in
addition to other required data for the specific permit:



      (1)   Plans indicating the location on the premises and the
type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and
other devices;



      (2)   Descriptions of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps,
supports, reflectors, and other devices which may include, but are not
limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including sections
where required);



      (3)   Photometric data, such as that furnished by
manufacturers, or similar, showing the angle of the cutoff or light emissions.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 153.205  SIGNS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a
comprehensive and balanced system of sign control that accommodates the need
for a well-maintained, safe, and attractive community, and the need for
effective communications, including business identification. It is the intent
of this subchapter to promote the health, safety, general welfare,
aesthetics, and image of the community by regulating signs that are intended
to communicate to the public, and to use signs that meet the city’s goals
by authorizing:



      (1)   Signs that establish a high standard of aesthetics;



      (2)   Signs that are compatible with their surroundings;



      (3)   Signs that are designed, constructed, installed, and
maintained in a manner that does not adversely impact public safety or unduly
distract motorists;



      (4)   Signs that are large enough to convey their intended
message;



      (5)   Signs that are proportioned to the scale of, and are
architecturally compatible with, principal structures;



      (6)   Signs representing the on-premise owner or occupant; and



      (7)   Signs that create and maintain high quality through sign
type and materials.



   (B)   Definitions. Signs are a permitted accessory use in all
districts subject to the regulations found in this subchapter. For purposes
of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a
bona fide business, tenant, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for
which no legal owner can be found.



      ADVERTISING COPY. The graphic content of a sign surface in either
permanent or removable letter, pictographic, symbolic, or alphabetic form.



      AWNING/CANOPY/SIGN. A sign constructed of flexible translucent or
fabric-type material that incorporates a written message or logo on its
exterior.



      BALLOON SIGN. A sign consisting of a bag or similar device of
lightweight material supported by helium, hot or pressurized blown air, which
is greater than 18 inches in diameter.



      BANNERS, FLYING BANNERS, PENNANTS, STREAMERS, and FESTOONS. A
temporary sign or attention-getting device generally made of flexible
materials, such as paper, cloth, plastic, or any non-rigid material, with no
enclosing framework. National and state flags shall not be included in this
definition.



      BILLBOARD SIGN. An off-premise sign structure advertising an
establishment, merchandise, service, social/political statement, or
entertainment that is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the
property on which the sign is located.



      BOXED CABINET SIGN. A sign mounted on a face of a building that
is roughly rectangular in shape, and provides for internal illumination and
the changing of the message of the sign by replacing a single transparent or
translucent material such as a Plexiglas/1exan face. This is meant to
distinguish between a BOXED CABINET SIGN that is a rectangular box, and one
that follows the outlines of the letters of the sign, or an OUTLINED CABINET
SIGN.



      BUILDING WALL AREA. The building wall area fronting on an
improved public road frontage is used to calculate the wall area by using the
height of the building wall up to the lowest roof line multiplied by the
width of the wall area to the outer most edges of its surface to calculate
the total wall area. The maximum amount of total sign surface area allowed
for a building is established by use of a percent of the total wall area
calculated as determined by this subchapter.



      CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC COPY SIGN.  Any characteristics of a sign
that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method
other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components,
whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure
itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that
incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the
image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or
its components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating
panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any
other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of
images or displays.



      CHANGEABLE NON-ELECTRONIC COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof
with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
manually.



      COMMUNITY OR CIVIC PROMOTION SIGN. An attention-getting device,
such as a banner, flag, or other sign type promoting events and activities,
that is installed and maintained by the city or others.



      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. Any sign that displays information regarding
the construction or development of the site on which it is displayed.



      DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that serves primarily to direct traffic
to the location of a place, area, or activity.



      FLASHING SIGN. See CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC COPY SIGN.



      FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is self-supporting and affixed to
a frame structure and not attached to a building.



      FREESTANDING SIGN SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance
between the freestanding sign structure and the street right-of-way, lot
line, or other reference point as provided by this subchapter. Distances are
to be measured perpendicularly from the property line to the most outwardly
extended portion of the structure.



      FRONT, BUILDING. The primary building wall and main entrance,
which may not necessarily front directly onto a public right-of-way.



      FRONT, LOT LINE. The boundary of a lot that abuts an existing
dedicated street. For lots abutting more than 1 street, the front shall be
that which is the minimum frontage. For lots abutting more than 1 street with
the same frontage, the city shall determine the front lot line.



      GROSS AREA, SIGN.



         (a)   AREA OF FREESTANDING SIGN.  The area of the
actual sign. It does not include embellishments, such as the monument base,
pole covers, framing, or decorative roofing, provided there is no advertising
copy on or attached to the embellishments. If the freestanding sign is
double-faced, only 1 face is used to calculate sign area.



         (b)   AREA OF WALL SIGN. That physical area of the sign
constituted as the face upon which the advertisement is borne. The NET
SURFACE AREA shall be that area enclosed within the smallest regular
geometric figure needed to encompass completely all the letters, insignias,
or symbols of the sign, including horizontal spacing between letters,
insignias or symbols, and including the physical area constituting the face
of the sign.



      HEIGHT OF SIGN. The vertical elevation of a freestanding sign is
measured from the elevation of the ground surface at the base of the sign to
the top of the sign structure, limited to the lowest point of the roof or
parapet of the principal building with which the freestanding sign is
associated.



      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign containing principally the name of
the individual or establishment occupying the premises, and which also may
include the street address, telephone number, or other information
identifying the use.



      ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign that has characters, letters, figures,
designs, or an outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a
part of the sign proper.



         (a)   BACKLIT. A light source contained within the sign
element or sign cabinet that illuminates by shining through a translucent
surface or sign face, except where only the letters of the sign copy are
illuminated.



         (b)   EXTERNAL. A light source outside the sign element
or sign cabinet that illuminates by directing light onto the sign surface,
such as by floodlights or spotlight.



         (c)   INTERNAL. A light source contained within the sign
cabinet or sign element that illuminates by directing light onto the sign
surface, or that illuminates only the letters of the sign copy, and which is
not backlighting.



         (d)   NEON. A light source supplied by neon or other gas
in which the light tube is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes.



      INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. A sign that identifies the name and other
characteristics of a public or semi-public institution on the site where the
sign is located.



      LOGO. An identifying graphic that may or may not be a registered
trademark, but which is the official graphic identifier for a business
organization.



      MARQUEE SIGN. A building sign painted on or attached to a marquee.



      MESSAGE CENTER/TIME/TEMPERATURE DISPLAY SIGN. A sign having
electrically changing copy that displays current time, temperature, and/or
public service announcements.



      MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign, not supported by exposed
posts or poles, that is architecturally designed and located directly at
grade where the base width dimension is at least as wide as the sign and has
no more than 2 sides.



      MULTI-TENANT CENTER. A group of commercial, retail, service, or
professional establishments with a designed occupancy of 2 or more tenants,
with shared parking and visual appearance as a contiguous structure that may
or may not be planned, constructed, or managed as a total entity.



      NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and address of a building
and/or the name of an occupant therein.



      NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN. A sign which contains a message not
classified as commercial speech, including, but not limited to, signs
containing messages concerning political, religious, social, and ideological
topics.



      NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this section.



         (a)   ILLEGAL. A sign which was constructed after the
passage of this subchapter or amendments thereto, but which does not conform
to the regulations of this subchapter, or a sign which existed prior to the
adoption of this subchapter and which did not conform to regulations then in
effect.



         (b)   LEGAL. A sign which lawfully existed at the time
of the passage of this subchapter or amendments thereto, but which does not
conform to the regulations of this subchapter.



      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity, service, or entertainment not sold or offered
upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is attached.



      ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or
offered on the premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed.



      ON-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that serves solely to direct
traffic to the location of a place, area, or activity on-site.



      OUTLINED CABINET SIGN. A sign mounted on the face of a building,
which roughly follows the shape of the text of the sign and provides for
internal illumination.  This definition is meant to distinguish between a
cabinet sign that follows the outlines of the letters of the sign and one
that is essentially a rectangular box, or a BOXED CABINET SIGN. An OUTLINED
CABINET SIGN will be treated more like “individual letter signs,” where
the area of the sign is based on the actual outlined shape of the letters
enclosed within the smallest regular geometric figure to encompass all
letters, insignias or symbols of the sign.



      PORTABLE SIGN. A sign, with or without copy and/or graphics, that
is constructed or placed upon a chassis with wheels, legs, or skids in order
to be movable from one location to another, such as may be mounted on an
automobile or trailer. This definition does not include permanent
identification signs painted directly on vehicles, principally used for
transportation, but does include such signs if the vehicles are not used for
transportation purposes but are intended rather as a structure to support a
sign.



      PROJECTING SIGN. A sign with a face perpendicular to the wall of
a building upon which it is attached.



      PROJECTION SIGN. A sign that is projected by means of a light on
an exterior wall or other exterior surface.



      PYLON SIGN. Any permanent, freestanding sign mounted on posts or
columns.



      REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or
rental of land or buildings.



      ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on the roof of a building or projecting
above the top of the wall or parapet of a building with a flat, gambrel,
gable or hip roof, or deck line of a building with a mansard roof.



      SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. A freestanding temporary sign with only 2
sides that is situated adjacent to a business with the intent to attract
traffic to the business.



      SIGN. Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics,
symbols, and/or written copy for the primary purpose of identifying,
providing directions, or advertising any establishment, product, goods, or
services. This includes symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures, or other
forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walks, awnings,
freestanding structures, suspended by balloons or kites, or on persons,
animals, or vehicles.



      SIGN REFACING. As it pertains to on-premises, permanent wall and
freestanding signs and billboard signs, replacing the existing advertising
sign face area that is attached to or supported from the sign cabinet and/or
main structure. This definition does not include any other rebuilding,
reconstructing or reconfiguration of the existing sign cabinet and/or
existing supporting structure.



      TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign designed or intended to be displayed for a
short period of time, and that is not permanently installed. This includes,
but shall not be limited to, banners, flying banners, sandwich board signs,
pennants, and flags other than community promotion signs, garage sale signs
and flyers, for-sale real estate signs, and lawn/curb signs.



      TRAFFIC VISIBILITY. The final location of a freestanding sign
shall be approved by the city. Signs shall be placed in such a manner so as
to not pose a danger to traffic by obscuring the view of approaching
vehicular traffic or pedestrians from the driveway or street right-of-way.
Each sign location is reviewed by the city on a case-by-case basis as part of
the sign permit process.



      WALL-MOUNTED SIGN. A sign attached essentially parallel to and
extending not more than 24 inches from the wall of a building, with no
advertising copy on the sides or edges.



   (C)   General.



      (1)   Scope of regulations. The sign regulations set forth in
this subchapter shall apply to all structures, properties and land uses in
the city.



      (2)   Compliance with standards. No person shall place, erect,
or maintain a sign, nor shall a lesser or owner permit property under his or
her control to be used for any sign that does not conform to the requirements
of this subchapter.



      (3)   Regulations. The following general regulations shall
apply to all signs.



         (a)   Signs existing on the effective date of this
subchapter that do not conform to the regulations set forth in this
subchapter are considered nonconforming.



         (b)   Except for billboard signs as regulated by §
153.209, signs shall not be constructed on any lot prior to the time of
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.



         (c)   The city may specify the hours any sign may be
illuminated. The hours of illumination may be specified on the permit or any
time during the life of the sign. Illuminated signs shall have a shielded
light source and conform to the lighting requirements in § 153.185.



      (4)   Message substitution. In all districts, any sign allowed
under this subchapter is allowed to contain noncommercial speech in lieu of a
commercial message.



      (5)   Permission of property owner. Signs may not be posted on
public or private property without the permission of the underlying property
owner.



      (6)   Posting of noncommercial signs in state general election
years. Pursuant to M.S. § 211B.045, notwithstanding any language to the
contrary in this section, noncommercial signs of any size may be posted in
any number beginning 46 days before the state primary in a state general
election year until 10 days following the state general election. During this
time period, noncommercial signs may be placed in unimproved areas of the
public right-of-way provided that all portions of the sign are located at
least 5 feet from any improved portion of the right-of-way and at least 2
feet from any sidewalk or trail. Signs may only be placed in the unimproved
public right-of-way with the permission of the abutting property owner and
shall not obstruct driver visibility. Signs may not be placed in or on
roundabouts.



   (D)   Prohibited signs. The following signs and advertising devices
shall be prohibited:



      (1)   Any sign that, by reason of its location, shape,
movement, color, lighting intensity, or any other manner, interferes with the
proper and safe functioning of a traffic sign or signal, obstructs the vision
of pedestrians, cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering public
streets, or otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard or a public nuisance, as
defined by the city;



      (2)   Balloon signs or standard balloons greater than 18
inches in size;



      (3)   Pennants, ribbons, streamers, festoons, flying banners;



      (4)   Flashing signs;



      (5)   Portable signs;



      (6)   Roof signs, including signs mounted on a roof surface or
projecting above the roofline or wall of a structure, if either attached to
the structure or cantilevered over the structure, except as allowed by §
153.208(J);



      (7)   Signs painted on or attached to trees, rocks, or other
natural surfaces or attached to public utility poles, bridges, or similar
public structures;



      (8)   Signs painted on buildings or fences in any district,
except for murals or artwork approved by the City Council;



      (9)   Search lights, strobe lights, or projection signs;



      (10)   Signs in the public right-of-way or easements or any
type unless otherwise approved by this subchapter;



      (11)   Temporary or permanent off-premise signs, except as
provided in § 153.210, Billboards, and § 153.210(C)(3), Temporary
agricultural signs.



   (E)   Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the
requirements of this subchapter:



      (1)   Official public notices or signs required by local,
state, or federal regulations;



      (2)   Governmental signs, including but not limited to,
traffic control and other regulatory purpose signs, street signs,
informational signs, danger signs, local government park signs, local
government building signs, and railroad crossings;



      (3)   Home security signs, "no trespassing," and "no parking"
signs, provided the total signage on a zoning lot shall not exceed 2 square
feet in area, the signs shall not be placed or maintained in the public
right-of-way, and shall not be illuminated;



      (4)   Historical plaques by recognized historical agencies,
provided the signs shall not be placed or maintained in the public
right-of-way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed 4 square feet in
area;



      (5)   Permanent or temporary interior signs not visible from
the exterior of a structure;



      (6)   Informational signs displayed strictly for the
convenience of the public, including signs identifying restrooms, waste
receptacles, addresses, doorbells, mailboxes, or building entrances;



      (7)   Permanent window signs occupying no more than 25% of the
window area in commercial districts, mixed use commercial districts,
industrial districts, and existing nonconforming commercial uses fronting on
a minor connector roadway as shown in the adopted Comprehensive Plan.



   (F)   Sign permit.



      (1)   Application procedure. No person shall erect, place,
construct, reconstruct, alter, or relocate any sign without a permit. The
application for a permit shall be submitted on a form furnished by the city.
A sign permit is not required for signs specifically exempted by these
regulations, the refacing of an existing wall or freestanding sign
advertising sign face area, the changing of the temporary message content of
a temporary or permanent sign, including but not limited to, temporary or
permanent window signs, changeable electronic and non-electronic copy
temporary messages, gasoline prices, and drive-thru menu board pricing and
food items, provided that all other requirements of this subchapter are met.



      (2)   Issuance of sign permit. Upon filing of an application,
the city shall examine the plans and accompanying data and determine if they
are in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. Sign permits shall
expire 180 days from the date of issuance for all permanent signs if the sign
has not been constructed or installed.



      (3)   Fee. The applicant shall pay a permit fee, which is a
flat fee established by ordinance on an annual basis. In addition to the
permit fee, an applicant for a billboard sign must pay an initial fee and an
annual fee established by ordinance on an annual basis.



      (4)   Sign installer. No person, firm, or corporation shall
engage in the business of erecting, placing, constructing, reconstructing,
altering, or relocating permanent wall signs or freestanding sign structures
within the city, without first having procured a license from the city for a
fee established by ordinance payable on an annual basis, except that the
owner, lessee or occupant of the property upon which the sign is located may
perform the actual work, provided the person has obtained a permit for the
sign. Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in
accordance with § 10.99 of the City Code, and the person's license granted
under this division may, in such case, be revoked by the City Council.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616,
passed 7-9-2012; Am. Ord. 678, passed 7-23-2018)



§ 153.206  CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC COPY SIGNS.



   Within all zoning districts except where prohibited by this subchapter,
changeable electronic copy signs shall be permitted based on the following
regulations:



   (A)   Changeable electronic copy signs are allowed only on a
freestanding sign. Changeable electronic copy signs may occupy no more than
the percentage allowed as determined in the appropriate zoning district for
which the sign is located. Time, date, or temperature information shall be
counted towards the total area of the changeable electronic copy area
permitted. Price information for motor fuel stations shall not be counted
towards the total area of the changeable electronic copy area permitted. The
remainder of the sign must not have the capability to have changeable
electronic copy even if not used. Only 1 contiguous changeable electronic
copy area is allowed on a sign face;



   (B)   A changeable electronic copy sign may not change or move more
often than once every 15 seconds.



   (C)   The images and messages displayed must be static, and the
transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without
any special effects;



   (D)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in
themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or
to any other sign;



   (E)   Changeable electronic copy signs must be designed and equipped
to freeze the device in 1 position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must
also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it
malfunctions. The sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic displays when
notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of this
chapter;



   (F)   Changeable electronic copy signs shall be restricted in their
illumination and brightness. All signs with electronic copy must be equipped
with an automatic dimmer control or other mechanism that automatically
controls the sign's brightness to assure at any time the sign's intensity
does not exceed the lighting standards contained in § 153.185. If there is a
violation of the brightness standards, the adjustment must be made within one
1 business day upon written and or verbal notification from the city.



   (G)   Operation of any changeable electronic copy sign not in
compliance with § 153.206 in its entirety will require the changeable
electronic sign owner or operator to turn off the display, within 1 hour of
written and or verbal notification from the city, and make adjustments to
meet all requirements of § 153.206. The sign may not be turned back on until
all operating adjustments have approval by the city.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616, passed 7-9-2012)



§ 153.207  SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS.



   Within the residential districts, the following signs are permitted:



   (A)   Address/building name sign. One address/building name wall
sign, not exceeding 10 square feet in area, for multi-family and
non-residential uses.



   (B)   Wall sign for existing nonconforming commercial uses. The
total aggregate square footage of all wall signs shall not exceed the sum of
15% of leased or owned building wall area on an improved public road
frontage. No more than 2 wall signs shall be allowed on an improved public
road frontage for an individual business. The maximum sign surface area for
an individual wall sign may not exceed 200 square feet. See § 153.208(C)
through (J) for additional commercial wall sign requirements.



   (C)   Home occupation sign. One non-illuminated home occupation
sign, not to exceed 6 square feet, for single-family residential properties
only.



      (1)   The sign must be located in the required front yard only.



      (2)   The sign shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from the
public right-of-way and a minimum of 5 feet from a side property line, and
shall meet traffic visibility requirements as defined in § 153.205(B).



      (3)   The sign must be made of wood or metal. The sign shall
be non-illuminated and supported by a wood or metal post and frame.



      (4)   The maximum height of the sign, from grade to the
highest point of the sign, shall not exceed 6 feet.



      (5)   The sign must not have more than 2 sides.



      (6)   A sign permit is required. A certificate of compliance
for a home occupation may be required to be obtained before a sign permit
will be allowed by the city.



   (D)   Agricultural business sign. An agricultural business sign is
permitted with the following regulations:



      (1)   The maximum sign area cannot exceed 32 square feet;



      (2)   The maximum height of the sign, from grade to the
highest point of the sign, shall not exceed 6 feet;



      (3)   The sign shall be non-illuminated;



      (4)   The sign shall be made of wood, metal, or a combination
thereof;



      (5)   The sign shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the
side or front property line, and shall meet traffic visibility requirements
as defined in § 153.205(B);



      (6)   The sign shall be located within the required front yard;



      (7)   No more than 1 sign is permitted on any 1 property;



      (8)   The sign must not have more than 2 sides;



      (9)   Agricultural business signs shall be allowed in all
districts where an agricultural business is permitted.



   (E)   Freestanding neighborhood identification sign. One
freestanding neighborhood identification monument sign is permitted for
residential developments, unless otherwise approved as part of a PUD, with
the following regulations:



      (1)   The identification sign shall not exceed 32 square feet
in area per surface;



      (2)   The maximum height shall be 6 feet;



      (3)   The sign must be located a minimum of 10 feet from the
public right-of-way and a minimum of 5 feet from all other property lines,
and shall meet traffic visibility requirements as defined in § 153.205(B);



      (4)   The sign may be externally illuminated and shall meet
the lighting requirements of § 153.185;



      (5)   The sign must be maintained by landlord/property owner
or homeowners' association;



      (6)   The sign must not have more than 2 sides.



   (F)   Freestanding sign for non-residential uses or existing
nonconforming commercial uses. One freestanding sign is permitted for each
permitted non-residential use and existing non-conforming commercial use,
with the following regulations:



      (1)   Single- or multi-tenant building or develop- ment. One
freestanding sign shall be allowed for a single- or multi-tenant building or
development.



      (2)   Non-residential uses and existing noncon- forming
commercial uses. The surface area shall not exceed 80 square feet, and may
include up to 50% of the total area as changeable electronic or
non-electronic copy for signs fronting on a minor connector roadway as shown
in the adopted Comprehensive Plan.



      (3)   Non-residential use. The surface area shall not exceed
40 square feet, and may include up to 50% of the total area as changeable
electronic or non-electronic copy for signs fronting on a local street.



      (4)   Maximum height. The maximum height for a freestanding
sign shall be the lowest point of the roof or parapet of the principal
building with which it is associated.



      (5)   Base of a monument sign. The base of a monument sign
shall be designed with compatible materials and color that architecturally
match the principal structure with which it is associated. The width of the
base shall not exceed the width of the sign face.



      (6)   Base of a pylon sign. The base of a pylon sign shall be
designed with compatible materials and color that architecturally match the
principal structure so that posts or column supports are not exposed.



      (7)   No more than 2 sides. A sign may not have more than 2
sides.



      (8)   Setbacks. The sign shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from the public right-of-way and a minimum of 5 feet from all other lot
lines, and shall meet traffic visibility requirements as defined in §
153.205(B):



      (9)   Illumination and lighting requirements. The sign may be
internally or externally illuminated and shall meet the lighting requirements
of § 153.185.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616,
passed 7-9-2012)



§ 153.208  WALL SIGNS AND FREESTANDING SIGNS IN ALL COMMERCIAL, MIXED USE
COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Within the commercial, mixed use commercial, and industrial districts,
wall signs and freestanding signs are permitted as follows:



   (A)   Address/building name sign. One address/ building name wall
sign for each commercial building, not exceeding 10 square feet in area, is
allowed. This sign does not count toward total aggregate square footage
allowed for wall signs.



   (B)   Wall sign commercial and industrial uses. The total aggregate
square footage of all wall signs shall not exceed the sum of 15% of leased or
owned building wall area on an improved public road frontage. No more than 2
wall signs shall be allowed on an improved public road frontage for an
individual business. The maximum sign surface area for an individual wall
sign may not exceed 200 square feet.



   (C)   Individual letters/channel-raceway letters wall sign.



   (D)   Outline cabinet wall sign.



   (E)   Flatpanel wall sign.



   (F)   Logo as part of a wall sign.



   (G)   Projecting wall sign. Projecting signs are permitted with the
following requirements:



      (1)   Projecting signs may encroach 5 feet into a required
yard setback in the MU-1 Zoning District. In all other districts, a
projecting sign must meet building setbacks;



      (2)   Projecting signs must be at least 8 feet above a
public/private sidewalk;



      (3)   The maximum area of a projecting sign is 10 square feet;



      (4)   Projecting signs are calculated as wall signs.



   (H)   Awning sign. Awning signs are permitted and calculated as a
wall sign.



   (I)   Master wall sign plan for multi-tenant buildings.  A master
sign plan may be proposed for existing or new multi-tenant buildings,
shopping centers, and commercial and residential Planned Unit Developments
(PUDs). In the case of a commercial multi-story building, a master sign plan
is required. The master sign plan shall be submitted to the city and shall be
of sufficient scope and detail to permit a determination as to whether or not
the plan is consistent with the regulations of this subchapter or adopted as
part of PUD standards. The purpose of the master sign plan is to determine
the specific individual tenant sign requirements for the facility. Existing
approved master sign plans for single-story multi-tenant buildings not part
of a PUD may either follow the existing approved plan, or may follow current
regulations provided in this subchapter. Building owner approval, in writing,
will be required for all signs in a multi-tenant building, and shall be
submitted with the required sign permit application.



   (J)   Location of wall signs on existing commercial buildings with
residential architecture. Roof signs are prohibited by § 153.205(D)(6).
Exception is made for existing commercial buildings that have residential
architectural character to be placed above the lowest roof line. In the case
of a hipped roof, mansard roof, gable-end roof, and dormers, wall signs may
be placed above the lowest roof line of a building if no alternatives exist
due to the architectural characteristics of the building. The final location
of the wall sign above the lowest roof line shall be minimized and be
approved by the city as part of the sign permit process.



   (K)   Illumination and lighting requirements. Wall signs may be
internally or externally illuminated and shall meet the lighting requirements
of § 153.185.



   (L)   Freestanding sign in the B-l and NC Zoning Districts. One
freestanding sign shall be allowed for a single- or multi-tenant commercial
building, with the following regulations:



      (1)   The surface area shall not exceed 40 square feet for a
single-tenant building and 80 square feet for a multi-tenant building, and
may include up to 50% of the total area as changeable electronic or
non-electronic copy.



      (2)   The maximum height for a freestanding sign shall be the
lowest point of the roof or parapet of the principal building with which it
is associated.



      (3)   The base of a monument sign shall be designed with
compatible materials and color that architecturally match the principal
structure with which it is associated. The width of the base shall not exceed
the width of the sign face.



      (4)   The base of a pylon sign shall be designed with
compatible materials and color that architecturally match the principal
structure so that post or column supports are not exposed.



      (5)   The sign may be internally or externally illuminated and
shall meet the lighting requirements of § 153.185.



      (6)   The sign may not have more than 2 sides;



      (7)   No freestanding sign, or any part thereof, shall be
located closer than 10 feet from the public right-of-way and 5 feet from all
other lot lines, and shall meet the traffic visibility requirements as
defined in § 153.205(B).



   (M)   Freestanding sign in the MU-2, B-2, B-3, BP, and I Zoning
Districts. One freestanding sign shall be allowed for a single- or
multi-tenant commercial building, with the following regulations:



      (1)   The surface area shall not exceed 100 square feet and
may include up to 50% of the total area as changeable electronic or
non-electronic copy.



      (2)   Parcels fronting on Interstate Highway 35 are allowed 1
additional freestanding sign, not to exceed 100 square feet in area and a
height of 30 feet. The secondary sign shall be located between the principal
building and I-35, and shall be setback 20 feet from the I-35 right-of-way.



      (3)   Parcel(s) in the B-2 Zoning District fronting on West
Broadway with a secondary road frontage on 1st Avenue NW west of 8th Street
NW may have a second freestanding sign, with a surface area not to exceed 10
square feet and 4 feet in height.



      (4)   The maximum height for a freestanding sign shall be the
lowest point of the roof or parapet of the principal building with which it
is associated.



      (5)   The base of a monument sign shall be designed with
compatible materials and color that architecturally match the principal
structure with which it is associated. The width of the base shall not exceed
the width of the sign face.



      (6)   The base of a pylon sign shall be designed with
compatible materials and color that architecturally match the principal
structure so that post or column supports are not exposed.



      (7)   The sign may be internally or externally illuminated and
shall meet the lighting requirements of § 153.185.



      (8)   The sign must not have more than 2 sides,



      (9)   No freestanding sign, or any part thereof, shall be
located closer than 10 feet from the public right-of-way and 5 feet from all
other lot lines, and shall meet traffic visibility requirements as defined in
§ 153.205(B).



   (N)   Freestanding sign in the MU-1 Zoning District. No freestanding
signage is permitted in the MU-1 District.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 573,
passed 3-10-2008; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616, passed
7-9-2012)



§ 153.209  BILLBOARD SIGNS.



   BILLBOARDS are off-premise signs that direct attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises
where the sign is located, or to which it is affixed. Billboards shall be
permitted only on those properties in the B-2 and B-3 Districts with direct
frontage on Interstate Highway 35.



   (A)   Billboard permits. No sign as permitted by this section shall
be erected, altered, or relocated without first securing a permit from the
city. Within 90 days from the effective date of this section, applications
for permits shall be made for all signs described within this division that
are presently erected, whether or not a permit had been previously issued.
The application shall be submitted in the same form as that required for a
new sign under this subchapter. In the event a permit had previously been
issued, no additional fee shall be collected for the new permit.



   (B)   Applications for permits.



      (1)   The billboard permit application shall be signed by the
applicant. When the applicant is any person other than the owner of the
property, the owner of the property shall also sign it. The application shall
contain the following information:



         (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of the
property owner, sign owner, and erector;



         (b)   Location of the sign structure;



         (c)   Scaled drawing showing position of the sign or
advertising structure in relation to the nearest buildings, structures,
public streets, right-of-way, and property lines;



         (d)   Plans and specifications and method of
construction or attachment to the building or the ground, including all
dimensions, all construction materials, a description of all light sources,
wattage, types and color of lights, and details of any light shields or
shades;



         (e)   If required by the city, a copy of stress sheets
and calculations, showing the structures as designed for dead load and wind
velocity, in the amount required by this section and all other sections of
the City Code, will be furnished;



         (f)   Any electrical permit required for any sign;



         (g)   Other information as may be required by the city.



      (2)   In addition to the above application, an agreement must
be entered into with the city which will authorize and direct the city to:



         (a)   Remove and dispose of, at the owner’s expense,
any sign and sign structure on which a permit has been issued but not renewed
by the owner, and not removed by the owner within a 30-day period following
the expiration of the permit; and/or



         (b)   Remove, at the expense of the owner, the sign and
sign structure, where maintenance is required but not furnished after a
hearing and a 10-day notice to the owner specifying the maintenance required
by the city.



      (3)   The following operations shall not be considered as
creating a sign and shall not require a billboard permit:



         (a)   The changing of the advertising copy or message;



         (b)   Painting, repainting, cleaning, and other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign or sign structure unless a structural change
is made.



      (4)   The issuance of a permit may also be subject to
conditions imposed by the city in order to promote a more reasonable
combination of signs and to promote conformity with the character and uses of
adjoining property.



   (C)   Size and distance limitations.



      (1)   The maximum sign per facing of a freestanding
advertising sign permitted under this section shall be 600 square feet. Two
facings per structure shall be the maximum permitted, and double-faced signs
shall be attached back-to-back or V-shape.



      (2)   A maximum height of 40 feet above lot grade measured by
the vertical distance from the elevation at the centerline of Interstate
Highway 35, measured to the top of the sign structure or from the elevation
of the ground surface at the base of the sign to the top of the sign.



      (3)   The minimum lineal distance between advertising signs
permitted under this section on the same side of the highway shall be 500
feet.



      (4)   The minimum setbacks for signs shall be twice the height
from all property lines.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 608, passed 5-23-2011; Am. Ord. 616, passed
7-9-2012)



§ 153.210  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Temporary signs as defined and regulated in this subchapter shall
further comply with the following provisions.



   (A)   Temporary emergency or special situation signs. The city may
approve the construction of a temporary sign not specifically defined in this
subchapter if a valid need is shown to exist by virtue of an emergency or
special situation. The duration, location, size, and other conditions
regarding the sign shall be established by the city at the time of approval
through the issuance of a temporary sign permit.



   (B)   Temporary sign permit exemption. The following signs do not
require a permit or permit fee, but are still subject to the other standards
of this section.



      (1)   Temporary noncommercial signs.



      (2)   Temporary on-site and off-site real estate signs
pertaining to the sale, rental, or development of real property.



      (3)   The changing of a temporary message on a permanent
changeable copy sign.



      (4)   Temporary construction signs designating the architects,
lending institutions, engineers, or contractors, when placed on a site where
a building is to be constructed within 60 days, shall be maintained on-site
no more than 30 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (5)   Temporary window signs.



      (6)   Temporary residential signs advertising garage sales,
provided the signage on a zoning lot shall not exceed 8 square feet in area,
and the signs shall not be placed or maintained in the public right-of-way,
and shall not be illuminated.



   (C)   Temporary signs in business, commercial, mixed use, and
industrial districts.



      (1)   Temporary banner sign. No more than 1 temporary banner,
not exceeding 40 square feet in area, may be located on an outside building
wall and shall not be placed in any other location. Each temporary sign shall
be permitted to be displayed for a maximum period of 30 consecutive days 4
times per year, with an approved temporary sign permit. No more than 1
banner, not exceeding 40 square feet in area, may be placed on the outside
building wall between December 1 and January 3 without an approved temporary
sign permit. A new permit must be obtained for every 30-day period. No fee is
required for a temporary banner permit.



      (2)   Temporary sandwich board sign. A maximum of 1 sandwich
board sign per business is permitted in business, commercial, and mixed use
districts. Sandwich board signs shall be displayed only during open business
hours and must be removed daily. A permit is not required.



         (a)   Sandwich board signs may be no more than 6 square
feet in area.



         (b)   Sandwich board signs must leave a minimum of 5
feet of clearance for pedestrian access if placed on a public or private
sidewalk. Sandwich board signs may not hinder the ability of persons to
access vehicles parked at the curb and/or access to a building,



         (c)   Sandwich board signs shall be maintained in a good
appearance at all times.



         (d)   No sandwich board sign shall be secured, tethered,
or installed on traffic devices, utility equipment, street trees, street
furniture, street lights, or any other public fixture.



         (e)   Sandwich board signs are temporary signs and shall
not be counted towards the total sign area of the site for permanent signage.



      (3)   Agricultural business, off-premises, direc-tional,
temporary, sandwich board sign. One  off-premises, temporary, agricultural
business, directional sign is allowed, if the following criteria are met:



         (a)   The applicant has written permission from the
property owner to place the agricultural business, off-premises, directional,
temporary, sandwich board sign on the owner’s property, The property on
which the sign is to be placed must be adjacent to the property on which the
agricultural business is being operated. A copy of the document granting
permission to the sign owner for placement of the sign shall be provided to
the city for record.



         (b)   The agricultural business, off-premises,
directional, temporary, sandwich board sign shall meet the requirements of §
153.210(C)(2)(a), (c), (d) and (e).



   (D)   Other temporary sign requirements.



      (1)   Community and civic promotion signs. The size, location,
frequency, and duration of such signs may vary, depending on the nature of
the promotion or civic event. A temporary permit is not required.



      (2)   Responsibility for temporary signs. Temporary signs
located on private property shall have the express consent of the property
owner.



      (3)   Temporary real estate signs. It is the intent of this
provision to prohibit the use of long-term real estate signs to advertise
units or space in multiple-family residential structures or business and
industrial structures or development that are periodically or perpetually
available for sale, rent, or lease. Short-term real estate signs shall be
removed when 85% of the project is sold or leased.



         (a)   Signs which advertise the sale or lease of
property in any district may be placed within the required front yard of any
property to be sold or leased, and shall not be in excess of 32 square feet
per surface. The signs shall not be less than 10 feet from the right-of-way
line unless flat against the structure.



         (b)   For the purpose of selling or promoting a
residential project of 6 or more dwelling units, any commercial area or an
industrial area, 2 signs, not to exceed 64 square feet of advertising
surface, may be erected upon the project site at each entrance to the
project. The sign shall not be less than 10 feet from any public right-of-way
line.



         (c)   Temporary, off-site, open house directional signs,
advertising the sale of residential real property, are allowed with the
consent of the property owner on whose property the signs are placed. The
signs shall be promptly removed at the completion of the open house and no
later than 6:00 p.m. on the same day. Off-site open house signs may not be
placed in the public right-of-way.



         (d)   Temporary, off-site, real estate directional signs
are allowed, but shall be limited to 2 square feet, and shall include the
name and telephone number of the person or company responsible for the signs.
The signs shall be promptly removed upon the sale of the property. Off-site
real estate signs may not be placed in the public right-of-way.



      (4)   Temporary noncommercial signs.



      (5)   Temporary window signs. No more than 50% of the total
window area may be used for the display of a temporary sign message.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616,
passed 7-9-2012; Am. Ord. 678, passed 7-23-2018)



§ 153.211  SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Conformance with the Building Code. The construction of all
signs permitted by this subchapter shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of the Building Code as administered by the city.



   (B)   Safety. No sign or structure shall be erected in such a manner
that any portion of its surface and/or supports will interfere in any way
with the free use of any fire escape, exit, or standpipe. No sign shall
obstruct any window. Signs shall be so located as to maintain all required
clearances from overhead power and service lines.



   (C)   Posts and columns. Sign support structures for all
freestanding signs, except monument signs, shall be limited to posts or
columns not in excess of that commonly required to support the size and
weight of the sign.



   (D)   Sign maintenance. All signs and sign structures shall be
properly maintained and kept in a safe and presentable condition. Vegetation
around, in front of, behind, and underneath the base of any freestanding sign
shall be neatly kept and free of weeds. No accumulation of rubbish or debris
shall be permitted.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616,
passed 7-9-2012)



§ 153.212  ADMINISTRATION, COMPLIANCE, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Nonconforming signs.



      (1)   Legal, nonconforming, permanent signs. Legal,
nonconforming, permanent signs, such as pylon and flashing signs, lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this subchapter, shall be allowed to
continue as determined by state law.



      (2)   A nonconforming sign may be repaired, replaced, and
maintained, but cannot be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.



      (3)   Should such sign or sign structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent greater than 50% of its replacement cost, and no building
permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property was damaged,
it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this subchapter.



      (4)   Should such sign or sign structure be moved for any
reason, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located.



   (B)   Variances. Requests for variances from sign size of a sign,
number of signs, and setback requirements of this section may be made
pursuant to § 153.036.



   (C)   Violations.



      (1)   Written order to alleged violator. When, in the opinion
of the city’s Zoning Administrator, a violation of this subchapter exists,
the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the property owner
of record where the sign is located and the owner or person responsible for
the erection of the sign, if known, which may include an order directing the
removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this subchapter.
The notice shall describe the violation and shall state that the property
owner, owner, or person responsible for the erection of the sign, if known,
has 15 days from the date of the notice in which to correct the alleged
violation or appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator in the manner
provided in this code. In the case of a temporary sign violation, the
property owner of record where the sign is located and/or the owner or person
responsible for the erection of the sign, if known, shall have 24 hours (or
less as determined by the Zoning Administrator) from the date of notice to
correct the alleged violation. Upon failure to remove or to comply with the
notice, the city may remove the sign. Any costs of removal incurred by the
city shall be assessed to the owners of the property on which the sign was
located, and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner
of taxes with all costs assessed against the property. Temporary signs
located on city-owned property or located in the public right-of-way may be
removed without notice to the owner or the person responsible for the
erection of the sign and may be immediately disposed of by the city.



      (2)   Defective or unsafe signs. If upon inspection the city
finds that a sign is abandoned or structurally, materially, or electrically
defective, or in any way endangers the public, the city shall issue a written
order to the owner of the sign and occupant of the premises, stating the
nature of the violation and requiring the repair or removal of the sign
within 30 days of the order.



      (3)   Emergency. In cases of emergency, the city may cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. Signs
removed in this manner must present a hazard to the public safety or welfare.
The city may cause the removal of any temporary sign that has not been
promptly removed as specified in this subchapter or by the specific sign
permit, or for failure to comply with written orders of removal or repair, or
which has been placed in a prohibited location.



      (4)   Mailed notice of removal. After removal or demolition of
the sign, a notice shall be mailed to the property owner of record where the
sign was located and sign owner, if known, stating the nature of the work and
the date on  which it was performed, and demanding payment of the costs as
certified by the city. The removal of temporary signs placed in the public
right-of-way or on city property shall require no notice and such signs shall
be discarded by the city.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 616,
passed 7-9-2012; Am. Ord. 678, passed 7-23-2018)



LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS



§ 153.230  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a standard that helps to
implement and regulate open space within the city by establishing a
protection of privacy and buffer between different land uses; increasing and
maintaining property values; creating an urban forest, thereby controlling
the urban heat island effect, preventing or reducing soil erosion,
sedimentation, and storm water runoff; improving air quality and reducing
noise pollution; and enhancing energy conservation through natural insulation
and shading.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.231  LANDSCAPE PLAN.



   (A)   A landscape plan is required for all commercial, multi-family
residential, industrial uses, major subdivisions, and Planned Unit
Developments and non-residential uses in residential zoning districts.



   (B)   Location and type of landscape materials may be further
regulated by the zoning district design standards and parking regulations of
this chapter. See zoning district design standards (§§ 153.324, 153.330,
153.334 and 153.335) and § 153.125 of this chapter for further requirements.



   (C)   Landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect in the state, as required by state rules. Landscape plans drawn to
scale of not less than 1 inch equals 50 feet and shall show the following:



      (1)   Boundary lines of the property with accurate dimensions;



      (2)   Locations of existing and proposed buildings, parking
lots, roads, and other improvements;



      (3)   Proposed grading plan with 2 foot contour intervals;



      (4)   Location, approximate size, and common name of existing
trees and shrubs;



      (5)   A planting schedule containing symbols, quantities,
common and botanical names, size of plant materials, root condition, and
special planting instructions;



      (6)   Planting details, illustrations, and proposed locations
of all new plant material;



      (7)   Locations and details of other landscape features,
including berms, fences, and planter boxes;



      (8)   Details of restoration of disturbed areas, including
areas to be sodded or seeded;



      (9)   Location and details of irrigation systems; and



      (10)   Details and cross sections of all required screening.



   (D)   Minor changes to the landscape plan (change in species type)
that do not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material as
specified on the approved landscape plan shall be approved by the Community
Development Director. Changes to the size and/or number of plant materials of
an approved landscape plan shall be considered a major change. Major changes
shall only be approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.232  MINIMUM LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Detached single-family and two-family residential.



      (1)   Four trees per residential lot.



      (2)   Establish grass or groundcover within 6 months after the
issuance of certificate of occupancy.



   (B)   Other than detached single-family and two-family residential.



      (1)   All open areas of a lot surrounding or within a
principal or accessory use which are not used or improved for required
parking areas, drives, or storage shall be landscaped with a combination of
overstory trees, understory trees, shrubs, flowers, and groundcover materials
within 1 year following the date of building occupancy.



      (2)   The minimum number of overstory trees shall not be less
than the perimeter of the lot divided by 30. The minimum number of understory
trees and shrubs shall not be less than the perimeter of the lot divided by
10.



      (3)   The city may require additional landscaping as necessary
to provide adequate screening or to provide a complete quality landscape
treatment of the site.



      (4)   In instances where healthy plant materials of acceptable
species exist on-site prior to its development, the application of the
standards in this subchapter may be adjusted by the city to allow credit for
the material, provided that the adjustment is consistent with the intent of
this chapter. The city may permit the seeding of areas reserved for future
expansion of the development if consistent with the intent of this chapter.



      (5)   The city may waive some of the landscaping requirements
of this chapter for developments in all zoning districts.



   (C)   Unless waived by the city, a Woodland Preservation Plan shall
be submitted as per § 153.297 to assess the best possible layout to preserve
significant trees and woodlands and to enhance the efforts to minimize damage
to significant trees and woodlands. The applicant shall meet with city staff
prior to submission of the development application or prior to application
for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the most feasible
and practical placement of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage,
and other physical features in order that the least number of significant
trees and woodlands are destroyed or damaged.



   (D)   All new overstory trees shall be balled and burlapped or
removed from the growing site by a tree spade. Deciduous trees shall have a
minimum caliper of 2-1/2 inches. Coniferous trees shall be a minimum of 6
feet in height. Ornamental trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1-1/2 inches.



   (E)   All site areas not covered by buildings, sidewalks, parking
lots, driveways, patios, or similar hard surface materials shall be covered
with sod or an equivalent groundcover approved by the city. This requirement
shall not apply to site areas preserved in a natural state.



   (F)   In order to provide for adequate maintenance of landscaped
areas, an underground sprinkler system shall be provided as part of each new
development, except areas to be preserved in a natural state and private
areas of detached one and two-family dwellings, and additions to existing
structures that are equal to or less than the floor area of the existing
structure.



   (G)   No more than 50% of the required number of trees shall be
composed of 1 species. Due to various ecological and maintenance related
concerns, no required tree shall be any of the following:



      (1)   A species of the genus (elm), except those bred to be
immune to Dutch Elm Disease;



      (2)   Common Buckthorn;



      (3)   Russian Olive;



      (4)   Black Locust;



      (5)   Box-elder;



      (6)   Ash.



      (7)   Additional trees may be restricted from specific
locations due to ecological and maintenance related issues. It is the
responsibility of the landowner and/or applicant to confirm with the city
whether or not a specific tree species is appropriate.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.233 LANDSCAPE DESIGN.



   (A)   Plant materials should be used which demonstrate adaptability
to harsh urban conditions, including salt spray, storm water runoff, and
reflected pavement glare and heat.



   (B)   Where safety and maintenance become an issue, plant materials
should be free from hazards such as thorns, fruit, nuts, or seeds.



   (C)   Plant materials should be located so that no impacts occur to
overhead or underground utilities, traffic flow or circulation, and emergency
and maintenance access.



   (D)   All vegetation shall be appropriately protected by planters or
other features as necessary. Plants shall be rated for USDA Zone 3 hardiness.



   (E)   The spacing of trees along all local and collector streets
shall be no more than 30 feet apart. The spacing of trees along all arterials
shall be no more than 40 feet apart.



   (F)   All parking areas in business, commercial, industrial, and
mixed use and non-residential uses in residential zoning districts shall also
be subject to the following standards for landscaping of islands, medians,
and parking lot edges.



      (1)   Landscaping shall be distributed throughout the parking
lot to define major vehicle and pedestrian routes, provide shade, and break
up large paved areas.



      (2)   A minimum of 1 deciduous shade tree shall be provided
for each parking island.



      (3)   A landscaped area to include a mix of deciduous shade
trees and understory plantings shall be provided in required parking lot
setback areas.



      (4)   Landscaping shall incorporate a variety of deciduous and
coniferous trees and shrubs for year-round interest, texture, shape, and
seasonal color.



      (5)   Edge treatments along streets and other public spaces
should visually screen parked vehicles, but not completely obstruct views
into and out of the parking lot.



      (6)   For parking lot edges adjacent to streets, parks, or
other public open space, the following shall be provided:



         (a)   At least 1 row of shade trees spaced evenly at 15
to 20 foot intervals (or appropriate to the selected species) for the length
of the parking lot’s edge;



         (b)   Screening, consisting of continuous planting,
alone or in combination with a decorative fence/wall or a landscaped berm.



      (7)   For parking lot edges not adjacent to the public realm,
soft landscaping with a variety of deciduous and coniferous trees and
plantings shall be provided.



      (8)   High quality privacy fencing with landscaped screening
shall be required between parking lots and residential uses.



      (9)   For existing parking lots that currently do not comply
with the required parking lot landscaping, such landscaping shall be provided
when:



         (a)   A new principal building or building addition is
constructed, or exterior remodeling of the principal building occurs.



         (b)   Over 50% of the total area of an existing parking
lot is reconstructed.



         (c)   An existing parking lot under 10,000 square feet
in area is expanded by 50% or more in total surface area.



         (d)   An existing parking lot over 10,000 square feet in
area is expanded by 25% or more in total surface area.



      (10)   The City Council, based on recommendation from the
Planning Commission, may modify the amount of landscaping required by this
section or exempt existing parking lots from providing landscaping if such
landscaping would reduce the amount of parking spaces and create a
nonconformity.



   (G)   Plant material shall be placed intermittently along long
expanses of building walls, fences, and other barriers to create a softening
effect and to help break up long expanses of blank walls with little
architectural detail.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.234  BUILDING FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   If a commercial, multi-family residential or non-residential
development maintains a front and corner side yard (i.e. is not built at the
property line), building foundation landscaping is required. However, during
site plan review, the Planning Commission may decide that such landscaping is
not appropriate for the development and may waive this requirement through
recommendations to the City Council.



   (B)   Foundation plantings shall work in concert with transition
yard plantings to frame important views, while visually softening long
expanses of walls, particularly those that lack windows and/or other
architectural details. Foundation plantings shall respond to the materials
and the form of a building. The body granting approval of the landscape plan
shall determine compliance with this intent as part of the review.



   (C)   The minimum width of the planting area provided to accommodate
foundation plantings is as follows:



      (1)   Five feet of planting area width adjacent to building
walls having an eave height of up to 20 feet.



      (2)   Ten feet of planting area width adjacent to building
walls having an eave height of 20 feet or more.



   (D)   Foundation plantings shall be planted in accord with the
requirements below:



      (1)   Foundation plantings shall be installed across 75% of
the length of the front facade of the building.



      (2)   Foundation plantings may consist of a mix of trees,
shrubs, and perennials. Shade, evergreen or ornamental trees shall be spaced
1 tree for every 25 feet. These plantings may be grouped within wider
foundation planting areas, but the total number of trees planted shall be no
less than the amount required by a linear planting spaced 25 feet apart.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.235  SELECTION, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Selection. All planting materials used shall be of good
quality and meet standards for minimum acceptable form, quality, and size for
species selected, and capable of withstanding the season temperature
variations of Minnesota. The use of species native to the region shall be
encouraged. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting
and at maturity, are additional criteria that shall be considered when
selecting plant material. Where appropriate, the use of drought and salt
tolerant plant materials is encouraged.



   (B)   Installation. All landscaping materials shall be installed in
accordance with the current planting procedures established by the landscape
industry. All plant materials shall be free of disease and shall be installed
so that soil of sufficient volume, composition, and nutrient balance are
available to sustain healthy growth.



   (C)   Required element. Landscape materials depicted on landscape
plans approved by the city shall be considered to be required site plan
elements in the same manner as buildings, parking, and other improvements. As
such, the owner of record, or in some instances the homeowner’s
association, shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and
replacement of all landscape materials, fences, steps, retaining walls, and
similar landscaping elements over the entire life of the development.



   (D)   Maintenance.



      (1)   The owners and their respective agents shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping in a
condition presenting a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and free from
refuse and debris.



      (2)   Plants and groundcover which are required by an approved
site or landscape plan and which are diseased or have died shall be replaced
within 3 months of notification by the city with like kind of the original
size. However, the time for compliance may be extended up to 9 months by the
city in order to allow for seasonal or weather conditions.



      (3)   Plantings placed upon public rights-of-way or major
easements are subject to removal by the city or utility company if required
for maintenance or improvement of the utility. Trees on utility easements
containing overhead wires shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall be the
property owner’s responsibility to maintain.



      (4)   Fences, steps, retaining walls, and similar landscaping
elements shall be maintained and in good repair.



      (5)   Irrigation. Landscape design pursuant to the
requirements of this section shall recognize the need for irrigation and
water conservation. Sprinkler irrigation systems may be required for certain
landscaped areas, as determined by a landscape architect. The need for
sprinkler irrigation systems shall be determined by the type of plant
material and the condition/growing medium that they are installed in. For
instance, whether there is a permanent means available to water plant
material, such as hose bibs, shall be a consideration. All irrigation systems
shall be designed to minimize use of water. Irrigation systems, when
provided, shall be maintained in good operating condition to promote the
health of the plant materials and conservation of water.



   (E)   Energy conservation. Plant material placement should be
designed to reduce the energy consumption needs of the development. In
addition, landscaping designs shall take into account and make an effort to
implement sustainable standards (§ 153.306) and design standards, where
appropriate.



      (1)   Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west
sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun.



      (2)   Evergreens and other plant materials should be
concentrated on the north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the effect
of winter winds.



   (F)   Berming. Earthen berms and existing topographic features shall
be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site where there is
sufficient space and, in particular, when berms and existing topographic
features can be combined with plant material to facilitate effective
screening. Minimum unretained berm side slopes shall be maintained at no more
than a 4:1 slope ratio to prevent erosion and be properly and safely
maintained. Retained slopes may be implemented with the appropriate terracing
necessary to reduce the need for safety railing.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.236  LANDSCAPE GUARANTEE.



   All new plants shall be guaranteed for 1 full year from the time
planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive and in satisfactory
growth at the end of the guarantee period or be replaced.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.237  RETAINING WALLS.



   Retaining walls exceeding 4 feet in height, including staged walls that
cumulatively exceed 4 feet in height require a building permit and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans prepared by a registered engineer.
Retaining walls shall not restrict drainage or be placed in public
rights-of-way or drainage easements (See Storm Water Ordinance, Chapter 151),
and must be in compliance with the traffic visibility requirements. Retaining
walls placed in drainage and utility easements shall require the property
owner to sign an encroachment agreement or certificate of compliance and
receive approval from the City Engineer. All retaining walls shall be
reviewed by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.238  LANDSCAPING LETTER OF CREDIT OR CASH ESCROW REQUIRED.



   (A)   When landscaping or other similar improvements to property are
required by this chapter, a letter of credit or cash escrow shall be supplied
by the owner in an amount equal to at least 125% of the approved estimated
landscaping costs. The letter of credit or cash escrow, with security
satisfactory to the city, shall be conditioned upon reimbursement of all
expenses incurred by the city for engineering, legal, or other fees in
connection with making or completing the improvements. The letter of credit
or cash escrow shall be provided prior to the issuance of any building permit
and shall be valid for a period of time equal to 1 full growing season after
the date of installation of the landscaping. In the event construction of the
project is not completed within the time prescribed by building permits and
other approvals, the city may, at its option, complete the work required at
the expense of the owner and the surety.



   (B)   The city may allow an extended period of time for completion
of all landscaping if the delay is due to conditions that are reasonably
beyond the control of the developer or property owner. When extensions are
granted, the city shall require such additional security as it deems
appropriate and or an addendum to an existing development agreement.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS



§ 153.250  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to protect the environment.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.251  EXPLOSIVES.



   Uses involving the commercial storage, use, or manufacture of materials
or products that could detonate by decomposition are not permitted.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.252  RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE.



   No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity
beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from
domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation of ordinary
business or household equipment and appliances. Any such emissions are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.253  NOISE, ODOR, AIR, AND WATER POLLUTION.



   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and other adopted city
ordinances regulating noise, odor, air, and water pollution shall be the
standards applied in those areas.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.254  VIBRATIONS.



   (A)   Any vibration discernible (beyond the property line) to the
human sense of feeling for a 3 minute or more duration in any 1 hour is
prohibited.



   (B)   Any vibration resulting in any combination of amplitudes and
frequencies beyond the "safe" range of the most current standards of the
United States Bureau of Mines on any structure is prohibited.



   (C)   These standards do not apply to vibrations created during the
process of construction.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.255  GLARE OR HEAT.



   Any operation producing an intense heat, light transmission, or glare
shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light
from being detected at the lot line of the site on which the operation is
located.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.256  PUBLIC HEALTH.



   The following are declared to be nuisances endangering public health
and are prohibited:



   (A)   Causing or allowing the effluent from any cesspool, septic
tank, drain field, or human sewage disposal system to discharge upon the
surface of the ground, or dumping the contents thereof at any place except as
authorized by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency;



   (B)   Causing or allowing the pollution of any public well, cistern,
stream, lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other
substances;



   (C)   Failing to dispose of carcasses of animals within 24 hours
after death;



   (D)   Any use that discharges through evaporation into the
atmosphere, on the soil surface or in the subsoil, within or beyond the
boundaries of the lot wherein such use is located, toxic or noxious matter in
such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business;



   (E)   The ownership, possession, or control of any unused
refrigerator or other container with doors which fasten automatically when
closed, of sufficient size to retain any person, and which is exposed and
accessible to the public, without removing the doors, lids, hinges or
latches, or providing locks to prevent access by the public.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.257  REFUSE.



   In all districts and on all construction sites (with the exception of
agricultural uses and crop residue), all waste material, debris, refuse, or
garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a
closed container designed for such purposes. The owner of vacant land shall
be responsible for keeping the land free of refuse. Waste material shall not
be washed into either the public storm sewer system or the public sanitary
system without first receiving permission to do so from the city. If the
permission is not granted, a method of disposal shall be devised which will
not require continuous land acquisition for permanent operation and will not
cause a detrimental effect to the adjacent land. Should the waste be of a
solid form rather than a liquid, the storage area shall be so located and
fenced to be out of public view.



   (A)   Refuse not consisting of motor vehicles. The notice provided
by the city of illegally stored or piled garbage or refuse not including
motor vehicles shall state that if within 15 days of receipt of the notice
the violation has not been corrected, the city, at its discretion, may
dispose of the refuse or garbage and bill the property owner for the city’s
disposal and reasonable administrative costs incurred. If repayment of the
city cost is not forthcoming within 30 days of actual disposal, the City
Council shall cause all costs of the disposal to be assessed against the
property in accordance with the procedure for assessment.



   (B)   Refuse consisting of motor vehicles. In the event refuse
consisting of a motor vehicle is illegally stored, the city shall give the
owner of the vehicle notice of the violation and 15 days to take corrective
action. An owner has taken corrective action when the vehicle is legally
parked and licensed, mechanically operable, and in compliance with all state
requirements for an operable vehicle on public roads. In the event corrective
action is not taken within 15 days from the notice of the violation, the city
may take the vehicle into custody, impound it, and sell it immediately at
public auction.



   (C)   Right of entry. The city is hereby authorized and directed to
enter onto private property to investigate any complaint for violation or any
apparent violation of this chapter or to dispose of any garbage or refuse
stored or piled in violation of this chapter. The property owner and every
property occupant shall give the city free access to the property at all
reasonable times for the purpose of the investigation or disposal.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.258  VACANT LAND.



   (A)   The owner of vacant land is responsible for keeping the land
free of weeds, refuse, debris, and other unsightly, noxious, or dangerous
conditions.



   (B)   Vacant land cannot be used for exterior storage unless
contiguous to a lot under the same ownership having a principal use or
approved permit. All storage must meet all other requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.259  HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   Any use that generates, processes, stores, or disposes of hazardous
waste shall comply with the standards and regulations of the Washington
County Hazardous Waste Management Ordinance, Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency (MPCA), and any other federal, state, and local agencies.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.260  VEHICLES.



   (A)   Vehicles, boats, trailers, and other equipment in an
inoperable state and/or unlicensed shall not be parked and/or kept in any
district, except in a location authorized by this chapter or in an enclosed
building.



   (B)   Recreational vehicles, including but not limited to trailers,
campers, motor homes, boats, pop-up campers, and trailers that transport
snowmobiles, wave runners, ATV’s, and the like are restricted as follows:



      (1)   Recreational vehicles exceeding 30 feet in length may
not be stored in any residential district.



      (2)   No recreational vehicles or equipment shall be parked in
the public right-of-way.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles exceeding 30 feet in length may be
temporarily parked in residential driveways for a maximum of 72 hours for
trip preparation and unloading purposes.



      (4)   Recreational vehicles shall be parked meeting accessory
structure setback requirements.



      (5)   No recreational vehicle shall be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes in any zoning district unless otherwise
authorized by this chapter.



      (6)   This section does not apply to recreational vehicles
offered for sale in any approved outdoor sales and display area of a motor
vehicle or recreational equipment sales dealership.



   (B)   No more than 1.5 vehicles per licensed driver within the
household may be stored on a residential parcel unless kept within an
enclosed building. All vehicles shall be licensed to a member of the
household. This does not pertain to guest parking.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.261  OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is intended to ensure that outdoor wood
boiler systems are utilized in a manner that does not create a public
nuisance and is not detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of
the residents of the city.



   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the definitions indicated unless the context clearly calls for or
indicates a different meaning.



      CLEAN FUEL. Natural dry wood which has not been painted,
varnished, or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure-treated
with preservatives, and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or
other composite wood products and other Environmental Protection Agency
approved fuels.



      OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER SYSTEM. An appliance installed out-of-doors
and designed to transfer or provide heat, via liquid or other means, through
the burning of clean fuel for heating purposes. OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER does not
include a fire pit or wood-fired barbeque.



      PUBLIC NUISANCE. As defined in § 96.01.



   (C)   Area of operation. An outdoor wood boiler system may be
installed and used in the conservancy, agriculture, rural residential, and
industrial zoning districts only.



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance shall
be obtained from the city prior to installing, altering, or relocating a wood
boiler system.



   (E)   Application for a certificate of compliance.



      (1)   An application for a certificate of compliance shall be
made to the city upon forms furnished by the city. The application shall
include the following data:



         (a)   Name and address of applicant and property owner;



         (b)   Legal description of the property;



         (c)   A site plan or survey, if deemed necessary by the
city, illustrating the dimensions of the property, including location of
buildings and the wood boiler relative to the lot lines and distances from
neighboring residences that are within 300 feet; and



         (d)   Manufacturer’s specifications for installation.



      (2)   All applications shall be accompanied by an application
fee.



   (F)   Application for building permit. A building permit must be
obtained to assure that all outdoor wood boiler systems meet all building and
fire codes, and manufacturer’s specifications for installation.



   (G)   Minimum requirements for all outdoor wood boiler systems.



      (1)   All requirements for installation and maintenance shall
be met including but not limited to local, state, and federal regulations and
manufacturer’s specifications.



      (2)   An outdoor wood boiler system shall be located at least
300 feet from any residence or principal building which is not on the same
property as the outdoor wood boiler system.



      (3)   An outdoor wood boiler system shall only be placed in a
location meeting the minimum required setbacks of an accessory structure
within the applicable zoning district.



      (4)   An outdoor wood boiler system shall have an attached
permanent stack extending 2 feet higher than the roof line of the structure
being served and residential or principal buildings within a 500-foot radius
of the wood boiler system.



      (5)   An outdoor wood boiler system shall not be operated or
maintained in a manner which creates a public nuisance.



      (6)   An outdoor wood boiler system shall burn clean fuel
only. An outdoor wood boiler system shall not be operated in a manner which
creates any dense smoke, noxious fumes or noxious gas or releases soot or
cinders in unreasonable quantities.



      (7)   An outdoor wood boiler system shall be equipped with
properly functioning spark arresters.



      (8)   An outdoor wood boiler system may not be operated from
April 1 to October 1 in each year.



   (H)   Right of entry and inspection.



      (1)   An officer, agent, employee or representative of the
city may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with
the provisions of this section.



      (2)   If the city determines that the operation of a wood
boiler system is creating a nuisance or is being operated in a manner
hazardous to persons or property, or not meeting the requirements of this
section, the city may revoke the certificate of compliance after a hearing is
held by the City Council upon 10 days’ written notice given to the owner.



   (I)   Existing outdoor wood boiler systems. Outdoor wood boiler
systems installed prior to the adoption of this section shall be operated in
compliance with the minimum requirements of this section except that the
distance requirement of division (G)(2) above shall not apply; and for any
existing outdoor wood boiler system not located in a conservancy,
agriculture, or rural residential district, the requirements of division (C)
above shall not apply. The owner(s) of the property on which the outdoor wood
boiler system is installed shall make an application for a certificate of
compliance within 30 days of adoption of this section.



(Ord. 570, passed 12-10-2007; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.262  DRILLING OF WELLS IN DRINKING WATER SUPPLY MANAGEMENT AREA.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the
city’s drinking water supply by prohibiting the drilling of wells within
the city’s drinking water supply management area.



   (B)   Connection to city water supply for properties with existing
wells. The owner of property improved with a building located within the
city’s drinking water supply management areas (DWSMA) as defined in the
city’s Wellhead Protection Plan (on file at City Hall) where a public water
supply is available, or becomes available, shall connect the buildings to the
public water supply, subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   A private property with a functional well shall not be
required to connect to a public water supply until the well becomes
non-functioning such that new drilling is required.



      (2)   At the time connection to the public water supply is
completed, all existing private wells no longer in use shall be sealed by a
licensed well contractor according to the rules of the Minnesota Department
of Health.



   (C)   Prohibition. No well, as that term is defined in M.S. Ch.
103I, other than a public water supply well or a well drilled for dewatering
or groundwater monitoring purposes, may be drilled or otherwise established
within the city’s drinking water supply management areas (DWSMA) as defined
in the city’s Wellhead Protection Plan (on file at City Hall) unless the
property on which the well is to be drilled does not have reasonable access
to the city’s water supply system. For the purpose of this section, a
property will be deemed to have reasonable access to the city’s water
supply system if any part of the property is located within 500 feet of
access to the city’s water supply system.



(Ord. 668, passed 9-11-2017)



LAND ALTERATION AND GRADING REGULATIONS



§ 153.270  LAND ALTERATION AND GRADING.



   (A)   Purpose. Land alteration and grading means the reclaiming of
land by depositing or moving material so as to alter the grade. The purpose
of these standards is to regulate the alteration or grading of land.



   (B)   Permit required. A land alteration and grading permit is
required for any excavating, filling, grading, or other changes in the
land’s topography that results in the movement of 50 cubic yards or more of
material.



   (C)   Permit not required. A land alteration and grading permit is
not required for the following, but the city may require the submittal of a
grading plan:



      (1)   Excavation or grading resulting in the movement of less
than 50 cubic yards of material;



      (2)   Grading activities associated with a construction
project, provided a building permit is issued;



      (3)   Grading undertaken in accordance with an approved
preliminary plat; or



      (4)   Driveways permitted in conjunction with an approved
building permit.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.271  PERMIT APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A land alteration and grading permit requires review and
approval by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Application requirements for all proposals:



      (1)   A completed land alteration and grading permit and fee;



      (2)   A design in accordance with Ch. 151, regarding
regulations of land disturbing and development activities in order to protect
water quality and environmentally sensitive land with existing and proposed
final grades with 2 foot contour intervals and 1 foot contour intervals if
the distance between contours is over 100 feet.



   (C)   The city shall determine if the proposed operation is of a
scale and has the potential to cause, either on or off-site, significant soil
erosion, vegetation destruction, or drainage damage during the land
alteration process. If such a determination is made, the city shall establish
further application requirements. Any mining operation shall require this
further documentation, including, but not limited to, such plans as the
following:



      (1)   A Woodland Preservation Plan, as regulated in §§
153.295et seq., to assess the best possible layout to preserve significant
trees and woodlands and to enhance the efforts to minimize damage to
significant trees and woodlands;



      (2)   An annual staging plan, if the operation is expected to
continue for more than 1 year, with grading plans for each year and an
estimate of volume of material to be removed each year;



      (3)   A screening plan showing berms and/or landscaping to
protect views from nearby properties and public streets and highways;



      (4)   A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as
regulated by § 151.06.



   (D)   Review of the application shall be as stipulated in the
conditional use permit (CUP) review procedure, with additional review and
recommendation by the City Engineer and the Washington County Soil and Water
Conservation District. Certain applications also require review, in
accordance with other rules, by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources, the Army Corps of Engineers, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and
the appropriate Watershed District.



   (E)   Approval of the application shall be by the City Council as
stipulated in the CUP approval process.



   (F)   The city may require the applicant to post a bond or other
financial guarantee to ensure compliance with the permit.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.272  CONSTRUCTION SITE STANDARDS.



   Construction site standards as described in § 151.08 shall be followed
during construction.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.273  EROSION CONTROL.



   The erosion control measures outlined in § 151.08 shall be followed
during construction.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.274  SEDIMENT CONTROL.



   The sediment control measures outlined in § 151.08 shall be followed
during construction.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.275  RESTORATION.



   The restoration standards outlined in § 151.08 shall be followed for
project completion.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.276  PUBLIC WATERS.



   No public water area shall be filled, partially filled, dredged,
altered by grading or mining, or disturbed in any manner without first
securing a permit from the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the
United States Army Corp of Engineers, and a grading permit from the city.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.277  DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No land shall be developed or altered and no use shall be
permitted that results in surface water runoff causing unreasonable flooding,
erosion, or deposit of materials on adjacent properties or water bodies. The
runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, a natural watercourse
or drainageway, a ponding area, or other public facility.



   (B)   Upon inspection of any site that has created drainage problems
or could create a drainage problem with proposed new development, the owner
or contractor of the site may be required to complete a grading plan and
apply for a grading permit.



   (C)   On any slope where the natural drainage pattern may be
disturbed or altered, the owner or contractor may be required to obtain a
grading permit.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.278  PRESERVATION OF NATURAL DRAINAGEWAYS/WATERWAYS AND WETLAND
PRESERVATION.



   The alteration of wetlands shall comply with the rules and regulations
of federal, state, and local agencies. A “natural drainageway” is defined
as a depression in the earth’s surface, such as ravines, draws, and
hollows, that has definable beds and banks capable of conducting surface
water runoff from adjacent lands.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.279  PRESERVATION OF NATURAL DRAINAGEWAYS/WATERWAYS.



   The preservation of natural drainage/waterways outlined in § 151.08
shall be followed during construction.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 580, passed 11-24-2008; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



WOODLAND PRESERVATION REGULATIONS



§ 153.295  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to govern the preservation and
protection of trees and woodlands within the city. The city recognizes the
value of trees and woodlands for absorbing air pollutants, reducing noise,
providing shade, providing wildlife habitat, providing visual amenity, and
preventing soil erosion and siltation. This section is adopted to ensure that
development occurs in a manner that protects and preserves these valuable
resources.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.296  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person or entity that is required to submit and
implement an approved Woodland Preservation Plan under this chapter.



   CALIPER INCH. The diameter of a tree measured at 4.5 feet above ground
level.



   CONIFEROUS TREES. A wood plant which, at maturity, is at least 12 feet
or more in height and has foliage on the outermost portions of the branches
year round.



   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Any area in which movement of earth, alteration in
topography, soil compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil
chemistry, or other change in the natural character of the land occurs as a
result of the site preparation, grading, building construction, or any other
construction activity.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ). An imaginary circle surrounding the tree
trunk radius distance of 1 foot per 1 inch of tree diameter (a 20 inch
diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of 20 feet).



   DRIP LINE. The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew
will directly fall to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree.



   EXEMPT TREE.  Eastern Cottonwood (Populus deltoids), Ash (any fraxinus
species), willow (any Salix species), any species of the genus Elm, except
those bred to be immune to Dutch Elm Disease, Common Buckthorn (Rhamnus
cathartica), Russian Olive (Elaeagmis angustifolia), Black Locust (Robinia
pseudoacacia), and Box-elder (Acer negundo) trees. These trees are not
protected under the provisions of this Chapter unless the tree is located in
the Shoreland Overlay District, and, unless located in the Shoreland Overlay
District, shall not be included in the definition of a Significant Tree for
purposes of this chapter.



   HARDWOOD DECIDUOUS TREE. Includes ironwood, oak, maple (hard), walnut,
ash, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry, locust, and basswood.



   SIGNIFICANT TREE. A healthy tree measuring a minimum of 6 caliper
inches for all hardwood deciduous trees, a minimum of 20 caliper inches for
all softwood deciduous trees, or a minimum of 12 feet in height for all
coniferous trees.



   SIGNIFICANT WOODLAND. A grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or
deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying 15,000 or more square
feet of property, and is comprised of deciduous trees of 6 caliper inches or
more, and coniferous trees over 12 feet in height.



   SOFTWOOD DECIDUOUS TREES. Includes catalpa, cottonwood, poplars/aspen,
box elder, willow, silver maple, and elm.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 655,
passed 5-23-2016)



§ 153.297  WOODLAND PRESERVATION PLAN.



   (A)   General submission requirements. A Woodland Preservation Plan
required hereunder shall be submitted when the subject property is three
acres or greater in size and:



      (1)   Preliminary subdivision plan is required within Ch. 152;
or



      (2)   A project is proposed for which a city grading permit is
required by § 153.271 and significant woodlands exist on-site; or



      (3)   An application for a single-family residential building
permit when significant woodlands exist on-site.



   (B)   All properties located within the Shoreland Overlay District
must comply with provisions for vegetation alteration as required in §
153.343.



   (C)   Plan requirements.



      (1)   All Woodland Preservation Plans, with the exception of
individual single-family residential lots, shall be certified by a forester,
landscape architect, or other qualified professional retained by the
applicant.



      (2)   All applicants shall submit a Woodland Preservation Plan
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Woodland
Preservation Plan shall include the following information:



         (a)   The name(s), telephone number(s), and address(es)
of applicant’s property owners, developers, and/or builders;



         (b)   Delineation of the buildings, structures, or
impervious surfaces situated thereon or contemplated to be built thereon;



         (c)   Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits
of the construction zone;



         (d)   Surveyed boundaries of all existing significant
trees and woodlands located within the area to be platted or within the
parcel of record;



         (e)   Identification of all significant trees and
woodlands proposed to be removed within the construction zone;



         (f)   Measures to protect significant trees and
woodlands;



         (g)   Size, species, and location of all replacement
trees proposed to be planted on the property in accordance with the tree
replacement schedule; and



         (h)   Signature of the person preparing the plan.



   (D)   Review process. The Woodland Preservation Plan shall be
reviewed by the city to assess the best possible layout to preserve
significant trees and woodlands and to enhance the efforts to minimize damage
to significant trees and woodlands. The applicant shall meet with the city
prior to submission of the development application, or prior to application
for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the most feasible
and practical placement of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage,
and other physical features in order that the fewest significant trees and
woodlands are destroyed or damaged. Once a plan is approved by the city, the
plan shall be recognized as the approved Woodland Preservation Plan.



   (E)   Compliance with plan.



      (1)   The applicant shall implement the Woodland Preservation
Plan prior to and during any construction. The woodland protection measures
shall remain in place until all grading and construction activity is
terminated, or until a request is made to, and approved by, the city.



      (2)   No significant trees or woodlands shall be removed until
a Woodland Preservation Plan is approved and accepted in accordance with the
approved Woodland Preservation Plan. If a significant tree or woodland that
was intended to be preserved is removed without permission of the city, or
damaged so that it is in a state of decline within 1 year from date of
project closure, reforestation or restitution shall be required as described
in § 153.299.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to inspect the development
and/or building site in order to determine compliance with the approved
Woodland Preservation Plan. The city shall determine whether compliance with
the Woodland Preservation Plan has been met.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 655,
passed 5-23-2016)



§ 153.298  PERMITTED TREE REMOVALS.



   The city recognizes that a certain amount of tree removal is an
inevitable consequence of the urban development process and therefore will
likely result in the removal of some significant trees. Consequently, the
city requires that significant tree removal beyond the following thresholds
shall require reforestation or restitution as described below in § 153.299.



   (A)   Trees may be removed within 30 feet from the face of the
foundation of buildings, required parking areas, driveways, well areas, drain
fields, essential utility areas, essential drainageways, easements, and
rights-of-way.



   (B)   All diseased, hazardous, dead and dying trees may be removed.
Except in the Shoreland Overlay District, all exempt trees may be removed.



   (C)   Up to 10% of significant trees may be removed from existing
improved parcels.



   (D)   On parcels where a significant woodlands exist, a percentage
of the woodland may be removed without any obligation for reforestation or
restitution, but only up to and including the threshold percentage of
woodland listed for that zoning district.



 


Zoning District

 

Threshold



Conservancy
 

10%



Agriculture
 

25%



Rural Residential
 

30%



SF, MXR-1, MXR-2, MXR-3, MF
 

50%



All Other Zoning Districts
 

60%




 



   (E)   Trees and woodlands within the Shoreland Overlay District are
subject to the requirements stated in §§ 153.343et seq., in addition to the
regulations of this chapter.



   (F)   After tree removal the parcel must still meet the minimum
requirements of §§ 153.230et seq. of this chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 655,
passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.299  MITIGATION PROCEDURES.



   Trees or woodlands removed beyond the permitted threshold(s), as
described above in § 153.298, shall be mitigated by the applicant through
either of the following methods as determined by the city:



   (A)   Replace the trees or woodlands in accordance with the tree
replacement provisions as outlined below in § 153.300; or



   (B)   Pay to the city the sum per caliper inch calculated from the
total amount of caliper inches of the required replacement trees in
accordance with the tree replacement provision in § 153.300. The fee per
caliper inch shall be set forth in the city fee schedule, and the payment
thereon shall be deposited into an account designated specifically for tree
mitigation.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.300  TREE REPLACEMENT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Schedule.



 


Size of Tree Damaged or Destroyed

 

Number of Replacement Trees






 

Category A

 

Category B

 

Category C



Coniferous, 12 to 24 feet high
 

1

 

2

 

4



Coniferous, 24 feet or higher
 

2

 

4

 

8



Hardwood deciduous, 6 to 20 inches diameter
 

1

 

2

 

4



Softwood deciduous, 20 to 30 inches diameter
 

1

 

2

 

4



Softwood deciduous, greater than 30 inches diameter
 

2

 

4

 

8




 



   (B)   Significant woodland replacement. Where replacement of a
significant woodland is required, the applicant shall be responsible for
furnishing and installing 1 Category A replacement tree, 2 Category B
replacement trees, or 4 Category C replacement trees for every 125 square
feet of significant woodland damaged or destroyed, or any increment thereof.



   (C)   Size of replacement trees.



      (1)   Category A trees shall be no less than the following
sizes:



         (a)   Deciduous trees, not less than 4 caliper inches;



         (b)   Coniferous trees, not less than 12 feet in height.



      (2)   Category B trees shall be no less than the following
sizes:



         (a)   Deciduous trees, not less than 2-1/2 caliper
inches;



         (b)   Coniferous trees, not less than 6 feet in height.



      (3)   Category C trees shall be no less than the following
sizes:



         (a)   Deciduous trees, not less than 1-1/2 caliper
inches;



         (b)   Coniferous trees, not less than 4 feet in height.



   (D)   Species requirement. Where 10 or more replacement trees are
required, not more than 50% of the replacement trees shall be of the same
species of tree without the approval of the city. No replacement tree shall
be an exempt tree.



   (E)   Warranty requirement. Any replacement tree which is not alive
or healthy, as determined by the city, or which subsequently dies due to
construction activity within 1 year after the date of project closure, shall
be removed by the applicant and replaced with a new healthy tree meeting the
same minimum size requirements within 8 months of removal.



   (F)   Additional requirements. The replanting of trees for
mitigation shall be in addition to any other landscape requirements of the
city.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 655,
passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.301  REQUIRED PROTECTIVE MEASURES.



   The following measures shall be utilized to protect significant trees
and woodlands during any type of grading or construction:



   (A)   Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminate safety
netting placed at the drip line or at the perimeter of the critical root zone
(CRZ), whichever is greater, of significant trees and woodlands to be
preserved. No grade change, construction activity, or storage of materials
shall occur within this fenced area;



   (B)   Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between
April 15 and July 1. Any oak trees so pruned shall be required to have any
cut areas sealed with an appropriate non-toxic tree wound sealant;



   (C)   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout
and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or paints.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.302  ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES.



   The following tree protection measures are suggested to protect
significant trees and woodlands that are intended to be preserved:



   (A)   Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve
trees;



   (B)   Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the drip
line of significant trees or use of tunneled installation;



   (C)   Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and/or irrigation
systems;



   (D)   Transplanting of significant trees into a protected area for
later moving into permanent sites within the construction area;



   (E)   Therapeutic pruning.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.306  SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL,
INDUSTRIAL, MIXED USE, NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT AND THE
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   To achieve the principles and objectives presented in the Comprehensive
Plan and implement the city’s Sustainability Action Plan, sustainable
design and development elements shall be incorporated into all
commercial/industrial, mixed use and non-residential development in
residential districts, and applied to apartments and multi-family structures.
A developer must select a minimum of 1 item from each of the following
categories and provide a detailed narrative as to how this requirement is
being satisfied:



   (A)   Storm water mitigation. The city supports the use of the
following techniques for storm water mitigation; however, final approval and
permitting authority must be obtained from the appropriate Watershed District.



      (1)   Pervious paving: Use of pervious surface system
technology within 50% or more of paved surface area.



      (2)   Rain gardens: Move water from building or hardscape
runoff on-site into planted areas specifically designed for infiltration.



      (3)   Green roof: Use a vegetated roof or rooftop garden to
reduce runoff.



      (4)   Water collection from building or hardscape surfaces:
Retain water on-site for irrigation or building use through cisterns or other
containment systems.



      (5)   Other techniques approved by appropriate Watershed
District.



   (B)   Heat island reduction.



      (1)   Shade trees over hardscape areas: Use overstory trees in
medians and parking lot perimeter planting areas where the canopy will
intercept sun from the pavement.



      (2)   Roofing materials: Use white roofing materials or other
roofing material solar reflective index meeting acceptable sustainability
standards and benefits.



   (C)   Water use reduction.



      (1)   Use native landscaping techniques and a high efficiency
irrigation system to minimize long term water usage.



      (2)   Use captured surface runoff from other areas on-site to
serve landscaped areas.



   (D)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Use best management practices for tree plantings in
order to encourage maximum canopy growth. See §§ 153.230et seq. for
additional landscaping requirements.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be designed to provide shading and
cooling during the summer months while minimizing reduction of solar heat
penetration during the winter months. See §§ 153.230et seq. for additional
landscaping requirements.



      (3)   Landscaping is to be environmentally sensitive and
should include native drought resistant plants and turf, and a reduced need
for chemical fertilizers and pest control. See §§ 153.230et seq. for
additional landscaping requirements.



      (4)   Where irrigation is required in §§ 153.230et seq., use
recycled gray water, roof water, collected site run-off, or an irrigation
system that will deliver up to 95% of the water supplied.



   (E)   Energy efficiency. All buildings and sites are to be sited and
developed in such a way as to maximize the benefits of the site for solar
heating and passive cooling through the following techniques, where feasible:



      (1)   Buildings are to be oriented on the site to optimize
passive solar heating and cooling opportunities.



      (2)   Buildings are to be oriented so as to minimize wind
loads on the structure.



      (3)   Windows are to be placed, and appropriately shaded, to
maximize solar penetration during the winter months and minimize solar
penetration during the summer months.



      (4)   Install solar panels in conformance with § 153.307 to
provide at least 10% of the project’s estimated electricity demand.



      (5)   A minimum of 50% of all exterior light fixtures used
on-site shall be powered by solar panel energy.



      (6)   All lighting shall be downcast and use LED fixtures
meeting requirements in § 153.185.



      (7)   Daylight sensors or timers shall be installed on all
exterior lighting.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.307  SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Zoning districts. Solar energy systems in accordance with the
standards in this section are allowed as a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts.



   (B)   Standards.



      (1)   Exemption. Passive or building-integrated solar systems
are exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as
any other building element.



      (2)   Height. Roof mounted solar energy systems shall comply
with the maximum height requirements in the applicable zoning district.
Ground mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 15 feet in height.



      (3)   Location. In residential zoning districts, ground
mounted solar energy systems are limited to the rear yard. In non-residential
zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy systems may be permitted in the
side yard meeting accessory structure requirements in § 153.110.



      (4)   Setbacks. Ground mounted solar energy systems shall
comply with all accessory structure setbacks in the applicable zoning
district. Roof mounted systems shall comply with all building setbacks in the
applicable zoning district and shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter
of the building on which the system is mounted.



      (5)   Roof mounting. Roof mounted solar collectors shall be
flush mounted on pitched roofs unless the roof pitch is determined to be
inadequate for optimum performance of the solar energy system in which case
the pitch of the solar collector may exceed the pitch of the roof up to 5%
but in no case shall be higher than 10 inches above the roof. Solar
collectors may be bracket-mounted on flat roofs.



      (6)   Easements. Solar energy systems shall not encroach on
public drainage, utility roadway, or trail easements.



      (7)   Screening. Solar energy systems shall be screened from
view to the extent possible without impacting their function.



      (8)   Maximum area. In the SF, MXR-1, MXR-2, MXR-3, and MF
residential districts, ground mounted solar energy systems shall be limited
to a maximum area of 200 square feet. In C, A and RR residential zoning
districts, ground mounted solar energy systems shall be limited to a maximum
area consistent with the accessory structure requirements in § 153.110 or no
more than 25% of the rear yard whichever is less.



      (9)   Aesthetics. All solar energy systems shall be designed
to blend into the architecture of the building to the extent possible without
negatively impacting the performance of the system and to minimize glare
towards vehicular traffic and adjacent properties.



      (10)   Feeder lines. The electrical collection system shall be
placed underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection system
may be placed overhead near substations or points on interconnection to the
electric grid.



      (11)   Structures shall not be located such that solar power
access blocks a neighboring property.



   (C)   Safety.



      (1)   Standards and certifications.



         (a)   Standards. Solar energy systems shall meet current
industry standards.



         (b)   Certification. Solar energy systems shall be
certified by an appropriate industry certifying entity.



      (2)   Utility connection. All grid connected systems shall
have a completed contractual agreement with the local utility prior to the
issuance of a building permit. A visible external disconnect must be provided.



         (a)   Abandonment. If the solar energy system remains
nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of 6 months, the system
shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The
owner shall remove the abandoned system at the owner’s expense after a
demolition permit has been obtained. Removal includes the entire structure
including transmission equipment.



         (b)   Permits. A building permit shall be obtained for
any solar energy system prior to installation.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.308  INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the
development of affordable housing within Forest Lake. The Metropolitan
Council has identified a need for housing that is affordable for a large
number of working households in the region. Forest Lake is responding to this
need by offering incentives to encourage a continued availability of a
diverse supply of housing opportunities for low to moderate income households.



   (B)   Applicability. For all affordable 50-80% of area median income
for Washington County adjusted by family size appropriate for the dwelling
unit. Housing costs include rent and utilities. Affordable monthly rental
shall be considered to be an amount not exceeding 30% of adjusted area median
family income.



   (C)   Definitions.



      (1)   Affordable rental housing. Where the rent plus utilities
for the dwelling unit does not exceed 30% of the allowed individual household
income.



      (2)   Area medium income (AMI). The median income of the
greater metropolitan area to which Forest Lake belongs, as is established and
updated annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.



      (3)   Density bonus. Those additional units that will be
allowed to be built if the density bonus is granted.



      (4)   Rental dwelling. Any dwelling unit intended to be leased.



   (D)   Incentives.



      (1)   Developers providing affordable housing units may
qualify for the following incentives and zoning code modifications listed
below. Approval of requested incentives and modifications shall be made by
the City Council. The city, in determining the reasonableness of the
incentives and modifications to be considered, shall recognize that it may be
benefitted not only on the inclusion of affordable housing but overall
quality of design, increase in efficiency in public facilities, location and
amount of proposed common space and location, design and type of dwelling
units.



         (a)   Density bonus. A developer may qualify for up to
15% increase in the otherwise allowable density for a property as determined
by the Comprehensive Plan designation of the property may be allowed. The
density bonus must be calculated by determining the largest number of units
that may be built on the property, then multiplying the result by 1.15 and
rounding up any fractions.



         (b)   Eligible projects may qualify for reduced
setbacks, reduced lot width, reduced lot size requirements and reduced
parking requirements from the underlying zone requirements throughout the
development.



         (c)   The city may consider reduced street width
requirements throughout the development provided health and safety provisions
are met.



         (d)   At the request of the developer, the city may
issue a reimbursement for fees and/or charges related to the development and
construction of the affordable housing units, including but not limited to
the following:



            1.   Planning and zoning fees. The city may issue
a reimbursement to the developer for up to 20% of the zoning and subdivision
fees for any affordable housing development.



            2.   Building permit fees. The city may issue a
reduction or reimbursement to the builder for up to 20% of the building
permit fee for any structure meeting the definition of an affordable housing
unit. For multi-family housing developments, the building permit
reimbursement may be available for any individual structure meeting the
definition of an affordable housing unit.



            3.   Sewer and water availability charges. The
city may issue a reimbursement to the builder for up to the amount of 20% of
the sewer core charge and water availability charge (WAC) for any structure
meeting the definition of an affordable housing unit.



            4.   Parkland dedication fees. The city may issue
a reimbursement to the developer for up to 20% of a cash payment in lieu of
park and open space dedication, if any, for each affordable housing unit
constructed within an affordable housing development. A reimbursement will
not be provided for land dedication.



      (2)   Other incentives may be negotiated or offered by the
City Council through the affordable housing plan review process.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 635, passed 3-24-2014)



ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 153.315  ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General zoning district provisions.



      (1)   Establishment. In order to classify, regulate, and
restrict the location of trade and industry and the location of buildings
designated for specific uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of
buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity
of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of yards,
recreation, and open space within and surrounding the buildings, the city is
divided into zoning districts. The use, height, and area regulations shall be
uniform in each district. The districts shall be known as:



         (a)   Residential.



            C      Conservancy



            A      Agriculture



            RR      Rural Residential



            SF      Single-Family



            MXR-l      Mixed Single-Family and  Townhouse



            MXR-2   Mixed Single and  Two-Family



            MXR-3   Mixed Residential



            MF      Multiple-Family



         (b)   Commercial.



            NC      Neighborhood Commercial Business



            B-1      Broadway Business



            B-2      Highway Commercial  Business



            B-3      Limited Industrial Business



         (c)   Mixed Use.



 



            MU-1   Downtown Mixed Use



            MU-2   General Mixed Use



         (d)   Industrial.



            I      Industrial



            BP      Business Park



         (e)   Overlay.



            AP      Agriculture Preserve Overlay District



            PUD      Planned Unit Development Overlay
District



                  Rural Open Space Housing Cluster Planned
Unit



         (f)   Development Overlay District.



            SOD       Shoreland Overlay District



            AOD      Airport Overlay District



      (2)   Zoning district boundaries. See zoning district
boundaries, § 153.008.



      (3)   Annexations. All territory hereafter annexed to the city
which is not shown on the Zoning Map shall automatically upon annexation be
classified within a nonconforming district and shall be subject to all
regulations, notations, references, and conditions as are applicable to the
district until such time that a determination may be made as to the proper
district classification for the territory and an amendment can be made to
that effect.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.316  CONSERVANCY (C) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Conservancy (C) District is intended to provide
special regulatory protection for those areas that contain valuable natural
resources or other similar resources; to foster, preserve, and promote
sensitive development; to preserve areas that are not suitable for intensive
agricultural production or development due to wetlands, woodlands, steep
slopes, scenic views, bedrock formations, and/or other physical features of
unique natural and biological characteristics.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the C District:



      (1)   Agricultural use;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (3)   Plant nurseries, wholesale;



      (4)   Recreation, public;



      (5)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the C District are allowed only when
it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot.
All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated by
§§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Agriculture business;



      (2)   Detached accessory structure;



      (3)   Daycare facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (4)   Kennel, private - 3 pets or fewer;



      (5)   Pasture;



      (6)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (7)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city.



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provisions of
this chapter, the following are uses in the C District that require approval
by a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by § 153.029.



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Agriculture building.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment within a single-family
detached dwelling.



         (b)   Agriculture building.



         (c)   Daycare facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons.



         (d)   Home occupations.



         (e)   Horse training facilities, private.



         (f)   Kennel, private - more than 3 pets.



         (g)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons.



         (h)   Solar energy systems, either roof or
ground-mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to §
153.307;



         (i)   Towers (see § 153.096).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the C District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034.)



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Essential services, utility substation.



         (b)   Towers (see § 153.096).



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Bed and breakfast inn.



         (b)   Daycare facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons.



         (c)   Feed lots.



         (d)   Horse training facilities, commercial.



         (e)   Kennel, commercial.



         (f)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons.



      (3)   Similar uses. Other uses similar to those permitted in
this section as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the C District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Dwelling, temporary during construction.



      (2)   Dwelling, temporary care facility.



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in a C District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area: 20 acres;



         (b)   Lot width: 300 feet at road right-of-way.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 50 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 40 feet from the public
right-of-way;



               d.   Existing Private street: 40 feet from
edge of road.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: must meet principal building
setbacks; however, if located between the principal structure and a road, a
100 foot setback is required.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



      (3)   Building height. All buildings shall be limited to a
maximum height of 35 feet.



         (a)   Principal structures shall not exceed 3 stories or
35 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structures shall not exceed 2
stories or 25 feet.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 676, passed
7-9-2018)



§ 153.317  AGRICULTURE (A) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Agriculture (A) District is intended to preserve
areas for interim or permanent agricultural use; preserve the rural character
of outlying areas of the city; to allow a mix of large lot residential
development and agriculturally related uses in areas of the city not yet
served by public sewer; and to broaden the choice of residential living
styles within the city.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the A District:



      (1)   Agricultural use;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (3)   Plant nursery, wholesale;



      (4)   Recreation, public;



      (5)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following permitted accessory uses in the A District are allowed
only when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the
same lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and
regulated by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Accessory structures;



      (2)   Agricultural business;



      (3)   Daycare facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (4)   Kennel, private - 3 pets or fewer;



      (5)   Pasture;



      (6)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (7)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city.



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provision of
this chapter, the following are uses in the A District that require approval
by a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by § 153.029.



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Agriculture building.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment within a single-family
detached dwelling;



         (b)   Agriculture building;



         (c)   Daycare facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (d)   Home occupations;



         (e)   Horse training facilities, private;



         (f)   Kennel, private - more than 3 pets;



         (g)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons;



         (h)   Solar energy systems, either roof or
ground-mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to §
153.307;



         (i)   Towers (see § 153.096).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the A District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Cemetery;



         (b)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (c)   Essential services, utility substation;



         (d)   Garden supply store and nursery yard;



         (e)   Mining;



         (f)   Place of worship;



         (g)   Recreation, commercial;



         (i)   Tower (see § 153.096);



         (j)   Yard waste facility.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Columbarium - accessory to place of worship;



         (b)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (c)   Daycare facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons;



         (d)   Feedlot;



         (e)   Horse training facilities, commercial;



         (f)   Kennel, commercial;



         (g)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons;



         (h)   Veterinary, large animal.



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the A District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Dwelling, temporary during construction.



      (2)   Dwelling, temporary care facility.



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an A District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area:



            1.   10 acres: (Sections 25, 26, 27, 34, 35, and
36);



            2.   20 acres: (Sections 28, 31, 32, and 33 -
except for parcel geocode 3303221440003, parcel geocode 3303221410004, and
parcel geocode 3303221440002);



            3.   See Comprehensive Land Use Plan for
additional information regarding information on section location and land use.



         (b)   Lot width: 300 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterial, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 50 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 40 feet from the public
right-of-way;



               d.   Existing private street: 40 feet from
edge of road.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: must meet principal building
setbacks; however, if located between the principal structure and a road, a
100 foot setback is required. See § 153.110 for requirements relating to
exterior designs and color.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



      (3)   Building height.



         (a)   Principal structure: maximum height of 3 stories
or 35 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure: maximum height of 1
story or 20 feet.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 676, passed
7-9-2018)



§ 153.318  RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RR) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Rural Residential (RR) District is intended to
provide areas for low density housing in rural areas of the city; to allow a
mix of large lot residential development and agriculturally related uses in
areas of the city not served by public sewer; and to broaden the choice of
residential living styles in the city.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the RR District:



      (1)   Agricultural use;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (3)   Plant nursery, wholesale;



      (4)   Recreation, public;



      (5)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the RR District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Agricultural business;



      (2)   Accessory structures;



      (3)   Day care facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (4)   Kennel, private - 3 or fewer pets;



      (5)   Pasture;



      (6)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (7)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city.



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provision of
this chapter, the following are uses in the RR District that require approval
by a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by § 153.029.



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Agriculture building.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment within a single-family
dwelling;



         (b)   Agricultural building;



         (c)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (d)   Home occupations;



         (e)   Horse training facilities, private;



         (f)   Kennel, private - more than 3 pets;



         (g)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons;



         (h)   Solar energy systems, either roof or ground
mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to § 153.307.



         (i)   Tower (see § 153.096).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the RR District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Cemetery;



         (b)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (c)   Essential services, utility substations;



         (d)   Mining;



         (e)   Place of worship;



         (f)   Recreation, commercial;



         (g)   School;



         (h)   Yard waste facility.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (b)   Columbarium - accessory to place of worship;



         (c)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons;



         (d)   Feedlot;



         (e)   Garden supply store and nursery yard;



         (f)   Horse training facilities, commercial;



         (g)   Kennel, commercial;



         (h)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons;



         (i)   Towers (see § 153.096);



         (j)   Accessory structure on adjacent non-riparian lot..



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the RR District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Dwelling, temporary during construction.



      (2)   Dwelling, temporary care facility.



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an RR District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area: 5 acres; except for RR zoned properties
located south of Shields Lake, west of Ingersoll Avenue, north of 200th
Street and east of Harrow Avenue North all new lot divisions shall be a
minimum of 10 acres due to potential of future sewered development within
this area.



         (b)   Lot width: 300 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 50 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 40 feet from the public
right-of-way;



               d.   Existing private street: 40 feet from
edge of road.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: must meet principal building
setbacks; however, if located between the principal structure and a road, a
100 foot setback is required. See § 153.110 for requirements relating to
exterior design and color.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



      (3)   Building height.



         (a)   Principal structure: maximum height of 3 stories
or 35 feet;



         (b)   Detached accessory structure: maximum height of 1
story or 20 feet.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 670, passed
12-4-2017; Am. Ord. 676, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 153.319  SINGLE-FAMILY (SF) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Single-Family (SF) Residential District is
intended to provide permanent areas for low density medium and large lot
single-family urban development; to broaden the choice of residential living
styles in the city; to establish areas for the development of single-family
detached housing in areas of the city within public sewer; and to restrict
encroachment of incompatible uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the SF District:



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (2)   Recreation, public.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the SF District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures;



      (2)   Day care facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (3)   Kennel, private - 3 pets or fewer;



      (4)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (6)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provisions of
this chapter, the following are uses in the SF District that require approval
with a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by § 153.029.



      (1)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment within a single-family
dwelling;



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (c)   Home occupations;



         (d)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons.



         (e)   Solar energy systems, either roof or ground
mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to § 153.307.



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the SF District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Cemetery.



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons.



         (c)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage.



         (d)   Essential services, utility substation.



         (e)   Place of worship.



         (f)   Recreation, commercial.



         (g)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons.



         (h)   School.



         (i)   Yard waste facility.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (b)   Columbarium - accessory to place of worship;



         (c)   Accessory structure on adjacent non-riparian lot.



      (3)   Similar uses. Other uses similar to those permitted in
this section as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the SF District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Dwelling, temporary during construction.



      (2)   Dwelling, temporary care facility.



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an SF District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area.



            1.   Without sewer and water: 10 acres;



            2.   With sewer only: 25,000 square feet;



            3.   With sewer and water: 15,000 square feet.



            4.   With sewer and water: 7,500 square feet for a
new lot of record, constructed according to affordable housing goals as
stated in the Comprehensive Plan and meeting inclusionary housing
requirements in § 153.308. Such lot size reduction shall not be permitted
within the Shoreland Overlay Zone.



         (b)   Lot width.



            1.   Without sewer and water: 300 feet at the
public right-of-way;



            2.   With sewer only: 100 feet at the required
front yard setback;



            3.   With sewer and water: 80 feet at the required
front yard setback.



            4.   With sewer and water: 60 feet at the required
front yard setback for a new lot of record, constructed according to
affordable housing goals as stated in the Comprehensive Plan and meeting
inclusionary housing requirements in § 153.308. Such lot width reduction
shall not be permitted within the Shoreland Overlay Zone.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Local/collector street: 30 feet from
the public right-of-way;



               c.   Private street: 30 feet from the edge
of road.



            2.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            3.   Side street: 25 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 30 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: 30 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            2.   Side street: 25 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            3.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 10 feet.



      (3)   Building height.



         (a)   Principal structures: shall be limited to a
maximum height of 35 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less.



         (b)   Accessory structures: shall be limited to 1 story
with a maximum sidewall height of 10 feet, measured from the floor surface to
the underside of the ceiling member.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 670, passed
12-4-2017; Am. Ord. 676, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 153.320  MIXED RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE-FAMILY, AND TOWNHOUSE (MXR-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Mixed Residential, Single-Family, and Townhouse
(MXR-1) District is intended to allow a mix of single-family detached and
single-family attached housing (with a maximum of 8 units per building) at a
more typical single-family density; to reflect the character of its
transitional setting on the fringe of the urbanized area of the city served
by public sewer and water; and to broaden the choice of residential living
styles in the city. The mix of detached and attached housing units shall
reflect a minimum 60% detached single-family and maximum 40% attached or
detached townhouse dwelling ratio in any given residential subdivision. A
conventional subdivision of traditional single-family housing units is also
allowed.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the MXR-1 District:



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family attached - 8 units per building
maximum;



      (3)   Recreation, public.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the MXR-1 District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot; all accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures (detached single-family
lots only);



      (2)   Day care facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (3)   Kennel, private - 3 or fewer pets;



      (4)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (6)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provisions of
this chapter, the following are uses in the MXR-1 District that require
approval with a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by §
153.029.



      (1)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment (single-family detached lots
only);



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (c)   Home occupations;



         (d)   Kennel, private - 3 pets or more.



         (e)   Solar energy systems, either roof or
ground-mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to §
153.307.



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the MXR-1 District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons;



         (b)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (c)   Essential services, utility substation;



         (d)   Place of worship;



         (e)   Recreation, commercial;



         (f)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons;



         (g)   School.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons;



         (b)   Columbarium - accessory to place of worship;



      (3)   Similar uses. Other uses similar to those permitted in
this section as determined by the city.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the MXR-1 District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Towers (see § 153.096);



      (2)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
council and added to this section by amendment.



      (3)   Topsoil removal.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an MXR-1 District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area.



            1.   With sewer and water:



               a.   Dwelling, detached single-family:
15,000 square feet;



               b.   Dwelling, detached single-family: 7,500
square feet for a new lot of record, constructed according to affordable
housing goals as stated in the Comprehensive Plan and meeting inclusionary
housing requirements in § 153.308. Such lot reduction shall not be permitted
within the Shoreland Overlay Zone.



               c.   Dwelling, detached townhome: 7,500
square feet per unit, or no minimum lot size if common site area owned and
maintained by a homeowner’s association;



               d.   Dwelling, attached townhome: 7,500
square feet per unit, or no minimum lot size if common site area owned and
maintained by a homeowner’s association.



            2.   Without sewer: 10 acres.



         (b)   Lot width.



            1.   With sewer and water:



               a.   Dwelling, detached single-family: 80
feet at required front yard setback;



               b.   Dwelling, detached single-family: 60
feet at the required front yard setback for a new lot of record, constructed
according to affordable housing goals as stated in the Comprehensive Plan and
meeting inclusionary housing requirements in § 153.308. Such lot reduction
shall not be permitted within the Shoreland Overlay Zone;



               c.   Dwelling, detached townhome: 60 feet at
the required front yard setback, except that developments with common site
area owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association shall not have a
required minimum lot width;



               d.   Dwelling, attached townhome: no
established minimum lot width.



            2.   Without sewer and water: 300 feet at public
right-of-way.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the public right-of-way or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Local/collector street: 30 feet from
the public right-of-way;



               c.   Existing private street: 30 feet from
the edge of road.



            2.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            3.   Side street: 25 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 30 feet.



            5.   Internal: 20 feet between principal
structures separated by common area.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: 30 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            2.   Side street: 25 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            3.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 10 feet.



      (3)   Building height.



         (a)   Principal structures: shall be limited to a
maximum height of 35 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less.



         (b)   Detached accessory structures: shall be limited to
1 story with a maximum sidewall height of 10 feet, measured from the floor
surface to the underside of the ceiling member.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 663, passed --; Am.
Ord. 676, passed 7-9-2018)



§ 153.321  MIXED RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY (MXR-2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Mixed Residential, Single and Two-Family (MXR-2)
District is intended to establish areas for the development of a mixture of
single and two-family housing; to restrict encroachment on incompatible uses;
to broaden the choice of residential living styles in the city; and to
promote quality development.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the MXR-2 District:



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (2)   Dwelling, duplex or two-family;



      (3)   Recreation, public.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the MXR-2 District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures (detached single-family
only);



      (2)   Day care facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (3)   Kennel, private - 3 or fewer pets;



      (4)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (6)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provisions of
this chapter, the following are uses in the MXR-2 District that require
approval with a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by §
153.029.



      (1)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment - single-family detached lots
only;



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (c)   Home occupations;



         (d)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons;



         (e)   Solar energy systems, either roof or
ground-mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to §
153.307.



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the MXR-2 District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (b)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (c)   Essential services, utility substation;



         (d)   Place of worship;



         (e)   School.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Columbarium - accessory to place of worship;



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons;



         (c)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons;



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the MXR-2 District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an MXR-2 District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area.



            1.   Dwelling, detached single-family: 12,500
square feet;



            2.   Dwelling, detached single-family: 7,500
square feet for a new lot of record, constructed according to affordable
housing goals as stated in the Comprehensive Plan and meeting inclusionary
housing requirements in § 153.308. Such lot reduction shall not be permitted
within the Shoreland Overlay Zone.



            3.   Two-family or duplex dwelling: 16,000 square
feet.



         (b)   Lot width, single-family or two-family.



            1.   Eighty feet at the required front setback.



            2.   Sixty feet at the required front yard setback
for a new lot of record, constructed according to affordable housing goals as
stated in the Comprehensive Plan and meeting inclusionary housing
requirements in § 153.308. Such lot reduction shall not be permitted within
the Shoreland Overlay Zone.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Local/collector street: 30 feet from
the public right-of-way;



               c.   Existing private street: 30 feet from
edge of road.



            2.   Side Yard: 10 feet.



            3.   Side street: 25 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 30 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: 30 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            2.   Side street: 25 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            3.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 10 feet.



      (3)   Building height.



         (a)   Principal structures: shall be limited to a
maximum height of 3 stories or 35 feet whichever is less.



         (b)   Detached accessory structures: shall be limited to
1 story with a maximum sidewall height of 10 feet, measured from the floor
surface to the underside of the ceiling member.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 676, passed
7-9-2018)



§ 153.322  MIXED RESIDENTIAL (MXR-3) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Mixed Residential (MXR-3) District is intended to
provide areas offering a variety of housing types, including single-family
attached and detached dwellings and multi-family structures to retain the
environment and character of less intensive styles of multiple-family
residence areas by establishing building and lot area requirements; to
broaden the choice of residential living styles in the city; and to promote
quality development by following a thorough application, review, and approval
process.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the MXR-3 District:



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family attached - 8 units per building
maximum with each unit having a separate entrance;



      (3)   Recreation, public.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the MXR-3 District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures (detached single-family
and dwelling apartment only);



      (2)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer persons;



      (3)   Kennel, private - 3 or fewer pets (single-family
detached lots only);



      (4)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use, as determined by the city;



      (6)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provision of
this chapter, the following are uses in the MXR-3 District that require
approval with a certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by §
153.029.



      (1)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment (single-family detached
dwellings only);



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (c)   Home occupations (single-family detached dwellings
only);



         (d)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons;



         (e)   Solar energy systems, either roof or
ground-mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to §
153.307.



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the MXR-3 District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Dwelling, apartment/condominium;



         (b)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (c)   Essential services, utility substation;



         (d)   Place of worship;



         (e)   School.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Columbarium - accessory to place of worship;



         (b)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons;



         (c)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons;



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



      (4)   New wireless support structures and small wireless
facilities located within the public right-of-way and meeting the
requirements of Chapter 98, and subject to the conditions found in §
153.096(PP).



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the MXR-3 District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an MXR-3 District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications as set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area.



            1.   Detached single-family: 9,000 square feet;



            2.   Attached townhouse: 7,500 square feet per
unit, or no minimum lot size if common site area owned and maintained by a
homeowner’s association.



            3.   Apartment/condominium dwelling: 43,560 square
feet or 1 acre;



         (b)   Lot width.



            1.   Detached single-family: 60 feet;



            2.   Multiple-family dwelling: 100 feet.



            3.   Attached townhouse: no established minimum.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 30 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 30 feet from the public
right-of-way;



               d.   Existing private street: 30 feet from
the back of the curb or edge of pavement;



               e.   Internal: 20 feet between attached or
multi-family principal structures separated by common area.



            2.   Side yard:



               a.   Single-family dwelling: 10 feet (unless
abutting a side street 25 feet);



               b.   Attached townhome: 10 feet;



               c.   Multiple-family dwelling: 30 feet.



            3.   Side street:



               a.   Single-family dwelling: 25 feet;



               b.   Attached townhome: 25 feet;



               c.   Multiple-family dwelling: 20 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 30 feet.



            5.   Internal: 20 feet between principal
structures.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: 30 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            2.   Side street: 25 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            3.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            4.   Rear yard: 10 feet.



      (3)   Building height.



         (a)   Principal structures: shall be limited to a
maximum height of:



            1.   Single-family detached: 35 feet;



            2.   Attached townhome: 35 feet or 3 stories,
whichever is less;



            3.   Apartment and condominiums (stacked units):
45 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less.



         (b)   Detached accessory structures: shall be limited to
1 story with a maximum sidewall height of 10 feet measured from the floor
surface to the underside of the ceiling member.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 676, passed
7-9-2018)



§ 153.323  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MF) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Multiple-Family Residential (MF) District is
intended to establish areas for the development of multiple dwelling
structures with a maximum density of 15 units per net acre; to maintain a
residential character in areas with a high density, multiple-family
development; to broaden the choice of residential living styles in the city;
to set limitations on housing development density; and to promote quality
development by following a thorough application, review, and approval process.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the MF District:



      (1)   Dwelling, multiple-family (apartment, condominium,
cooperative);



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family, existing prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter. All setback requirements for principal structures
and detached accessory structures shall comply with the standards in the
MXR-1 District;



      (3)   Recreation, public.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the MF District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Detached accessory structure;



      (2)   Detached accessory structure, existing single-family
shall comply with the standards in the MXR-1 District.



      (3)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer persons
in an existing single-family dwelling only;



      (4)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons in an existing single-family dwelling only;



      (5)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (6)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (D)   Certificate of compliance.



      (1)   Subject to applicable provision of this chapter, the
following are uses in the MF District that require approval with a
certificate of compliance as set forth in and regulated by § 153.029.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14
persons in an existing single-family dwelling only;



         (b)   Home occupations in an existing single-family
dwelling only unless otherwise approved by the city and property owner;



         (c)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons in an existing single-family dwelling only;



         (d)   Solar energy systems, either roof or ground
mounted (meeting accessory structure requirements) according to § 153.307.



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the MF District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (b)   Essential services, utility substations;



         (c)   Manufactured home park;



         (d)   Nursing home.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons in an existing single-family home only;



         (b)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons in an existing single-family home only;



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the MF District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an MF District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area: 43,560 square feet (or 1 acre);



         (b)   Lot width: 100 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 30 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 30 feet from the public
right-of-way;



               d.   Existing private street: 30 feet from
the back of curb or edge of pavement.



            2.   Side yard: 30 feet.



            3.   Rear yard: 30 feet.



            4.   Internal: 20 feet between principal
structures.



         (b)   Accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: 30 feet and cannot be located
between the principal structure and the street.



            2.   Side yard: 10 feet.



            3.   Rear yard: 10 feet.



      (3)   Maximum height.



         (a)   Principal structure: shall be limited to a maximum
height of 4 stories and 45 feet, whichever is less.



         (b)   Accessory structures: shall be limited to 1 story
with a maximum sidewall height of 10 feet, measured from the floor surface to
the underside of the ceiling member.



   (H)   Design standards for Townhome and Multiple-Family Structures.



      (1)   Design requirements: row style, multi-story (not
stacked) or 1 level attached.



      (2)   Design character. A high quality of building design is
an important way to bring larger buildings into a traditional neighborhood
scale. In addition, site design, landscaping, and pedestrian amenities will
help to create a comfortable, livable district and a shared sense of
ownership among residents.



         (a)   Subdivision requests. Building elevations and
floor plans shall be furnished with subdivision requests illustrating
exterior building material and colors to demonstrate compliance with this
section. Building floor plans shall identify the interior storage space
within each unit.



         (b)   Decks or porches. Provision shall be made for
possible decks, porches, or additions as part of the initial dwelling unit
building plans. The unit lot shall be configured and sized to include decks
or porches.



         (c)   Minimum overhang. In case of a gable roof, a
minimum 12 inch soffit shall be required.



         (d)   Exterior building finish. The exterior of
attached/townhome dwelling units shall include a variation in building
materials which are to be distributed throughout the building facades and
coordinated into the architectural design of the structure to create an
architecturally balanced appearance. In addition, attached/townhome dwelling
structures shall comply with the following requirements:



            1.   A minimum of 25% of the combined area of all
building facades of a structure shall have an exterior finish of brick,
stucco, and/or natural or artificial stone.



            2.   Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or
artificial stone, no single building facade shall have more than 75% of 1
type of exterior finish.



            3.   Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or
artificial stone, no townhome dwelling structure shall have more than 60% of
all building facades of 1 type of exterior finish.



            4.   For the purpose of this section and material
calculations:



               a.   The area of the building facade shall
not include area devoted to windows, entrance doors, garage doors, or roof
areas.



               b.   Variations in texture or style (i.e.,
lap siding versus shake shingle siding) shall be considered as different
materials meeting the requirements of this section.



               c.   Integral colored split face (rock face)
concrete block shall not qualify for meeting the brick, stucco, and/or
natural or artificial stone material requirements.



               d.   Multiple unit buildings in proximity to
each other shall not look alike in terms of color of siding, accent and
roofing materials. The building under consideration will be compared to 2
homes on 2 lots on either side of it and to the 3 homes directly facing it.



               e.   Outside storage shall be allowed only
in designated areas which are screened in accordance with § 153.146 of this
chapter and under the ownership of the property owners’ association subject
to other applicable provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Building design and materials, multi-family (stacked).



         (a)   Design character: The scale of multi-family
dwellings makes the buildings highly visible and it is critical to
incorporate high quality architecture. All buildings shall be designed to
accomplish the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. Building
materials shall be attractive in appearance, durable, and of a quality which
is both compatible with adjacent structures and consistent with the city’s
standards for the district in which it is located. All buildings shall be of
good aesthetic and architectural quality, as demonstrated by the inclusion of
elements such as accent materials, entrance and window treatments,
contrasting colors, irregular building shapes and rooflines, or other
architectural features in the overall architectural concept.



         (b)   A minimum of 50% of the combined area of all
building facades of a structure shall contain the following permitted major
exterior materials: face brick (glazed or unglazed), clay faced tile, and/or
stone masonry (granite, limestone, marble, slate, sandstone, or quartzite).



         (c)   Accent materials may include: finished texture
stucco (cement or synthetic), exterior finished wood siding (painted,
stained, or weather sealed), exterior finished metal siding (not including
sheet metal of any kind), exterior finished vinyl siding or fiber cement
siding in lap or panel design (color impregnated or painted). Panel seam
lines shall be architecturally integrated into the building design so that
they are not visible. Seam lines can either be filled, covered with accent
material or some other method to make seam lines invisible. Accenting
materials and design shall be included on all facades.



         (d)   All building and roofing materials shall meet
current accepted industry standards and tolerances, and shall be subject to
review and approval by the city for quality, durability, and aesthetic
appeal. The applicant shall submit to the city product samples, color
building elevations, and associated drawings which illustrate the
construction techniques to be used in the installation of such materials.



         (e)   If complementary building styles, materials, and
color schemes are proposed for a development, the developer shall submit to
the city a plan showing the distribution of the styles, materials, and colors
throughout the development.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651,
passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.324  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DESIGN: APPLICABLE TO ALL
COMMERCIAL/BUSINESS DISTRICTS (NC, B-1, B-2).



   To ensure attractive commercial/business development, the following
design standards shall apply to all commercial/business development in the
Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Broadway Business (B-1), and Highway Business
(B-2) Districts.



   (A)   Visual interest and building materials.



      (1)   All new building fronts and refacing of existing
buildings shall include a minimum of 3 of the following elements:



         (a)   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning,
parapet, or columns;



         (b)   A visually pleasing primary front entrance that,
in addition to doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around
the door entrance for single-occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square
feet total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be
counted as 1 element). Entrances shall be clearly articulated and obvious
from the street;



         (c)   A minimum of 30% window coverage on each front
that faces a street or similar based on requirements in § 153.306(E)(1);



         (d)   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;



         (e)   A combination of horizontal and vertical design
features;



         (f)   Irregular building shapes;



         (g)   Other architectural features in the overall
architectural concept.



      (2)   No wall shall exceed 50 feet in length without at least
1 visual interest element, such as windows, horizontal and vertical facade
articulation, contrasting material colors, vertical or horizontal patterns.



      (3)   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped
around walls visible to public view. Accent material shall consist of
materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior material.
Such materials may include glass and prefinished decorative metal. Fiber
cement may also be used as accent materials for the trim, soffit, and/or
fascia.



      (4)   Major exterior materials of all walls including face
brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical panel
siding, architectural concrete, and precast panels shall be acceptable as the
major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall design
of the building. No more than 25% of any exterior wall on a building shall be
fiber cement siding, wood, or metal accent material.



      (5)   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally
integrated into the building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines
can be filled, covered by other accent material or other method thereby
making the seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall
also be allowed as a major exterior wall material, and shall be required to
be sealed. All materials shall be color impregnated with the exception of
architectural concrete precast panel systems (only within the B-2 District)
and fiber cement siding which may be painted.



      (6)   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned pre-stressed
concrete panels, whether smooth or raked, non-decorative concrete block,
sheet metal or unfinished metal, and/or galvanized or unfinished aluminum
surfaces (walls or roofs) shall not be used as exterior materials. This
restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to all accessory
buildings.



      (7)   Roofs. Roofs which are exposed or an integral part of
the building aesthetics shall be constructed only of commercial grade
shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, slate, tile, or copper. Flat
roofs, which are generally parallel with the first floor elevation, are not
subject to these material limitations.



   (B)   Screening.



      (1)   Rooftop mechanical equipment. The view of all rooftop
equipment and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities on
buildings shall be screened from the ground level view of abutting streets.
Screening may include parapet walls, penthouses, or other architecturally
integrated elements. Wood fencing or chain link with slats shall not be used
for screening. A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates
the sight lines from the ground level view.



      (2)   Ground mechanical equipment. Ground mechanical equipment
shall be 100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by
opaque landscaping, or a screen wall shall be provided that is compatible
with the architectural treatment of the principal structure.



      (3)   Screening adjoining residential use. Wherever a
commercial or non-residential use abuts, or is across the street from an R
Residential District, a berm, fence, or screening comprised of compact
evergreen trees or hedge or combination thereof, not less than 80% opaque at
time of installation and not less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent to a
street where it shall be not less than 3 feet and not more than 4 feet in
height shall be erected or installed and maintained. The light from
automobile headlights and other sources shall be 100% screened whenever it
may be directed onto adjacent residential windows. All screening shall comply
with § 153.146 of this chapter.



      (4)   Trash enclosure service structure. All trash, recyclable
materials, and trash and recyclable materials handling equipment and
compactors shall meet the requirements of § 153.257 and shall be screened
from public view. All trash enclosure service structures shall be constructed
of the same materials as the principal building.



   (C)   Pedestrian environment. Pedestrian connections to the
surrounding neighborhood shall be incorporated into all commercial
development.



      (1)   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where
people typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops,
building entrances, street corners, or abutting bike or pedestrian trail
connections. These spaces must include at least 2 of the following:



         (a)   Patterned materials on walkways (on-site);



         (b)   Bicycle racks;



         (c)   Trash receptacles (decorative);



         (d)   Pedestrian lighting;



         (e)   Fountains, sculptures, mobiles, kiosks, or banners;



         (f)   Flower boxes or container landscaping.



      (2)   Sidewalk connections shall be provided to and through
the development to existing and planned trails, sidewalks, and adjacent
properties, where access exists or reasonable connections are possible. Clear
internal pedestrian circulation routes shall be provided on the site.



   (D)   Parking and vehicular circulation. Parking areas in all
commercial districts shall be subject to the following design standards and
requirements in § 153.132:



      (1)   Parking orientation shall minimize visual and noise
impacts on adjacent properties.



      (2)   To the maximum extent feasible, parking shall be located
behind or to the side of a building in a landscaped parking area and screened
from view from public rights-of-way through landscaping, berms, or low walls.
Structured parking, integrated with the building’s architectural design, is
encouraged.



      (3)   Parking areas shall be safe and convenient for both the
movement of vehicles and customers.



      (4)   Vehicle circulation on-site shall be clearly organized
to facilitate movement into and throughout parking areas.



      (5)   On corner lots, parking shall not be located on the
corner.



      (6)   Service access areas shall be located in the rear of the
property, outside of view from public rights-of-way. Buildings within a
development should share services areas to the extent practical.



      (7)   Circulation and parking for service areas shall be
designed to minimize disruption to the flow of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.



      (8)   Development sites where uses require multiple deliveries
shall provide separate customer and service access drives where possible.



   (E)   Exterior storage. All exterior storage of material and
equipment related to, located on, and used by any business shall be stored
within a building or screened, as required herein, so as not to be visible
from streets, highways, or neighboring property, with the exception of the
following:



      (1)   Merchandise being displayed for sale or rental;



      (2)   Materials and equipment currently being used for
construction on the premises;



      (3)   Merchandise located on service station pump islands and
along front length of the building.



   (F)   Neighborhood Commercial design standards. In addition to the
minimum design standards applicable to all commercial districts, Neighborhood
Commercial Districts shall also be subject to the following standards to
reflect the character of the Neighborhood Commercial District. The design
standards are explained in further detail and illustrated in the Forest Lake
Commercial Design Manual.



      (1)   Building design. New buildings adjacent to existing
buildings or residential neighborhoods shall appear to have similar scale and
design elements as the neighboring buildings at a residential scale and
character. Buildings fronts shall include 3 of the following elements:



         (a)   Articulation of facades into house-size segments;



         (b)   Residential scale building modules similar to
adjacent buildings;



         (c)   Similar facade proportions to those on neighboring
buildings;



         (d)   Residential scale building components such as
porches, patios, decks, columns and balconies;



         (e)   A roof configuration which reflects traditional
residential structures and is pitched such as gable, hip, or shed;



         (f)   Display windows a minimum of 6 feet in height
shall exist along at least 50% of the linear length of the building front.



      (2)   Landscape design. Landscaping shall be used to unify,
soften, and screen neighborhood commercial projects. Landscaping in the
Neighborhood Commercial District shall incorporate the following elements in
addition to the requirements in §§ 153.230 through 153.238.



         (a)   Incorporate unique and significant existing trees
into the landscape design. See § 153.295.



         (b)   Use a wide variety of plants in informal
arrangements.



         (c)   Landscaping shall be arranged and grouped to
signify key site locations, such as building and site entrances, walkways,
and around monuments.



         (d)   Use layering to promote informality with a variety
of plants with differing mature heights.



         (e)   Use of plants or trees that have seasonal color.



      (3)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements
presented in § 153.185, lighting in the NC District shall be subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of
parking areas.



         (b)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



         (c)   Decorative lighting appropriate to this district
is illustrated in the Commercial Design Manual.



         (d)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



         (e)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building
fronts to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



      (4)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented
in § 153.205, signs in the NC District shall also be subject to the
following requirements:



         (a)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be
distinct and minimal.



         (b)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



         (c)   Signage shall be designed in a manner that is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter and as illustrated in the
Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



   (G)   Broadway Business (B-1) District design standards. In addition
to the minimum design standards applicable to all commercial/business
districts, the Broadway Business District shall also be subject to the
following standards to reflect the character of the district. The design
standards are explained in further detail and illustrated in the Forest Lake
Commercial Design Manual.



      (1)   Site layout.



         (a)   Orient and consolidate structures to complement
existing, adjacent development and to create a coordinated and visually
attractive commercial district setting.



         (b)   Site planning shall respect the relationship of
the site to existing and proposed buildings and streets.



         (c)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall
orient front facades to parallel the primary street.



         (d)   Align the building front facade with adjacent
buildings to promote visual continuity from the public right-of-way, unless
site or use constraints are prohibitive.



         (e)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary
pedestrian entrance at street level.



         (f)   Parking orientation shall minimize visual and
noise impacts on adjacent properties.



         (g)   To the maximum extent feasible, parking shall be
located behind or to the side of a building in a landscaped parking area and
screened from view from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential
districts.



         (h)   On corner lots, parking shall not be located on
the corner.



      (2)   Building design. Bay widths of more than 24 feet shall
be designed with architectural detailing to achieve an appearance of bay
widths of no more than 24 feet. Building articulation, column spacing, width
of window bays, placement of windows, and variation in roof height lines and
setback and similar design can be used to achieve this requirement.



      (3)   Landscaping. In addition to the landscaping requirements
presented in §§ 153.230 through 153.238, landscaping in the B-1 District
shall also be subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   Use predominately native materials and
well-adapted plant species to create an attractive environment along the
edges of each development parcel.



         (b)   Use landscaping to buffer objectionable views, to
break up the apparent size and monotony of parking areas, and to screen
service areas and ground mechanical equipment. Parking shall be screened from
the public right-of-way through landscaping, berms, or low walls.



         (c)   Window boxes, hanging flower baskets, and planters
shall be used to identify primary entrances.



      (4)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements
presented in § 153.185, lighting in the B-1 District shall be subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of
parking areas.



         (b)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



         (c)   Decorative lighting appropriate to this district
is illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



         (d)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



         (e)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building
fronts to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



      (5)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented
in §§ 153.205et seq., signs in the B-1 District shall also be subject to
the following requirements:



         (a)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be
distinct and minimal.



         (b)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



         (c)   Signage shall be designed in a manner that is
consistent with code requirements and as illustrated in the Forest Lake
Design Requirement Manual.



   (H)   Highway Business (B-2) District design standards. In addition
to the minimum design standards applicable to all commercial/business
districts, the B-2 District shall also be subject to the following standards
to reflect the character of the district. The design standards are explained
in further detail and illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement
Manual.



      (1)   Site layout.



         (a)   Building entries shall face the primary street
adjacent to the project and face the parking areas serving the site.



         (b)   Decorative and/or landscaped cart corrals should
be placed throughout the parking lot so that parking spaces are not used to
store shopping carts.



         (c)   Multiple entries to the site should be
consolidated.



         (d)   The majority of parking shall be located in the
front and side of the lot. Employee parking and loading shall be in the rear.



      (2)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements
presented in § 153.185, lighting in the B-2 District shall be subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of
parking areas.



         (b)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



         (c)   Decorative lighting appropriate to this district
is illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



         (d)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



         (e)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building
fronts to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



      (3)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented
in §§ 153.205et seq., signs in the B-2 District shall also be subject to
the following requirements:



         (a)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be
distinct and minimal.



         (b)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



         (c)   Signage shall be designed in a manner that is
consistent with code requirements and as illustrated in the Forest Lake
Design Requirement Manual.



   (I)   Limited Industrial (B-3) District design standards. In
addition to the minimum design standards applicable to all
commercial/business districts, the Limited Industrial Business District shall
also be subject to the following standards to reflect the character of the
district. The design standards are explained in further detail and
illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



      (1)   Site layout.



         (a)   Building entries shall face the primary street
adjacent to the project. An additional entry should face the parking lot.



         (b)   The majority of parking shall be located on the
side of buildings or in front. Employee parking and loading shall be in the
rear.



         (c)   Landscaped cart corrals should be placed
throughout the project so that parking spaces are not used to store shopping
carts.



         (d)   Multiple entries to the site should be
consolidated.



      (2)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements
presented in § 153.185, lighting in the B-3 District shall be subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of
parking areas.



         (b)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



         (c)   Decorative lighting appropriate to this district
is illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



         (d)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



         (e)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building
fronts to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



      (3)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented
in §§ 153.205et seq., signs in the B-3 District shall also be subject to
the following requirements:



         (a)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be
distinct and minimal.



         (b)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



         (c)   Signage shall be designed in a manner that is
consistent with the code requirements and as illustrated in the Forest Lake
Design Requirement Manual.



   (J)   Compliance.



      (1)   All new construction shall fully comply with the
requirements in § 153.324.



      (2)   Complete building face lift combined with a building
addition shall fully comply with the requirements in § 153.324.



      (3)   Other existing building and site improvements shall
comply with the standards in § 153.054.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 658, passed 7-25-2016)



§ 153.325  [RESERVED.]



§ 153.326  NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (NC) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
District is to allow single multi-use commercial buildings containing
convenience retail and service commercial uses at major intersections on
small neighborhood scale sites where public sewer is available and sites are
designated in the City of Forest Lake Comprehensive Plan. The district is
intended to accommodate the basic needs of neighborhoods that would not
otherwise have convenient access to retail areas in the city.



   (B)   Design character. The character of this district shall reflect
the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods. Building scale,
setback, and design should be consistent with existing neighborhoods. Because
this district is intended to serve surrounding residential areas, pedestrian
connectivity to existing neighborhoods is also important. Design in this
district should foster a welcoming pedestrian environment through pedestrian
scale buildings, street furniture, and pedestrian and bike facilities.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the NC District:



      (1)   Retail sales and service;



      (2)   Multi-tenant structures;



      (3)   Medical uses;



      (4)   Office;



      (5)   Restaurant (full service or fast food);



      (6)   School, specialty;



      (7)   Brewery;



      (8)   Micro distillery;



      (9)   Taproom.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the NC District are allowed only
when they are accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the provisions set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant;



      (2)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (3)   Attached smoking facility associated with a principal
use;



      (4)   Agricultural seasonal sale;



      (5)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems (meeting accessory
structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (6)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (7)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the NC District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034):



      (1)   Day care facility, licensed;



      (2)   Essential services, governmental building and storage,
and utility substations;



      (3)   Motor vehicle, service station;



      (4)   Motor vehicle, wash;



      (5)   Veterinary;



      (6)   Permitted uses with a drive-thru;



      (7)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the NC District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an NC District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area: 43,560 square feet (or 1 acre) for
multi-tenant structures;



         (b)   Lot area: 25,000 square feet for freestanding
structures;



         (c)   Lot width: 150 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterials, as designated on the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 40 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 30 feet from the public
right-of-way.



            2.   Side yard: 30 feet.



            3.   Rear yard: 30 feet.



            4.   Building height: all buildings shall be
limited to 1 story with a maximum height of 30 feet.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 646,
passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.327  BROADWAY BUSINESS (B-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Broadway Business (B-1) District is intended to
establish areas for the location and development of professional offices,
administrative offices, limited neighborhood and community-oriented retail,
and health care services and facilities which are expected to develop with a
high level of amenities such as landscaping and architectural controls; to
encourage a complex of compatible and mutually supportive health care
services and facilities; to allow a transitional reuse of existing buildings
until market conditions warrant redevelopment; to enhance redevelopment
potential by prohibiting uses that would impede redevelopment; to capitalize
on the high volume of traffic and potential customers; to ensure an
appropriate physical relationship with the surrounding neighborhood,
including acceptable traffic operations on local streets; and to provide a
district which is related to and may reasonably adjoin high density or other
residential districts.



   (B)   Design character. Due to the high visibility of this area, the
character of this district shall reflect well-designed and attractive
businesses. Development in this district shall be unified through building
architecture and landscaping. The design character of this district shall
also take into account the relationship of the site to surrounding
residential areas and the retail area surrounding the interchange at I-35.
Development shall be designed to provide for appropriate transitions and
connections to surrounding residential areas and to the more dense pedestrian
oriented Downtown Mixed Use District and the less dense auto-oriented Highway
Business District. Pedestrian connections within this district will be
essential.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the B-1 District:



      (1)   Existing auto repair and service (minor) at the time of
adoption of this chapter;



      (2)   Medical uses;



      (3)   Office;



      (4)   Retail/office/multi-tenant structure;



      (5)   Retail sales and services;



      (6)   School, specialty;



      (7)   Restaurant, fast food (no drive-thru);



      (8)   Restaurant, full service (no drive-thru);



      (9)   Veterinary clinic (with no outdoor kennels);



      (10)   Brewery;



      (11)   Micro distillery;



      (12)   Taproom.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the B-1 District are allowed only
when they are accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the provisions set forth herein and
regulated by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant;



      (2)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (3)   Attached smoking facility associated with the principal
use;



      (4)   Agricultural seasonal sale;



      (5)   Roof mounted solar energy systems (meeting accessory
structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (6)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (7)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the B-1 District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034):



      (1)   Club or lodge;



      (2)   Day care facility, licensed;



      (3)   Funeral home;



      (4)   Place of worship and any columbarium constructed in
connection therewith;



      (5)   Permitted uses with drive-thru facilities;



      (6)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the B-1 District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, coverage, and height requirements. The
following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-1 District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot size: 22,500 square feet.



         (b)   Lot width: 150 feet.



         (c)   Lot depth: 200 feet, or the depth of the district
for lots abutting Broadway.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Front:



            1.   Arterials, as designated in the Comprehensive
Plan: 20 feet from the public right-of-way;



            2.   Collector: 20 feet from the public
right-of-way;



            3.   Local: 20 feet from the public right-of-way.



         (b)   Side: 5 feet (or if abutting a street, 20 feet, or
if abutting a residential district, 35 feet).



         (c)   Rear: 5 feet (if abutting a residential district,
35 feet).



      (3)   Building height. All buildings shall be limited to 2
stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. The total impervious surface shall
not exceed 80%.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651,
passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.328  HIGHWAY BUSINESS (B-2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Highway Business (B-2) District is intended to
accommodate an adequate supply of businesses and services that primarily
serve the community and regional needs; to keep retail and service businesses
that are oriented to motorists in close proximity to thoroughfares and access
from regional highways in areas that are appropriately designated on the
Comprehensive Plan; and to encourage grouping of compatible and mutually
supportive business uses and services.



   (B)   Design character. Design standards within this district are
intended to support a high standard of development and design that portrays a
positive visual image and minimizes the effects of traffic congestion, noise,
odor, and glare from surrounding uses. Given the area’s proximity to the
interstate and the auto-oriented uses permitted in this district, development
will be primarily auto-oriented. However, pedestrian access and safety will
still be achieved through design features within the district and to provide
connections to surrounding areas. High quality design is required in this
area because of its highly visible location.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the B-2 District:



      (1)   Club or lodge;



      (2)   Day care facility, licensed;



      (3)   Funeral home;



      (4)   Garden supply stores and nursery yards;



      (5)   Health/recreation facility;



      (6)   Hotel;



      (7)   Medical uses;



      (8)   Motel;



      (9)   Motor vehicle - convenience store, parts, repair
(major), repair (minor), service station, new auto dealership licensed, used
auto dealership licensed, wash;



      (10)   Office;



      (11)   Plant nursery, commercial and wholesale;



      (12)   Restaurant - fast food and full service (with or
without drive-thru);



      (13)   Retail/office/multi-tenant structure;



      (14)   Retail sales and services;



      (15)   School, specialty;



      (16)   Truck stop;



      (17)   Wholesale office and showroom;



      (18)   Brewery;



      (19)   Micro distillery;



      (20)   Taproom.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the B-2 District are allowed only
when it is an accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant;



      (2)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (3)   Attached smoking facility associated with principal use;



      (4)   Agricultural seasonal sale;



      (5)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems (meeting accessory
structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (6)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (7)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the B-2 District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034):



      (1)   Essential services, governmental buildings and storage,
utility substations;



      (2)   Kennel, commercial;



      (3)   Light manufacturing;



      (4)   Nursing home;



      (5)   Open sales lot;



      (6)   Place of worship and any columbarium constructed in
connection therewith;



      (7)   Recreation, commercial;



      (8)   School;



      (9)   Self-service storage;



      (10)   Veterinary;



      (11)   Warehousing and distribution;



      (12)   Towers (see § 153.096);



      (13)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section
as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the B-2 District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Place of worship leasing space;



      (2)   School facility leasing space;



      (3)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, height, and coverage requirements. The
following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-2 District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot size: 25,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width: 100 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Front: 40 feet;



         (b)   Side: No setback is required unless abutting a
residential district; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required;



         (c)   Rear: No setback is required unless abutting a
residential district; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required.



      (3)   Building height. All buildings shall be limited to no
more than 3 stories with a maximum building height of 45 feet.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. The total impervious surface shall
not exceed 80%.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651,
passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.329  LIMITED INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS (B-3) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. Limited Industrial Business (B-3) District is to
provide a district that supports a mix of industrial and commercial
development.



   (B)   Design character. The overall character of the Limited
Industrial Business (B-3) District is intended to have a low impact
manufacturing/warehouse character. Industrial uses in this district shall be
limited to those that can compatibly exist adjacent to both lower intensity
business uses and high intensity manufacturing uses and can have limited
amounts of truck traffic in comparison to high intensity industrial
districts. Because this district abuts residential neighborhoods, B-3 uses
are regulated in height, lot coverage, setbacks, landscaping, loading, and
use type, so as to facilitate compatibility between these uses and
residential development.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the B-3 District:



      (1)   Club or lodge;



      (2)   Day care facility, licensed;



      (3)   Funeral home;



      (4)   Garden supply stores and nursery yards;



      (5)   Health/recreation facility;



      (6)   Hotel;



      (7)   Medical uses;



      (8)   Motel;



      (9)   Motor vehicle - convenience store, parts, repair
(major), repair (minor), service station, new auto dealership licensed, used
auto dealership licensed, wash;



      (10)   Office;



      (11)   Plant nursery, commercial and wholesale;



      (12)   Restaurant, fast food (with or without drive-thru)



      (13)   Restaurant, full service (with or without drive-thru);



      (14)   Retail/office/multi-tenant structure;



      (15)   Retail sales and services;



      (16)   School, specialty;



      (17)   Truck stop;



      (18)   Wholesale office and showroom;



      (19)   Essential services, governmental buildings and storage,
utility substations;



      (20)   Light manufacturing;



      (21)   Open sales lot;



      (22)   Recreation, commercial;



      (23)   Self-service storage;



      (24)   Veterinary;



      (25)   Warehousing and distribution;



      (26)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section
as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council;



      (27)   Brewery;



      (28)   Micro distillery;



      (29)   Taproom.



   (D)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the B-3 District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Place of worship leasing space;



      (2)   School facility leasing space;



      (3)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (E)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the B-3 District are allowed only
when it is accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot.
All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated by
§§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Essential services, governmental buildings and storage,
utility substations;



      (2)   Attached smoking facility associated with principal use;



      (3)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (4)   Agricultural seasonal sales;



      (5)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems, roof systems (meeting
accessory structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (6)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (7)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (F)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Place of worship and any columbarium constructed
therewith;



      (2)   Kennel, commercial;



      (3)   School, specialty;



      (4)   Towers (see § 153.096);



      (5)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, height, and coverage requirements. The
following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-3 District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot size: 25,000 square feet;



         (b)   Lot width: 100 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Front: 40 feet;



         (b)   Side: No setback is required unless abutting a
residential district; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required;



         (c)   Rear: No setback is required unless abutting a
residential district; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required.



      (3)   Building height. All buildings shall be limited to a
maximum height of 45 feet or 4 stories, whichever is less.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. The total impervious surface shall
not exceed 80%.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651,
passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.330  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DESIGN: APPLICABLE TO ALL INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS (I, BP) AND THE B-3 DISTRICT.



   To ensure attractive commercial development, the city has a set of
industrial design standards applicable to all industrial development and to
development in the B-3 Limited Industrial Business District. This is
applicable to following districts: Industrial (I), Business Park (BP), and
Limited Industrial Business (B-3).



   (A)   Visual interest and building materials.



      (1)   All new building fronts and refacing of an existing
building, shall include a minimum of 3 of the following elements:



         (a)   Accent materials;



         (b)   A visually pleasing front entry that, in addition
to doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the door
entrance for single-occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet
total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as
1 element);



         (c)   Twenty-five percent window coverage on each front
that faces a street;



         (d)   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;



         (e)   A combination of horizontal and vertical design
features;



         (f)   Irregular building shapes; or



         (g)   Other architectural features in the overall
architectural concept.



      (2)   No wall shall exceed 75 feet in length without at least
1 visual interest element, such as a window, horizontal or vertical facade
articulation, contrasting materials colors, or vertical or horizontal
patterns.



      (3)   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped
around walls visible from public view. Accent material shall consist of
materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior material.
Such materials may include glass and prefinished decorative metal. Fiber
cement trim, soffit, and fascia may be used as accent materials.



      (4)   Major exterior materials of all walls including face
brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical panel
siding, architectural concrete, and precast panels shall be acceptable as the
major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall design
of the building. No more than 25% of any exterior wall on a building shall be
fiber cement siding, wood, or metal accent material.



      (5)   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally
integrated into the building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines
can be filled, covered by other accent material or other method thereby
making the seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall
also be allowed as a major exterior wall material, and shall be required to
be sealed. All materials shall be color impregnated with the exception of
allowing architectural concrete precast panel systems (only within the I
District) and fiber cement siding to be painted.



      (6)   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned pre-stressed
concrete panels, whether smooth or raked, non-decorative concrete block,
sheet metal, unfinished metal, and/or galvanized or unfinished aluminum
surfaces (walls or roofs) shall not be used as exterior materials. This
restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to all accessory
buildings.



      (7)   Roofs. Roofs which are exposed or an integral part of
the building aesthetics shall be constructed only of commercial grade
shingles, wood shingles, standing seam metal, slate, tile, or copper. Flat
roofs, which are generally parallel with the first floor elevation, are not
subject to these material limitations.



   (B)   Screening.



      (1)   Rooftop mechanical equipment. The view of all rooftop
equipment and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities
abutting a street on buildings shall be screened from the ground level view.
Screening may include parapet walls, penthouses, or other architecturally
integrated elements. Wood fencing or chain link with slats shall not be used
for screening. A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates
the sight lines from the ground level view.



      (2)   Ground mechanical equipment. Ground mechanical equipment
shall be 100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by
opaque landscaping, or a screen wall shall be provided to be compatible with
the architectural treatment of the principal structure.



      (3)   Screening adjoining residential use. Wherever an
industrial, commercial, or business park use abuts, or is across the street
from a residential district, a berm, fence, or screening comprised of compact
evergreen trees or hedge or combination thereof, not less than 80% opaque at
time of installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent to a
street where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in height
shall be erected or installed and maintained. The light from automobile
headlights and other sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be
directed onto adjacent residential window. All screening shall comply with §
153.146 of this chapter.



      (4)   Trash enclosure service structure. All trash, recyclable
materials, and trash and recyclable materials handling equipment and
compactors shall be screened from public view. Any trash enclosure shall be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building.



   (C)   Parking and vehicular circulation. Parking areas in all
industrial districts shall be subject to the following design standards:



      (1)   Parking orientation shall minimize visual and noise
impacts on adjacent properties.



      (2)   To the maximum extent feasible, parking shall be located
behind or to the side of a building in a landscaped parking area and screened
from view from public rights-of-way through landscaping, berms, or low walls.



      (3)   Structured parking, integrated with the building’s
architectural design, is encouraged.



      (4)   Parking areas shall be safe and convenient for both the
movement of vehicles and customers.



      (5)   On corner lots, parking shall not be located on the
corner.



      (6)   Vehicle circulation on-site shall be clearly organized
to facilitate movement into and throughout parking areas.



      (7)   Service access areas shall be located in the rear of the
property, outside of view from public rights-of-ways. Buildings within a
development should share services areas to the extent practical.



      (8)   Circulation and parking for service areas shall be
designed to minimize disruption to the flow of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.



      (9)   Development sites where uses require multiple deliveries
shall provide separate customer and service access drives where possible.



   (D)   Exterior storage. All exterior storage of material and
equipment related to, located on, and used by any business shall be stored
within a building or fully screened, as required herein, so as not to be
visible from streets, highways, or neighboring property, with the exception
of the following:



      (1)   Materials and equipment currently being used for
construction on the premises;



   (E)   Loading and service areas. All external loading and service
areas accessory to industrial buildings must be completely screened from the
ground level view from contiguous residential or commercial properties and
adjacent streets, except at access points. Whenever an industrial use abuts a
residential district, there shall be no loading docks on any building
elevation that is either directly facing or oriented towards a single-family
residence.



   (F)   Industrial District and Limited Industrial Business District
design standards. In addition to the minimum design standards applicable to
all industrial districts, the Industrial (I)  and B-3 Districts shall also
be subject to the following standards to reflect the character of the
districts. The design standards are explained in further detail and
illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Manual.



      (1)   Site layout. Whenever such developments abut residential
districts, their interior road patterns shall be arranged in such a way as to
route service vehicle traffic away from residential neighborhoods.



      (2)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements
presented in § 153.185, lighting in the I and B-3 Districts shall be subject
to the following regulations:



         (a)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of
parking areas.



         (b)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



         (c)   Decorative poles and fixtures shall be consistent
with the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



         (d)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



         (e)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building
fronts to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



      (3)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented
in §§ 153.205et seq., signs in the I and B-3 Districts shall also be
subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be
distinct and minimal.



         (b)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



         (c)   Signage shall be designed in a manner that is
consistent with the code requirements and as illustrated in the Forest Lake
Design Requirement Manual.



   (G)   Compliance.



      (1)   All new construction shall fully comply with the
requirements in § 153.324.



      (2)   Complete building face lift combined with a building
addition shall fully comply with the requirements in § 153.324.



      (3)   Other existing building and site improvements shall
comply with the standards in § 153.054.



   (H)   Business Park design standards. In addition to the minimum
design standards applicable to all industrial districts, the Business Park
(BP) District shall also be subject to the following standards to reflect the
character of the district. The design standards are explained in further
detail and illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



      (1)   Site layout.



         (a)   Orient and consolidate structures to complement
existing, adjacent development and to create a coordinated and visually
attractive business park setting.



         (b)   Site planning shall respect the relationship of
the site to existing and proposed buildings and streets.



         (c)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall
orient front facades to parallel the primary street.



         (d)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary
pedestrian entrance at street level.



         (e)   Where feasible, the development shall be arranged
to preserve and integrate natural environmental features into the site design.



      (2)   Building design.



         (a)   A minimum of 30% of the ground level facade shall
be transparent.



         (b)   Visual continuity shall be created by designing
buildings to exhibit complementary height and massing to adjacent buildings.



         (c)   Buildings shall be designed in an architectural
style and constructed of materials that are compatible, and complementary to
surrounding buildings in the Business Park District.



      (3)   Landscaping. In addition to the landscaping requirements
presented in §§ 153.230 through 153.238, landscaping in the BP District
shall also be subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   Use predominately native materials and
well-adapted plant species to create an attractive environment along the
edges of each development parcel.



         (b)   Use landscaping to buffer objectionable views and
to break up the apparent size and monotony of parking areas.



         (c)   Landscaping shall be clustered into features
areas, such as corners, entryways, buffer zones, and screening rather than
distributed thinly throughout the site.



      (4)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements
presented in § 153.185, lighting in the BP District shall be subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of
parking areas.



         (b)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



         (c)   Decorative lighting appropriate to this district
is illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



         (d)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



         (e)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building
fronts to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



      (5)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented
in §§ 153.205et seq., signs in the BP District shall also be subject to the
following requirements:



         (a)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be
distinct and minimal.



         (b)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



         (c)   Signage shall be designed in a manner that is
consistent with code requirements and as illustrated in the Forest Lake
Design Requirement Manual.



(Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 658, passed 7-25-2016)



§ 153.331  [RESERVED.]



§ 153.332  INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Industrial (I) District is intended to provide an
area where industrial, business service, and office uses may locate to
provide a range of employment opportunities; to attract new development that
will present a positive image to the community; and to provide locations with
traffic management capabilities that can adequately handle the traffic
generated within the district without disrupting traffic flows on nearby
thoroughfares.



   (B)   Design character. The overall design character of the
Industrial (I) District is to present the least amount of impact on adjacent,
less intensive land uses and to display a positive community image. Given the
area’s proximity to the interstate and heavy industrial activity and truck
traffic in these areas, development will be primarily auto-oriented. High
quality design is required in this area because of its highly visible
location.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the I District:



      (1)   Industrial condominium/multi-tenant structure;



      (2)   Manufacturing;



      (3)   Medical;



      (4)   Office;



      (5)   Public airport and related facilities;



      (6)   Public compost facility;



      (7)   Recreation-public;



      (8)   Research and technology center;



      (9)   Warehousing and distribution;



      (10)   Wholesaling.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the I District are allowed only when
it is accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot. All
accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated by §§
153.110et seq.



      (1)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (2)   Attached smoking facility associated with principal use;



      (3)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems (meeting accessory
structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (4)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (5)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the I District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034):



      (1)   Detached accessory structure;



      (2)   Essential services, governmental buildings and storage,
utility substations;



      (3)   Kennel, commercial;



      (4)   Recreation, commercial;



      (5)   Recycling center;



      (6)   Transportation/motor freight terminal;



      (7)   Towers (see § 153.096);



      (8)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the I District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Place of worship leasing space.



      (2)   School facility leasing space



      (3)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an I District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot size: 1 acre;



         (b)   Lot width: 150 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Front:



            1.   Arterials, as designated in the Comprehensive
Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the centerline of
the street, whichever is greater;



            2.   Collector: 30 feet from the public
right-of-way;



            3.   Local: 30 feet from the public right-of-way.



         (b)   Side:



            1.   Ten feet;



            2.   Abutting a side street: 20 feet;



            3.   Abutting a residential district: 35 feet.



         (c)   Rear: 20 feet (or if abutting a residential
district, 60 feet).



      (3)   Building height. All buildings shall be limited to a
maximum height of 45 feet except for those properties in the Airport Overlay
Zone.



   (H)   Airport Requirements. Properties within the Airport Overlay
District shall comply with the requirements in § 153.344. Additional
standards may be enforced by the Airport Commission for building design.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 602,
passed 11-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.333  BUSINESS PARK (BP) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Business Park (BP) District is to:



      (1)   Reserve larger areas for multi-use buildings, offices,
wholesale showrooms, light manufacturing, research and development, training,
limited retail uses, and uses accessory to conducting business within a
coordinated, well-defined campus environment;



      (2)   Protect business from incompatible and unrelated land
uses intruding into the work environment;



      (3)   Create an area to provide opportunities for higher
technology business and other industries that may benefit from the
accommodation of both office and light industrial uses on-site with internal
and external amenities to benefit employees;



      (4)   Provide for accessible business park opportunities near
major highways and future transit corridors;



      (5)   Preserve and utilize natural environmental features for
office sites that are located next to or overlook public open space and trail
uses, woodlands, and wetlands.



   (B)   Design character. Development in this district shall establish
and maintain high standards of site design, spatial relationships,
proportions, building architecture, and landscape design that will create a
high quality environment attractive to major employers. The design character
of this district will be characterized by a high level of design, site
amenities such as trails or open space, storm water management, and other
modern techniques used to create a high-end office and industrial park.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the BP District:



      (1)   Offices;



      (2)   Agricultural uses and operation as allowed in the AG
Zoning District, in existence as of January 1, 2009;



      (3)   Cafeterias not open to the general public;



      (4)   Coffee shops, cafeterias, medical facilities, and
athletic/fitness facilities if located within the principal structure;



      (5)   Government offices/facilities;



      (6)   Technical, vocational, business and college/university
satellite facilities/schools;



      (7)   Travel agencies;



      (8)   Research and development;



      (9)   Data processing;



      (10)   Wholesale showroom;



      (11)   Warehousing used in conjunction with offices or
manufacturing facilities;



      (12)   Retail sales, incidental to manufacturing of products
produced on the site not to exceed 25% of the gross square footage of the
first floor;



      (13)   Telecommuting center;



      (14)   Commercial printing;



      (15)   Manufacturing;



      (16)   Higher technology business uses including, but not
limited to: the manufacturing, or assembly, of medical devices and equipment,
telecommunications equipment, pharmaceuticals, computer or electronic
products and software, aeronautical equipment or components;



      (17)   Public utilities and essential government services;



      (18)   Recreation, public;



      (19)   Medical facility within principal building;



      (20)   Athletic/fitness facility within principal building;



      (21)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section
as determined by the Planning Commission and the City Council;



      (22)   Brewery;



      (23)   Micro distillery;



      (24)   Taproom.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following accessory uses in the BP District are allowed only
when they are accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same
lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated
by § 153.110 of this chapter.



      (1)   Exterior employee break areas;



      (2)   Bicycle and public or private transit shelters;



      (3)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (4)   Information kiosks;



      (5)   Gate security detached building;



      (6)   Commercial overnight delivery drop box;



      (7)   Attached smoking facility associated with principal use;



      (8)   Solar energy systems, either roof or ground-mounted
(meeting accessory structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (9)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (10)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the BP District (requires a
conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.034 of this chapter).



      (1)   Restaurant, fast food (no drive-thru);



      (2)   Restaurant, full service (no drive-thru);



      (3)   Day care, freestanding;



      (4)   Health and fitness centers, freestanding;



      (5)   Financial institutions and banks with drive-thru
facilities;



      (6)   Health care facilities;



      (7)   Park and ride lots and transit hubs;



      (8)   Full service hotels;



      (9)   Radio and tv studios, sound stages, multi-media, post
production studio and support facilities and equipment;



      (10)   Towers (see § 153.096);



      (11)   Outdoor storage tanks and equipment for products that
are used in conjunction with the primary use;



      (12)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section
as determined by the Planning Commission and the City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the BP District (requires an
interim use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by §
153.035).



      (1)   Place of worship leasing space.



      (2)   School facility leasing space.



      (3)   Uses as determined by the Planning Commission and City
Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback height, and coverage requirements. The
flowing minimum requirements shall be observed in a BP District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot size: 1 acre.



         (b)   Lot width: 150 feet.



         (c)   Front:



            1.   Arterials, as designated in the Comprehensive
Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line or 150 feet from the centerline of
the street, whichever is greater;



            2.   Collector: 30 feet from the public
right-of-way;



            3.   Local: 30 feet from the public right-of-way.



         (d)   Side:



            1.   Ten feet;



            2.   Abutting a street: 20 feet;



            3.   Abutting a residential district: 35 feet.



         (e)   Rear: 20 feet (or if abutting a residential
district, 60 feet).



      (2)   Building height: maximum height is 6 stories or 65 feet.



      (3)   Maximum impervious: 65%.



   (H)   Expansion of legally established nonconforming residential
uses. Legally established nonconforming single family and duplex residential
uses may be expanded with a building permit. Such permitted expansions shall
include the construction of detached accessory structures which shall comply
with the applicable procedures and performance standards for detached
accessory structures in this section.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651,
passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 669, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 153.334  DOWNTOWN MIXED USE (MU-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Downtown Mixed Use District is to
establish a strong identity for downtown Forest Lake and provide for high
density, compact mixed use development. The intent of the city is to preserve
and enhance the downtown appearance with storefronts adjacent to the
sidewalks and parking in the rear or side of the buildings. The city desires
to encourage urban living options by allowing a full range of mixed uses
within the downtown.



   (B)   Design character. This district is characterized by a mix of
older commercial and residential buildings and newer high density housing and
retail buildings. New development in this district shall create a unifying
identity and transition between different uses through high quality design,
pedestrian amenities, compact development, and connections to public spaces.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted in the Downtown Mixed Use District.



      (1)   Bank (no drive-thru);



      (2)   Club or lodge;



      (3)   Dwelling, multiple-family (apartment, condominium,
cooperative, townhouse) when located above the street level floor; at a
minimum density of 10 units and a maximum density of 15 units per acre;



      (4)   Museums/art galleries;



      (5)   Offices, public parking facilities and structures;



      (6)   Public studios or performance theaters;



      (7)   Recreation, public;



      (8)   Restaurant, full service (no drive-thru);



      (9)   Retail/office/multi-tenant structure;



      (10)   Retail sales and services;



      (11)   School, specialty;



      (12)   Tavern or bar;



      (13)   Brewery;



      (14)   Micro distillery;



      (15)   Taproom.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following permitted accessory uses in the Downtown Mixed Use
District are allowed only when it is accessory to an existing principal
permitted use on the same lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures
set forth in and regulated by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant;



      (2)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (3)   Attached smoking facility associated with a principal
use;



      (4)   Structured parking (private);



      (5)   Roof-mounted solar energy systems (meeting accessory
structure requirements) according to § 153.307;



      (6)   Public open space plaza, square or related uses;



      (7)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the city;



      (8)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Bed and breakfast inn;



      (2)   Drive-thru facilities for permitted uses, if provisions
for vehicle stacking, vehicle maneuvering, outdoor speaker devices, and other
related matters can be shown to be in keeping with the intent and character
of the MU-1 District and compatible with surrounding uses;



      (3)   Dwelling, multiple-family, row house style townhome;



      (4)   Funeral home;



      (5)   Hotel;



      (6)   Marina, public/private;



      (7)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Lot size, setback, site design and height requirements. The
following minimum requirements shall be observed in the MU-1 District subject
to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot size: No minimum.



         (b)   Lot width: No minimum.



      (2)   Setbacks. No setbacks are required unless adjacent to a
residential district, where the setback shall be a minimum of 35 feet.
Buildings shall be set at the property line to create a traditional downtown
environment; however, exception can be made to provide for courtyards,
outside seating, or larger entry ways as provided in division (H) below.



      (3)   Site design.



         (a)   Building frontage.



            1.   At least 65% of the street frontage of any
lot shall be occupied by building facades at the property line. In addition,
on corner lots, a minimum of the first 50 feet of the lot frontage on either
side of a street intersection must be occupied by buildings set at the
property line. Parking or other space open to the sky is not allowed within
this first 50 feet.



            2.   On lots with more then 1 street frontage
(corners), the building shall be located to meet the 65% street frontage
requirement on both streets.



            3.   The building frontage requirement may be met
either with an enclosed building or an arcade constructed with a permanent
roof of the same materials as the remainder of the building.



            4.   At least the first and second floor must meet
the building frontage requirement. Arcades at street level and terracing of
building facades above the second floor are encouraged.



            5.   Wherever a surface parking area faces a
street frontage, such frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall,
railing, hedge, or a combination of these elements to a minimum height of
2-1/2 feet and a maximum height of 3-1/2 feet above the level of the parking
lot at the build to line.



         (b)   Drive-thru or drive-in lanes are not allowed
within the build-to-line or in front of any building; but must be located to
the side or rear of a building.



         (c)   To provide linkages to parking and the lakefront,
all businesses shall provide a primary entrance at both the front and the
rear of the building.



         (d)   Rear facing windows and doors shall be provided on
all structures to promote use of off-street parking lots and create
connections to the Hardwood Creek Trail and the lakefront.



      (4)   Building height. The minimum building height shall be 25
feet or 2 stories while the maximum building height on all buildings shall be
45 feet or 4 stories.



   (G)   Parking requirements. Parking for residential units in the
MU-1 District shall be provided underground and shall be calculated as
required under § 153.125. The residential parking spaces shall be
specifically reserved for the use of residents and visitors only, separate
from any commercial, office or other uses on-site or nearby and shall not be
counted as part of any shared parking or joint parking arrangement.



   (H)   Building design requirements. To maintain the character of the
downtown area, the MU-1 District is subject to the following standards to
reflect the character of the district. The design standards are explained in
further detail and illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirements Manual.



      (1)   All new building fronts and 100% refacing of existing
buildings shall include a minimum of 4 of the following elements:



         (a)   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning,
parapet, or columns;



         (b)   A minimum of 30% window coverage on each front
that faces a street;



         (c)   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;



         (d)   A combination of horizontal and vertical design
features;



         (e)   Irregular building shapes;



         (f)   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;



         (g)   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least 4
feet;



         (h)   Fenestration at the first floor level which is
recessed horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade;



         (i)   Using remaining 35% street frontage (if available
based on building design) provide a variation in setback at a minimum of 5
feet to provide open plaza, seating area or expanded building entry;



         (j)   Other architectural features in the overall
architectural concept.



      (2)   Visual interest and building design.



         (a)   Buildings may be designed in a variety of styles
but must relate to surrounding buildings and the overall downtown character.



         (b)   Architectural styles, materials, color, and
detailing should be used to provide continuity of design elements.



         (c)   Building massing, scale, and height will be varied
within a block.



         (d)   Bay widths of more than 24 feet shall be designed
with architectural detailing to achieve an appearance of bay widths of no
more than 24 feet. Building jogs, column spacing, width of window bays,
placement of windows and variation in roof height lines, and setback and
similar design can be used to achieve this requirement.



         (e)   Buildings shall be finished in acceptable tones
and colors, such as dark earth tones and muted colors. Brighter colors shall
be used sparingly only for trim and details.



         (f)   Multi-story buildings shall have the ground floor
distinguished from the upper floors (used to identify separate tenants) by
having 1 or more of the following:



            1.   Awning;



            2.   Trellis;



            3.   Arcade;



            4.   Window lintels;



            5.   Intermediate cornice line;



            6.   Brick detailing such as quoins or corbels.



         (g)   Building fronts. Building fronts shall include a
minimum of 2 of the following elements:



            1.   Recessed entries;



            2.   Canopies;



            3.   Window boxes;



            4.   Narrow (4 feet or less) windows;



            5.   Recessed or projected windows and transoms.



         (h)   Building roofs. Acceptable building roof designs
include flat, pitched, or curved. Buildings shall include a variety of roof
lines within a block. Mansard roofs and mansard style roofs are not permitted
except for mansard styled cornices. Building roofs shall incorporate a
minimum of 1 of the following elements:



            1.   Parapets or cornices;



            2.   Varying building heights;



            3.   Sloped roofs where the historical character
of the original building dictates.



         (i)   Residential uses on first floors. Whenever
residential uses are included on the first floor of a building, the first
floor elevations shall be a minimum of 2 feet 6 inches above the sidewalk
elevations immediately adjacent to the front of the residential unit to
ensure the residential unit is raised from the public space. In addition,
each first floor unit must have an individual private entrance at the street
level with private courtyard enclosure.



      (3)   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped
around walls visible from public view. Where a mixed use building is visible
from a public road all elevations shall be architecturally treated. Accent
material shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the
primary exterior material. Such materials may include glass, prefinished
decorative metal, and fiber cement trim, soffit, and fascia.



         (a)   Major exterior materials of all walls including
face brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical
panel siding, architectural concrete, and precast panels shall be acceptable
as the major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall
design of the building. Major materials must cover at least 60% of the
exterior. Brick shall not be painted.



         (b)   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally
integrated into the building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines
can be filled, covered by other accent material or other method thereby
making the seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall
also be allowed as a major exterior wall material and shall be required to be
sealed. All materials shall be color impregnated except that architectural
concrete precast panel systems and fiber cement siding may be painted.



         (c)   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned
pre-stressed concrete panels, whether smooth or raked, non-decorative
concrete block, sheet metal, unfinished metal, and/or galvanized or
unfinished aluminum surfaces (walls or roofs) shall not be used as exterior
materials. This restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to
all accessory buildings except those accessory buildings not visible from any
property line. No more than 25% of any exterior wall on a building shall be
fiber cement siding, wood, or metal accent material.



   (I)   Screening.



      (1)   Rooftop mechanical. The view of all rooftop equipment
and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities abutting a
street on buildings shall be screened from the ground level view. Screening
may include parapet walls, penthouses, or other architecturally integrated
elements. Wood fencing or chain link with slats shall not be used for
screening.  A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates the
sight lines from the ground level view.



      (2)   Screening adjoining residential use. Wherever a Mixed
Use (MU) District abuts, or is across the street from an Residential (R)
District, a berm, fence, or screening consisting of compact evergreen trees
or hedge or a combination thereof, not less than 80% opaque at time of
installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent to a street
where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in height shall
be erected or installed and maintained. All screening shall comply with §
153.146 of this chapter.



      (3)   Screening adjoining non-residential parking and
driveways. Any off-street parking area for business, industrial, or other
non-residential use containing more than 6 parking spaces shall be screened
as required herein.



      (4)   Trash enclosure service structure. All trash enclosures
or other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same materials and
colors as the principal building.



   (J)   Exterior storage. All exterior storage of material and
equipment related to, located on, and used by any business or other
non-residential use shall be stored within a building or fully screened, as
required herein, so as not to be visible from streets, highways, or
neighboring property, with the exception of the following:



      (1)   Materials and equipment currently being used for
construction on the premises.



   (K)   Landscape design. All landscaping shall comply with §
153.230et seq. of this chapter. Plant materials shall be used to enhance and
delineate the existing downtown environment, to enhance the pedestrian
environment, and to improve the connection between Lake Street and the
lakefront.



      (1)   Plant materials used shall demonstrate an adaptability
to urban conditions, including salt spray, storm water runoff, and reflected
pavement glare and heat.



      (2)   Plant materials shall be free of hazards such as thorns,
fruit, or nuts that may pose safety or maintenance concerns for this
pedestrian-oriented environment.



      (3)   Plant materials shall be located so that no impacts
occur to overhead or underground utilities, traffic flow and internal
circulation, and emergency and maintenance access.



      (4)   Planting areas should be located and designed to avoid
visual interference with public signage and private commercial communication.



      (5)   Plant materials shall be arranged to provide focal
points on the site, and concentrated to signify key site locations such as
the primary building entrance, site entrance, around signage and along
pedestrian walkways.



   (L)   Pedestrian environment. Pedestrian connections to the
surrounding neighborhood shall be incorporated into Downtown Mixed Use
Development.



      (1)   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where
people typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops,
building entrances, street corners and abutting bike, or pedestrian trail
connections. These spaces must include at least 2 of the following:



         (a)   Patterned materials on walkways;



         (b)   Benches;



         (c)   Decorative trash receptacles;



         (d)   Drinking fountains;



         (e)   Pedestrian lighting;



         (f)   Fountains, sculptures, mobiles, or kiosks;



         (g)   Street trees, flower boxes, or container
landscaping.



   (M)   Parking. Parking lots and driveways, including alleys, shall
be developed with alternative paving materials, colors, or textures to create
a sense of separateness from the public street and encourage slower speeds.



   (N)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements presented
in § 153.185, lighting in the Downtown Mixed Use District shall be used to
increase visibility, security, and aesthetic appeal of nighttime landscapes.
Light fixtures will be used to unify the downtown area.



      (1)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



      (2)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas (private).



      (3)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building fronts
to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



   (O)   Signage. In addition to the signage requirements presented in
§§ 153.205et seq., signage in the Downtown Mixed Use District shall:



      (1)   Be distinct and minimal to reduce visual sign clutter;



      (2)   Be designed in a manner that is consistent with other
signage in the district to reflect a unified district character.



   (P)   Compliance.



      (1)   All new construction shall fully comply with the
requirements in § 153.324.



      (2)   Complete building face lift combined with a building
addition shall fully comply with the requirements in § 153.324.



      (3)   Other existing building and site improvements shall
comply with the standards in § 153.054.



   (Q)   Expansion of legally established nonconforming residential
uses. Legally established nonconforming single family and duplex residential
uses may be expanded with a building permit. Such permitted expansions shall
include the construction of detached accessory structures which shall comply
with the applicable procedures and performance standards for detached
accessory structures in this section.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651,
passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 669, passed 12-4-2017)



§ 153.335  GENERAL MIXED USE (MU-2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the General Mixed Use (MU-2) District
is to provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed use development along key
community corridors and to support high quality development and site
flexibility due to the unique site conditions in these areas. The mixture of
land uses within the district is essential to establishing the level of
vitality and intensity needed to support retail and service uses. A
combination of retail, office, service, and residential uses are encouraged
although not required. Buildings may also be entirely residential. The mix of
uses can occur vertically and horizontally. The placement of building and the
relationship of the building, parking, landscaping, and pedestrian spaces is
essential to creating the pedestrian-friendly environment envisioned for the
MU-2 District. The standards in this section are reinforced within the Design
Manual through pictures and graphics representing the intent of this section.



   (B)   Design character. The character of the General Mixed Use
District shall reflect high quality design due to the high visibility of
these areas. Although development in this mixed use district will be more
auto-oriented in design than the traditional Downtown Mixed Use District,
pedestrian connections and amenities will still be required to provide
connections to existing and future planned trails and to provide for safe
pedestrian circulation within the site. Landscaping, signage, and
architectural details shall be used to unify sites within each of the General
Mixed Use areas in Forest Lake.



   (C)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted in the General Mixed Use District:



      (1)   Bank (without drive-thru);



      (2)   Club or lodge;



      (3)   Dwelling, multiple-family (apartment, condominium,
cooperative, townhouse) at a minimum density of 10 and maximum of 15 units
per acre;



      (4)   Dwelling, multiple-family, row house style townhomes;



      (5)   Essential services, government buildings;



      (6)   Existing auto sales, new and used as of the date of the
adoption of this chapter;



      (7)   Existing minor auto repair as of the date of the
adoption of this chapter and according to the standards set forth in §
153.324;



      (8)   Hotel;



      (9)   Health recreation facility;



      (10)   Medical uses;



      (11)   Museums/art galleries;



      (12)   Movie theatres;



      (13)   Offices;



      (14)   Restaurants, full service;



      (15)   Restaurants, fast food;



      (16)   Retail/office/multi-tenant structure;



      (17)   Retail sales and services;



      (18)   Tavern or bar;



      (19)   Brewery;



      (20)   Micro distillery;



      (21)   Taproom.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following permitted accessory uses in the General Mixed Use
District are allowed only when it is an accessory to an existing principal
permitted use on the same lot. All accessory uses must meet the procedures
set forth in and regulated by §§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant;



      (2)   Public open space plaza, square or other related uses;



      (3)   Trash enclosure service structure;



      (4)   Attached smoking facility associated with a principal
use;



      (5)   Structured parking;



      (6)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council;



      (7)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to the applicable provision of this
chapter, the following are conditional uses in the General Mixed Use District
(requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by § 153.034 of this chapter).



      (1)   Place of worship;



      (2)   Drive-thru lanes for permitted uses if provisions for
vehicle stacking, vehicle maneuvering, outdoor speaker devices, appearance
and lighting of outdoor menu boards, and other related matters can be shown
to be in keeping with the intent and character of the MU-2 District and
compatible with surrounding uses;



      (3)   Motor fuel stations;



      (4)   Schools, specialty;



      (5)   School;



      (6)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Interim uses. Subject to the applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are interim uses in the General



Mixed Use District (requires an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth and regulated by § 153.035 of this chapter).



      (1)   Place of worship in leased premises.



      (2)   Other uses as determined by the Planning Commission and
City Council.



   (G)   Lot size, setback, site design, and height requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot size requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the MU-2 District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.



         (a)   Minimum lot requirements:



            1.   Lot size: 25,000 square feet.



            2.   Lot width: 150 feet.



         (b)   Setbacks:



            1.   Front: 20 feet from public roadways and 30
feet from Highway 61.



            2.   Side: No setback is required unless abutting
a residential district; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required.



            3.   Rear: No setback is required unless abutting
a residential district; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required.



   (H)   Site design.



      (1)   Orient and consolidate structures to complement
existing, adjacent development to create a coordinated and visually
attractive mixed use setting.



      (2)   Site planning shall respect the relationship of the site
to the existing and proposed buildings and streets and major roadways
including Highway 61.



      (3)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall orient
front facades parallel to the primary street.



      (4)   Align the building front facade with adjacent buildings
to promote visual continuity from the public right-of-way, unless site or use
constraints are prohibitive.



      (5)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary
pedestrian entrance at street level.



      (6)   Wherever a surface parking area faces a street frontage,
such frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing, hedge, or a
combination of these elements to a minimum height of 2-1/2 feet and a maximum
height of 3-1/2 feet above the level of the parking lot at the build to line.



      (7)   Drive-thru or drive-in lanes are not allowed within the
front of any buildings. They must be located to the side or rear of a
building.



      (8)   Maximum impervious coverage. The total lot coverage
shall not exceed 80% impervious.



   (I)   Building height.



      (1)   Maximum height on all buildings shall be 45 feet or 4
stories.



      (2)   Where multiple buildings are proposed on a single site
the buildings shall be designed with varying heights while meeting the
following minimum standards:



         (a)   Buildings at the front setback line along Highway
61 shall have a minimum height of 15 feet for 60% of the building length with
a maximum height of 25 feet. Buildings set back from Highway 61 (not meeting
the minimum front yard setback to Highway 61) shall have a minimum height of
25 feet for 60% of the building length in order to provide visibility.



   (J)   Parking requirements.



      (1)   Parking for residential units in the MU-2 District shall
be provided underground and shall be calculated as required under § 153.132.
The residential parking spaces shall be specifically reserved for the use of
residents and visitors only, separate from any commercial, office or other
uses on-site or nearby and shall not be counted as part of any shared parking
or joint parking arrangement.



      (2)   Parking for non-residential uses in the MU-2 District
shall be calculated under §§ 153.125 through 153.132. Shared parking
arrangements as provided in § 153.130 are encouraged provided that such
shared parking is fully connected between sites for automobiles and
pedestrians.



   (K)   Building design requirements. To maintain the character of the
downtown area the MU-2 District is subject to the following standards to
reflect the character of the district. The design standards are explained in
further detail and illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirements Manual.



      (1)   All new building fronts (single-story or multi-story)
and 100% refacing of existing buildings, shall include a minimum of 4 of the
following elements:



         (a)   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning,
parapet, or columns;



         (b)   A visually pleasing primary front entrance that,
in addition to doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around
the door entrance for single-occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square
feet total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be
counted as 1 element). Entrances shall be clearly articulated and obvious
from the street;



         (c)   A minimum of 30% window coverage on each front
that faces a street;



         (d)   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;



         (e)   A combination of horizontal and vertical design
features;



         (f)   Irregular building shapes;



         (g)   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;



         (h)   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least 4
feet;



         (i)   Fenestration at the first floor level which is
recessed horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade;



         (j)   Other architectural features in the overall
architectural concept.



      (2)   Multi-story buildings shall have the ground floor
distinguished from the upper floors by having 1 or more of the following:



         (a)   Awning;



         (b)   Trellis;



         (c)   Arcade;



         (d)   Window lintels;



         (e)   Intermediate cornice line;



         (f)   Brick detailing such as quoins or corbels.



      (3)   Residential uses on first floors. Whenever residential
uses are included on the first floor of a building the first floor elevation
shall be a minimum of 2 feet 6 inches above the sidewalk elevations
immediately adjacent to the front of the residential unit to ensure the
residential unit is raised from the public space. In addition, each first
floor unit must have an individual private entrance at the street level with
private courtyard enclosure.



      (4)   Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a
public street, public open space or abutting property may not exceed 50 feet
in length without significant visual relief consisting of 1 of the following:



         (a)   The facade shall be divided architecturally by
means of significantly different materials or textures;



         (b)   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;



         (c)   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least 4
feet; or



         (d)   Fenestration at the first floor level that is
recessed horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade.



      (5)   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped
around walls visible from public view. Where a mixed use building is visible
from a public road all elevations shall be architecturally treated. Accent
material shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the
primary exterior material. Such materials may include glass, prefinished
decorative metal, and fiber cement trim within soffit and fascia areas.



      (6)   Major exterior materials of all walls including face
brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical panel
siding, architectural concrete, and precast panels shall be acceptable as the
major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall design
of the building. Major materials must cover at least 60% of the exterior.



      (7)   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally
integrated into the building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines
can be filled, covered by other accent material or other method thereby
making the seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall
also be allowed as a major exterior wall material and shall be required to be
sealed. All materials shall be color impregnated with the exception of
architectural concrete precast panel systems and fiber cement siding which
may be painted.



      (8)   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned pre-stressed
concrete panels, whether smooth or raked, non-decorative concrete block,
sheet metal, unfinished metal, and/or galvanized and unfinished aluminum
surfaces (walls or roofs) shall not be used as exterior materials. This
restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to all accessory
buildings except those accessory buildings not visible from any property
line. No more than 25% of any exterior wall on a building shall be fiber
cement siding, wood, or metal accent material.



      (9)   Building roofs. Mansard or mansard style roofs are not
permitted except for mansard style cornices. Acceptable designs include flat,
pitched, or curved. Building roof styling shall incorporate a minimum of 1 of
the following elements:



         (a)   Parapets or cornices;



         (b)   Varying building height and variety of roof lines
(while meeting requirements in division (D)).



   (L)   Screening.



      (1)   Rooftop mechanical equipment. The view of all rooftop
equipment and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities
abutting a street on buildings shall be screened from the ground level view.
Screening may include parapet walls, penthouses, or other architecturally
integrated elements. Wood fencing or chain link with slats shall not be used
for screening. A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates
the sight lines from the ground level view.



      (2)   Screening adjoining residential use. Wherever a Mixed
Use (MU) District abuts, or is across the street from an Residential (R)
District, a berm, fence, or screening consisting of compact evergreen trees
or hedge or a combination thereof, not less than 80% opaque at time of
installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent to a street
where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in height shall
be erected or installed and maintained. All screening shall comply with §
153.146 of this chapter.



      (3)   Ground mechanical equipment. Ground mechanical equipment
shall be 100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by
opaque landscaping or screen wall compatible with the architectural treatment
of the principal structure.



      (4)   Trash enclosure service structure. All exterior trash
enclosures or other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same
materials and colors as the principal building.



   (M)   Exterior storage. All exterior storage of material and
equipment related to, located on, and used by any business or other
non-residential use shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as
not to be visible from streets, highways, or neighboring property, with the
exception of the following:



      (1)   Merchandise being displayed for sale or rental as of the
adoption of this section;



      (2)   Materials and equipment currently being used for
construction on the premises;



      (3)   Merchandise located on service station pump islands.



   (N)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements presented
in § 153.185, lighting in the MU-2 District shall also be subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in height
shall be used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of parking
areas.



      (2)   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas.



      (3)   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building.



      (4)   Wall mounted lighting shall be used on building fronts
to illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.



   (O)   Landscape design. In addition to the landscape requirements
presented in § 153.230, plant materials shall be used to create a unified
and attractive mixed use environment.



      (1)   Planting areas should be located and designed to avoid
visual interference with public signage and private commercial communication.



      (2)   Plant materials shall be arranged to provide focal
points on the site, and concentrated to signify key site locations such as
the primary building entrance, site entrance, around signage, along
pedestrian walkways, and along the perimeter of the building.



   (P)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented in
§§ 153.205et seq., signs in the MU-2 District shall also be subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be distinct
and minimal.



      (2)   Monument sign bases shall be constructed of similar
materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.



      (3)   Signage shall be designed in a manner consistent with
this chapter, and as illustrated in the Forest Lake Design Requirement Manual.



   (Q)   Compliance.



      (1)   All new construction shall fully comply with the
requirements in § 153.324.



      (2)   A complete building face lift combined with a building
addition shall fully comply with the requirements in § 153.324.



      (3)   Other existing building and site improvements shall
comply with the standards in § 153.054.



   (R)   Expansion of legally established nonconforming residential
uses. Legally established nonconforming single family and duplex residential
uses may be expanded with a building permit. Such permitted expansions shall
include the construction of detached accessory structures which shall comply
with the applicable procedures and performance standards for detached
accessory structures in this section.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 598, passed 7-26-2010; Am. Ord. 628,
passed 5-13-2013; Am. Ord. 646, passed 9-14-2015; Am. Ord. 651, passed
3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 669, passed 12-4-2017)



OVERLAY DISTRICTS



§ 153.340  AGRICULTURE PRESERVE (AP) OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The Agriculture Preserve (AP) District is intended to
preserve areas for interim or permanent agricultural use; preserve the rural
character of outlying areas of the city; to allow a mix of large lot
residential development and agriculturally related uses in areas of the city
not yet served by public sewer; and to broaden the choice of residential
living styles within the city. The AP District is a statutory agriculture
district with special tax and assessment benefits.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following are permitted uses in the AP District:



      (1)   Agricultural use;



      (2)   Dwelling, single-family detached;



      (3)   Plant nursery, wholesale;



      (4)   Recreation, public.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter and M.S. § 473H.17, as it may be amended from time to time, the
following permitted accessory uses in the AP District are allowed only when
they are accessory to an existing principal permitted use on the same lot.
All accessory uses must meet the procedures set forth in and regulated by
§§ 153.110et seq.



      (1)   Detached accessory structures;



      (2)   Agricultural business;



      (3)   Day care facility, unlicensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (4)   Kennel, private - 3 pets or fewer;



      (5)   Pasture;



      (6)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (7)   Other uses customarily associated with but subordinate
to a permitted use as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council;



      (8)   Amateur radio antenna (subject to the amateur radio
antenna standards in § 153.096(II)(9)).



   (D)   Certificate of compliance. Subject to applicable provision of
this chapter and M.S. Ch. 473H, as it may be amended from time to time, the
following are uses in the AP District that require approval by a certificate
of compliance as set forth herein and regulated by § 153.029.



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Agricultural building.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory apartment;



         (b)   Agriculture building;



         (c)   Day care facility, licensed, serving 7 to 14
persons;



         (d)   Dwelling, temporary during construction;



         (e)   Dwelling, temporary care facility;



         (f)   Home occupations;



         (g)   Horse training facilities, private;



         (h)   Kennel, private - more than 3 pets;



         (i)   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10
persons;



         (j)   Towers (see § 153.096).



   (E)   Conditional uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this
chapter and M.S. § 473H.17, as it may be amended from time to time, the
following are conditional uses in the AP District (requires a conditional use
permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by § 153.034).



      (1)   Principal uses.



         (a)   Cemetery;



         (b)   Essential services, governmental buildings and
storage;



         (c)   Essential services, utility substation;



         (d)   Garden supply store and nursery yard;



         (e)   Mining;



         (f)   Place of worship;



         (g)   Recreation, commercial;



         (h)   School;



         (i)   Tower (see § 153.096);



         (j)   Yard waste facility.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Balloon port, commercial;



         (b)   Bed and breakfast inn;



         (c)   Day care facility, licensed - serving more than 14
persons;



         (d)   Feedlot;



         (e)   Horse training facilities, commercial;



         (f)   Kennel, commercial;



         (g)   Residential facility, licensed - serving more than
10 persons;



         (h)   Veterinary, large animal.



      (3)   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as
determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.



   (F)   Lot size, setback, and height requirements. The following
minimum requirements shall be observed in an AP District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this
chapter.



      (1)   Minimum lot requirements.



         (a)   Lot area: 40 acres.



         (b)   Lot width: 300 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Principal structure.



            1.   Front yard:



               a.   Arterial, as designated in the
Comprehensive Plan: 75 feet from the right-of-way line, or 150 feet from the
centerline of the street, whichever is greater;



               b.   Collector street: 50 feet from the
public right-of-way;



               c.   Local street: 40 feet from the public
right-of-way.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure.



            1.   Front yard: must meet principal building
setbacks; however, if located between the principal structure and a road, a
100 foot setback is required.



            2.   Side yard: 20 feet.



            3.   Side street: same as front yard.



            4.   Rear yard: 50 feet.



      (3)   Building height. All buildings shall be limited to a
maximum height of 35 feet.



         (a)   Principal structure: maximum height of 3 stories.



         (b)   Detached accessory structure: maximum height of 2
stories.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 651, passed 3-14-2016)



§ 153.341  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The primary purpose of a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
is to permit a more creative and flexible regulatory process in guiding land
development as compared to the standard development regulations of this
chapter. The PUD process provides a joint planning/design effort by the city
and the applicants, as opposed to the city establishing limits within which
applicants must perform. The intent is to provide a greater degree of
creativity and flexibility and promote the health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants.



      (2)   Benefits resulting from a PUD may include the following
opportunities:



         (a)   To promote more efficient and effective use of
land, open space, and public facilities;



         (b)   To preserve, enhance, and protect desirable site
characteristics, open spaces, and valuable natural resources;



         (c)   To benefit from new technology in building design
and construction;



         (d)   To encourage variety in the organization and site
elements, land uses, building densities, and building types and to promote
higher standards of site and building design for all PUD projects;



         (e)   To assure that the development of a complex unit
of associated uses is planned as a single entity and to effectuate the
policies and standards of the Comprehensive Plan.



   (B)   Rules and standards.



      (1)   Applicants may be excused from certain requirements of
this chapter when specifically approved as part of the PUD. The elimination
of requirements shall only be allowed for the purpose of creating better
overall design and an improved living environment and not solely for the
economic advantage of the applicant. All provisions of this chapter not
specifically excused in the preliminary plan review and/or final plan review
shall apply to the PUD.



      (2)   The granting of a PUD does not alter in any manner the
underlying zoning district uses. Building permits shall not be issued which
are not in conformity with the approved PUD.



      (3)   PUDs may be utilized in all zoning districts except for
conservancy, rural residential, and agriculture districts.



   (C)   Development standards. The development standards for PUDs
shall be guided by the underlying zoning district and established with PUD
approval, with the exception of the following standards:



      (1)   Minimum area for residential PUDs. The minimum total
area required for a PUD shall be 7.5 acres of contiguous upland (excluding
wetlands). Tracts of land of less than 7.5 acres contiguous upland (excluding
wetlands) may qualify only if the applicant can show that the minimum lot
area requirement should be waived because a PUD is in the public interest and
that 1 or more of the following conditions exist:



         (a)   Unusual physical features of the property itself
or of the surrounding neighborhood are such that development under the
standard provisions of the normal district would not allow a physical or
terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community to be
preserved;



         (b)   The property is adjacent to or across the street
from property that has been developed under the provisions of this section
and will contribute to the amenities of the neighborhood;



         (c)   The development of the property as a PUD will
provide the city with other significant on-site or off-site benefits or
amenities.



      (2)   Residential densities. A PUD may provide for a variety
of housing types in any one of the basic residential zoning districts. The
total number of dwelling units allowed in a development shall be determined
by either of the following:



         (a)   The area standards of the underlying zoning
district in which the proposed development is to be located;



         (b)   The density specified by the PUD is consistent
with the intent of the city’s Comprehensive Plan. A plan may provide for a
greater number of dwelling units per acre than would otherwise be permitted
by the Comprehensive Plan. However, the applicant has the burden of showing
that such increases in units will not have an undue and adverse impact on
existing public facilities and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring
property owners of their properties. The city, in determining the
reasonableness of the increase in the authorized dwelling units per acre,
shall recognize that increased density may be compensated for by additional
private amenities and by increased efficiency in public facilities and
services to be achieved by:



            1.   The location, amount, and proposed use of
common open space;



            2.   The location, design, and type of dwelling
units; and



            3.   The physical characteristics of the site.



      (3)   Multi-family, commercial, and industrial sites. All
multi-family, commercial, and/or industrial sites shall at a minimum have 2
principal buildings or 2 principal uses on-site to qualify as a PUD. All
multi-family, commercial, and/or industrial sites that have 2 or more
principal buildings must be processed as a PUD.



      (4)   Open space. A primary function for all PUDs is to
encourage development that preserves and enhances the natural characteristics
and valuable natural resources of a site and not force intense developments
that use all portions of a given site to arrive at the maximum intensity or
density allowed. In evaluating each individual proposal, the recognition of
this objective will be a basic consideration in granting approval or denial.
All open space shall be labeled as such and as to its intent or designed
functions.



      (5)   Relationship to adjacent areas. The design of a PUD
shall take into account the relationship of the site to the surrounding
areas. The perimeter of the PUD shall be designed to minimize any undesirable
impact of the development on adjacent properties and, conversely, to minimize
any undesirable impact of adjacent land use and development characteristics
on the PUD.



   (D)   Procedure and administration.



      (1)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to submission of any plan
for consideration of the Planning Commission, the applicant shall meet with
the city to discuss the contemplated project relative to community
development objectives for the area in question to learn what procedural
steps and exhibits shall be required. In the event the proposed development
of the land is not in conflict with the community development objectives, the
applicant may proceed to concept plan review.



      (2)   Concept plan review. Before submitting an application
for preliminary plan review, the applicant may request that the Planning
Commission review a concept of the proposed PUD. The concept plan review
allows the applicant to receive general, non-binding feedback from the
Planning Commission before the applicant prepares and submits a more detailed
application for preliminary plan review.



      (3)   Preliminary plan review. The applicant for a PUD shall
apply for preliminary plan review (see division (E) of this section for
submittal requirements). The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation
to the City Council to approve or deny the preliminary plan and the Council
shall take final action on the application. City Council approval of the
preliminary plan indicates that the applicant can proceed on to final plan
review.



      (4)   Final plan review. The applicant shall secure final plan
review approval from the City Council within 1 year following the date of
approval of the preliminary plan review. If application for final plan review
approval is not received within 1 year, the preliminary plan review will be
considered abandoned and a new application for preliminary plan review must
be submitted. After receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall make final determination on approval of the final plan
review.



      (5)   Application. A PUD requires a preliminary plan and final
plan review application. An application and submittal requirements shall be
filed in writing with the city.



      (6)   Fees. The required application fee shall accompany
applications for preliminary plan and final plan review. The applicant shall
pay fees as set forth by the City Council.



      (7)   Public hearing and notices. All applications for review
of a Planned Unit Development proposal, except concept review, require a
public hearing and shall be noticed and processed according to the standards
and procedures for zoning ordinance text and map amendments as established in
§ 153.037.



      (8)   Development agreements. A development agreement shall be
required to be executed reflecting all terms and conditions of the approved
Planned Unit Development plans and financial requirements.



   (E)   Preliminary plan review submittal requirements. The
application for preliminary plan review shall be accompanied by supporting
information as listed below or as deemed necessary by the city to fully
explain the property, the applicant, and the proposed development. The
application may include further information as the applicant deems
appropriate for preliminary plan review of the proposed PUD. The city may
require additional information depending on the complexity of the proposal.
The supporting information and an application form shall be submitted in a
format as directed by the city and, at a minimum, shall contain the following:



      (1)   A written statement generally describing the proposed
PUD and the market which it is intended to serve. The statement shall also
demonstrate the proposed PUDs relationship to the city’s Comprehensive Plan
and how the proposed PUD is to be designed, arranged, and operated to permit
the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the City Code. The statement shall also include the
public decisions necessary for implementing the proposed plan, including the
present and possible new zoning classifications required for development;



      (2)   A legal description of the entire area within the PUD
for which final plan review approval is sought;



      (3)   A preliminary plat prepared in accordance with the
city’s subdivision regulations;



      (4)   A preliminary plan drawing to a scale of not less than 1
inch equals 50 feet (or scale as requested by the city) containing at a
minimum the following information:



         (a)   Proposed name of the development;



         (b)   Property boundary lines and dimensions of the
property and any significant topographical or physical features of the site;



         (c)   The location, size, use, and arrangement,
including height in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area
coverage and floor area of proposed buildings, including model homes and
existing buildings that will remain, if any. Also, all required setback lines
shall be depicted;



         (d)   Location, dimensions of all driveways, entrances,
curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces, and access aisles, and all other
circulation elements, including bike and pedestrian, and the total site
coverage of all circulation elements;



         (e)   Location, designation, and total area of all
common private open space and facilities;



         (f)   Location, designation, and total area proposed to
be conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds,
school sites, and recreational facilities;



         (g)   The location, use, and size of structures and
other land uses on adjacent properties; and



         (h)   Where applicable, a tabulation indicating the
number of residential dwelling units and expected population and a tabulation
indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial and industrial
floor space by type of activity.



      (5)   A preliminary landscape plan showing groundcover
materials and the areas to be landscaped with the location, size, and species
of all trees, shrubbery, and groundcover;



      (6)   A preliminary grading, drainage, and site alteration
plan for the development illustrating changes to existing topography and
natural site vegetation and all appropriate protection measures taken during
construction;



      (7)   A preliminary lighting plan illustrating the location,
types of devices, and photometric data;



      (8)   A preliminary signage plan illustrating the sizes,
location, and overall program;



      (9)   A traffic flow plan and analysis;



      (10)   Solid waste disposal procedures and provisions;



      (11)   Proof of a property interest in the site which shall
consist of a fee simple title, or an option to acquire a fee simple title
within a specified time period, or a leasehold interest in excess of 30
years, or a substantial interest in a joint venture agreement, real estate
investment trust, or other real estate syndication that can obtain a fee
simple title or marketable title subject to certain restraint which will not
substantially restrict its development within a reasonable time. All
mortgages, including purchase money mortgages, easements restricting land
use, and liens and judgments that may affect the site, shall be documented.
The applicant shall supply proof of existing ownership consisting of an
abstract of title, certified currently, a current certificate of title, or an
attorney’s title opinion based thereon, together with any unrecorded
documents whereby the applicant acquired a legal or equitable property
interest;



      (12)   Any other information that may have been required by
the city staff, Planning Commission, or City Council in conjunction with the
approval of preliminary plan review.



   (F)   Final plan submittal requirements. The application for final
plan approval shall be accompanied by development plans of the proposed PUD
and supporting information as listed below or as deemed necessary by the
city. All material shall be submitted together in a format as directed by the
city and shall include the following:



      (1)   A final site plan, grading plan, utility plan,
landscaping plan, lighting plan, building elevations, sign plan, and all
applicable data as aforementioned in division (E)(4) and § 153.035, as
deemed necessary depending upon the complexity of the proposal. One
transparent Mylar copy of the final development plans, should they be
approved, shall be filed with the city within 60 days of the approval.



      (2)   A final plat in accordance with the requirements of the
city’s subdivision ordinance.



      (3)   A legal submission component, including any deed
restrictions, covenants, agreements, by-laws, or proposed homeowner’s
association or other documents or contracts controlling the use or
maintenance of the property. Where the information is lacking, the City
Council may require a bond or similar guarantee to insure that areas held in
common by persons residing in the development will be developed and
maintained.



      (4)   A final construction plan indicating the geographical
sequence and timing of development for the plan or portions thereof,
including the date of beginning and completion of each stage.



      (5)   Any other information necessary to fully represent the
intentions of the final plan.



   (G)   Criteria and Procedure for granting a PUD. The Planning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may act to approve or deny a
preliminary or final plan for a PUD. The City Council shall review the
submitted application and recommendation from city staff and make a final
decision. The final decision of the City Council shall include all conditions
or modifications to the application. The Planning Commission, in making a
recommendation, and the City Council, in acting upon a plan, shall consider
the following factors. However, nothing herein shall be meant to guarantee
approval of the PUD:



      (1)   The consistency of the proposed PUD with the city’s
Comprehensive Plan;



      (2)   The proposed use’s compliance with the standards and
criteria of the zoning code and subdivision regulations;



      (3)   The extent to which the proposed PUD is designed to form
a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries in terms of
relationship of structures, patterns of circulation, visual character, and
sufficiency of drainage and utilities;



      (4)   The extent to which the proposed uses will be compatible
with present and planned uses in the surrounding area;



      (5)   The impact of the proposed uses on the health, safety,
and general welfare of the occupants of the surrounding area;



      (6)   The burden or impact created by the PUD on parks,
schools, streets, and other public facilities and utilities;



      (7)   The sufficiency of each phase of the PUD to ensure its
construction and operation is feasible without dependence upon any subsequent
phase;



      (8)   The impact of the PUD on environmental quality, property
values, scenic views, and reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding area; and



      (9)   That any exceptions to city code, policy, or regulations
are justified by the design or development of the proposed use.



   (H)   Final plan revisions.



      (1)   Minor changes in the location, placement, and heights of
buildings or structures may be authorized by the city if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan
review was approved.



      (2)   Major changes such as rearrangement of lots, blocks, and
building tracts or any other significant changes as determined by the city
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission with recommendation to the City
Council. Upon Planning Commission recommendation the City Council shall make
final approval. Any changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent
of the approved final plan review.



   (I)   Method of amending a PUD. Any desired change involving
density, use, building type, enlargement, or intensification of the use not
specifically allowed by a particular PUD, or any request for a variance from
the specific terms of a previously passed PUD, shall require that an
application be filed for an amendment and all procedures shall then apply as
required for a new plan application.



   (J)   Method of cancellation of a PUD. Any existing approved PUD
shall be deemed to be canceled if the owner of the land involved in the
permit applies for and receives a rezoning with respect to the property prior
to the time that there is any physical implementation of the matters covered
by the previously approved PUD. In addition, an existing PUD shall be deemed
to be automatically canceled in the event that a final plat, if the same is
required in connection with the application, is not filed with Washington
County as required by and in accordance with the terms of the city
subdivision regulations within 120 days following final approval of the PUD
by the City Council. The PUD shall expire and be considered null and void 1
year after it has been issued if no construction has begun or if use has not
been established. In all other situations, an existing PUD shall be canceled
and revoked, short of expiring according to its own terms, only in the event
of the city, acting in accordance with law and due process, taking some
rezoning action that supersedes the PUD.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 648, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 153.342  RURAL OPEN SPACE HOUSING CLUSTER PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The primary purpose of a rural open space housing
cluster Planned Unit Development (PUD) is to preserve the open space and
rural character of certain zoning districts while creating compact
neighborhoods that have a strong visual and physical access to the open
space. This method of development uses the size and shape of the open space
as the central organizing element, rearranging the density on each parcel so
that less land is cleared, graded, and turned into driveways, streets, lawns,
and houses. The Open Space Development regulations are established to
encourage development of rural housing clusters that meet the following
purposes:



      (1)   To provide efficient use of the land while maintaining
contiguous blocks of economically viable agricultural land, mature woodlands,
and open space, and preserving historical features, scenic views, natural
drainage systems, and other desirable features of the natural environment;



      (2)   To allow housing to be concentrated on sites that have
low agricultural potential and/or high natural housing appeal;



      (3)   To create neighborhoods with direct access to open
space, distinct identities, and sense of community;



      (4)   To encourage innovation and promote flexibility,
economy, and creativity in residential development;



      (5)   To provide commonly-owned open space areas for passive
and/or active recreational use by residents of the development and, where
specified, the larger community;



      (6)   To preserve scenic views and elements of the rural
character and the natural environment by minimizing views of new development
from existing roads.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMMUNITY GARDEN. Land which is cultivated by the residents of
the development for the production of trees, vegetables, fruits, flowers,
herbs, and grasses for the residents’ use or to be sold directly to
consumers through membership in the garden.



      CONSERVATION EASEMENT. An interest in real property created in a
manner that imposes limitations or affirmative obligations in regard to the
use of property, including the retention, protection, and maintenance of
natural resources, open space, and agriculture.



      CULTURAL RESOURCE. The historic and archeological characteristics
of the land, including buildings and landscapes that provide information
regarding the history of the city and its people.



      HISTORIC BUILDING AND STRUCTURE. A structure which has been
identified by the Washington County History Network Inventory or the State
Historic Preservation Office as having public value due to its architectural
features relating to the cultural heritage of the city.



      HOMEOWNER’S ASSOCIATION. A formally constituted non-profit
association or corporation made up of the property owners and/or residents of
the development for the purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining the
common open space and facilities.



      NEIGHBORHOOD. An area containing a contiguous group of
residential lots where people live in close proximity to one another.



      OPEN SPACE. Land used for agriculture, natural habitat pedestrian
corridors, and/or recreational purposes that is undivided and permanently
protected from future development.



      OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT. A grouping of residential structures on
smaller lots than allowed in the specific zoning district leaving some land
dedicated as open space.



      PERIMETER ROAD. A road lying outside of and abutting the
development parcel.



      PLANT COMMUNITY. A grouping of plants with common environmental
requirements living within the landscape (such as wetlands, grasslands, and
boreal forests).



      PROTECTIVE OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. A contract entered into
between private parties that constitute a restriction of the use of a
particular parcel of property.



      RESOURCE INVENTORY. A survey of the land’s features, including
its natural resources, cultural resources, scenic views and view sheds, and
physical characteristics.



   (C)   Applicability. The Open Space Development standards are an
alternative set of standards for residential developments within the
Conservancy, Agricultural, and Rural Residential Districts. Open Space
Developments are permitted within these zoning districts upon the issuance of
a PUD. The design standards contained in this section are not applicable in
the Shoreland Overlay District. The regulations of this section are
applicable only to Open Space Developments approved after the effective date
of this chapter.



   (D)   Application.



      (1)   A PUD is required for an Open Space Development in the
Conservancy, Agricultural, and Rural Residential Districts.



      (2)   A PUD application shall be filed, in writing, with the
city in accordance with rules and regulations set forth in § 153.341.



      (3)   In addition to those criteria as stated in § 153.341,
the Planning Commission shall consider the following:



         (a)   The Open Space Development is designed to preserve
open space and the rural character of the Conservancy, Rural Residential, and
Agriculture Districts;



         (b)   The Open Space Development is designed in
accordance with the standards of this section;



         (c)   The Open Space Development supports the goals and
policies of the city’s Comprehensive Plan;



      (4)   In addition to those submittal requirements stated in §
153.341, the following items shall be submitted as part of the PUD
application for Open Space Developments:



         (a)   Resource inventory. The plan for an Open Space
Development shall include a resource inventory to include the following
mapped at a scale of no less than 1 inch equals 100 feet.



            1.   Topographic contours at 2 foot intervals
showing rock outcrops and slopes of more than 8%.



            2.   Soil type locations and identification of
soil type characteristics such as agricultural capability, depth to bedrock,
and suitability for wastewater disposal systems.



            3.   Hydrologic characteristics, including surface
water bodies, flood plains, wetlands, natural swales, and drainage ways.



            4.   Vegetation of the site, according to general
cover type (pasture, woodland, and the like), defining boundaries of woodland
areas and stand-alone trees with a caliper of more than 6 inches. Vegetative
types shall be classified as generally deciduous, coniferous, or mixed and
described by plant community, relative age, and condition. See also §§
153.233et seq.



            5.   Current land use and land cover (cultivated
areas, paved areas, and the like), all buildings and structures on the land,
and all encumbrances such as easements or covenants.



            6.   Visual resources showing views onto the tract
from surrounding roads and public areas as well as views within the tract.



            7.   Cultural resources: brief description of
historic character of buildings and structures, historically important
landscapes, and archeological features.



            8.   Context: general outlines of existing
buildings, land use, and natural features such as water bodies or wooded
areas, roads, and property boundaries within 500 feet of the tract.



         (b)   Yield plan. The applicant shall submit a "yield
plan" showing the maximum number of dwelling units that would be permitted
given the minimum lot size and lot widths for conventional subdivisions and
other requirements of this chapter and the subdivision regulations. The yield
plan need not be engineered; however, it shall be drawn to scale and it shall
identify all the major physical features on the parcel.



         (c)   Concept subdivision plan. One or more open space
design plans meeting the intent of this chapter and including at least the
following information:



            1.   Open space areas indicating which areas are
to be protected;



            2.   Boundaries of areas to be developed and
proposed general street and lot layout;



            3.   Number of housing units proposed;



            4.   Areas proposed for storm water management and
on or off-site sewage treatment;



            5.   The plans shall be drawn to scale.



         (d)   Phasing plan. Open Space Developments may be
phased in accordance with a unified development plan for the entire tract
meeting the following requirements:



            1.   A phasing plan identifying the sequence of
development showing approximate areas serially numbered with a description of
each phase. Information shall be provided regarding the number of dwelling
units, proposed improvements, and common facilities for each;



            2.   The phasing plan shall be made a part of the
PUD;



            3.   Any common facilities, including golf
courses, shall be constructed prior to the sale of any lots and shall be
clearly marked on a site map that shall be an attachment to all sales
agreements for individual lots;



            4.   As part of the development agreement, a
financial guarantee to ensure completion of common facilities, trails, and
landscaping shall be provided.



         (e)   General location map.



      (5)   Application procedure. Upon submittal of a complete
application, the application shall be processed according to the following.



         (a)   Public hearing and notices. All applications for
final review of an Open Space Development proposal require a public hearing
and shall be noticed and processed according to the standards and procedures
for a PUD and major subdivision under the provisions of the city subdivision
regulations.



         (b)   Criteria for granting an Open Space Development.
The city may grant an Open Space Development, provided the proposed
development complies with the standards and criteria stated in this chapter
and the subdivision regulations and that the development is in harmony with
the general intent of the Comprehensive Plan. In granting approval for an
Open Space Development, the city shall consider:



            1.   The impact of the proposed use on the health,
safety, and general welfare of the occupants of the surrounding lands;



            2.   Existing and anticipated traffic conditions,
including parking facilities on the adjacent streets and land;



            3.   The effect of the proposed use on property
values and scenic views in the surrounding area;



            4.   The compliance of the proposed use with the
city’s Comprehensive Plan;



 



            5.   The ability of the proposed use to meet the
standards of this chapter; and



            6.   Whether the proposed use is permitted in the
underlying zoning district.



         (c)   Approval. If the city determines that the proposed
use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
city, and that the use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan, the city may approve such Open Space
Development.



   (E)   Uses. The following uses are permitted within designated open
space. The uses must meet the standards and criteria specified for those uses
as set forth herein and regulated in this chapter unless as otherwise stated
below:



      (1)   Conservation (such as woodland, meadow, prairie);



      (2)   Agricultural;



      (3)   Equestrian;



      (4)   Recreational uses and associated parking:



         (a)   Trails (walking, skiing, cycling, horseback
riding, snowmobiling);



         (b)   Picnic areas;



         (c)   Community gardens;



         (d)   Turf areas for informal play;



         (e)   Playgrounds.



      (5)   Storm water management facilities;



      (6)   Community sewage disposal systems;



      (7)   Essential services, utility.



   (F)   Ownership and management of open space. The designated open
space and common facilities shall be owned and managed by 1 or a combination
of the following:



      (1)   Homeowners’ association;



      (2)   The city or another governmental body empowered to hold
interest in real property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes;



      (3)   An individual who will use the land for open space
purposes as provided by the permanent conservation restrictions.



   (G)   Open space.



      (1)   Required open space shall be subject to permanent
conservation easement and used for the purposes as defined by this chapter.
The conservation easement shall be dedicated to an acceptable land trustee or
other similar organization as approved by the city.



      (2)   The uses within the open space shall be accessible to
the residents of the development. These uses may also be available to the
general public, providing the proper approvals are received.



      (3)   A financial guarantee ensuring the construction and
completion of the common facilities shall be submitted to the city.



   (H)   Homeowners’ associations.



      (1)   A homeowners’ association shall be established if the
open space is owned by a homeowners’ association. Membership in the
association is mandatory for all purchasers of homes in the development and
their successors.



      (2)   A homeowners’ association agreement guaranteeing
continuing maintenance shall be submitted to the city as part of the data
required for the PUD. The homeowners’ association documents or the
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   The legal description of the common lands or
facilities;



         (b)   The restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment
of the lands or facilities, including the persons or entities entitled to
enforce the restrictions;



         (c)   A mechanism for resolving disputes among the
owners or association members;



         (d)   A mechanism to assess and enforce the common
expenses for the land or facilities, including upkeep and maintenance
expenses, real estate taxes, and insurance premiums;



         (e)   The conditions and timing of the transfer of
ownership and control of land or facilities to the association or to common
ownership;



         (f)   Any other matter the developer deems appropriate;



         (g)   The management of collector sewage treatment
systems.



   (I)   Density standards. The number of density units for the parcel
shall be determined by the Comprehensive Plan and by underlying zoning.



   (J)   Performance standards.



      (1)   General considerations.



         (a)   The residential lot shall be large enough to
accommodate 1 house and a 2 car garage.



         (b)   All structures shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from unclassified water bodies.



      (2)   Residential lot requirements.



         (a)    Minimum lot size:



            1.   Septic on-site: 60,000 sq. ft. (43,560 sq.
ft. net buildable);



            2.   Septic off-site: 25,000 sq. ft. (3,400 sq.
ft. net buildable).



         (b)   Principal building setbacks:



            1.   Front lot line: 30 feet;



            2.   Side lot line: 10 feet;



            3.   Rear lot line: 30 feet.



         (c)   Accessory building setbacks: see accessory
structures, §§ 153.110et seq.



         (d)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.



         (e)   All newly created lots shall take access from
interior local streets.



         (f)   Fifty percent of the lots within a neighborhood
shall abut open space on at least 1 side. A local street may separate lots
from the open space.



      (3)   Neighborhood siting standards.



         (a)   Neighborhoods shall be located to minimize their
impacts on the natural, scenic, and cultural resources of the site.



         (b)   Neighborhoods shall avoid encroaching on rare
plant communities or endangered species identified



in the Department of Natural Resources County Biological Survey for Natural
Communities and Rare Species.



         (c)   Fragmentation of open space shall be minimized.



         (d)   Whenever possible, open space shall connect with
existing or potential open space lands on adjoining parcels.



         (e)   Neighborhoods should be sited to achieve the
following goals to the extent practicable. In cases where impact on 1 or more
of the following resource areas is unavoidable, the impact should be
minimized through use of landscaping, topography, or other features:



            1.   Avoid prime farmland soils and large tracts
of land in agricultural use and avoid interference with normal agricultural
practices;



            2.   Minimize disturbance to woodlands, hedgerows,
mature trees, or other significant vegetation;



            3.   Protect scenic views of open land from
adjacent roads;



            4.   Protect existing historic buildings or
incorporate them through adaptive reuse.



         (f)   The maximum number of residential lots permitted
in a neighborhood is 50.



      (4)   Open space design. Open space shall be designed in a
manner that ensures an active use or enjoyment of a reasonable portion of the
open space for the residents.



         (a)   Open space shall be designated as part of the
development. The minimum required open space is based on a percentage of the
gross acreage:



            1.   A: 55%;



            2.   RR: 55%;



            3.   C: 75%.



         (b)   The required open space shall be undivided and
restricted from further development.



         (c)   The following areas or structures may be located
within the open space area and shall be counted toward the overall open space
percentage required:



            1.   Parking areas for access to and use of the
open space;



            2.   Buildings or structures that are accessory to
the use of the open space.



         (d)   Road rights-of-way may not be located within the
required open space area and shall not be counted towards the required
minimum open space.



         (e)   No more than 50% of the required open space may
consist of unclassified water bodies, ponds, areas within the 100 year
floodplain (or high water mark as documented by city records), wetlands, or
slopes of greater than 33%.



         (f)   At least 10% of the open space shall be accessible
to the residents of the development.



            1.   At least 10% of the open space that is
accessible shall be suitable for recreational uses, such as trails, play
fields, or community gardens.



            2.   A pathway system connecting all parts of
those open space areas accessible to neighborhood residents and connecting
these areas to neighborhood streets and to planned or developed trails on
adjacent parcels shall be identified in the plan.



            3.   That portion of the open space designated for
the location of sewage treatment facilities shall not be included as part of
this accessible open space.



      (5)   Street standards. Streets shall be designed to minimize
the visual size and scale of the development and to help discourage excessive
speeds. Neighborhood streets may take the form of a two-way street, a pair of
one-way streets on either side of a landscaped median, or a one-way loop
street around a small neighborhood green. Street widths and alignments should
be carefully scaled to neighborhood size. Streets shall be developed
according to the following standards that promote road safety, assure
adequate access for fire and rescue vehicles and promote adequate vehicular
circulation:



         (a)   The applicant must demonstrate that access to the
development has the capacity to handle traffic generated by the proposed
project and will not endanger the safety of the general public;



         (b)   Streets shall be constructed to meet the city’s
engineering standards;



         (c)   Street connections to adjacent parcels shall be
provided in logical locations to avoid creating landlocked parcels and
provide for connecting street patterns.



      (6)   Sewage and water facilities.



         (a)   Water for an Open Space Development shall be
provided by individual on-site wells or by 1 or more community wells meeting
the permit requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health. The use of
shared or community wells are encouraged.



         (b)   All Open Space Developments shall be provided with
adequate sewage treatment facilities meeting the standards of the Washington
County Individual Sewage Treatment Standards Regulations and the permit
requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.343  SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statutory authorization and policy.



      (1)   Statutory authorization. This section is adopted
pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes.



      (2)   Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city
affects the public health, safety, and general welfare not only by
contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local
tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health,
safety, and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use, and development
of shorelands of public waters. The legislature of Minnesota has delegated
responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision,
use, and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters
and related land resources. This responsibility is recognized by the city.



   (B)   Scope and applicability.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the
shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in this section and
unclassified water bodies where applicable. A landscape/garden pond created
by a private user where there was no previous water body may, at the
discretion of the governing body, be exempt from this section.



      (2)   It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate,
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
section shall prevail.



      (3)   The use of any shoreland of public water; the size and
shape of lots; the use, size, type and location of structure on lots; the
installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems; the
grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland
vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the
terms of this regulation and other applicable regulations.



      (4)   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
section is determined to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected
thereby.



      (5)   The regulations contained in this section are in
addition to and not in lieu of the other regulations contained in others
sections of this chapter. All other regulations in this chapter that are
inconsistent with the regulations of this section are repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.



   (C)   Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of these regulations to:



      (1)   Designate suitable land use districts for each body of
public water;



      (2)   Regulate the sanitary and waste treatment system for
lots;



      (3)   Regulate the area of lot and the width of lots suitable
for building sites;



      (4)   Regulate the alteration of shoreland of public waters;



      (5)   Regulate alterations of the natural vegetation and the
natural topography along shorelands;



      (6)   Conserve natural resources and maintain a high standard
of environmental duality;



      (7)   Preserve and enhance the quality of surface water;



      (8)   Preserve the natural environmental values of shorelands;



      (9)   Provide for the utilization of water and related land
resources;



      (10)   Maintain water quality, reduce flooding and erosion,
and provide sources of food and habitat for a variety of fish and wildlife.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in § 153.010 and to give this section its most reasonable
application.



      ACCESS CORRIDOR. An area where vegetation is cut or removed
through the buffer to provide access to a lake, stream, or wetland.



      BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from
the top of a bluff.



      BLUFF LINE. A line along the top of a slope connecting points at
which the slope, proceeding away from the water body or adjoining watershed
channel, becomes less than 18% and it only includes slopes greater than 18%
that meet the following criteria:



         (a)   Part or all of the feature is located in a
shoreland area;



         (b)   The slope rises at least 20 feet above the
ordinary high water level of the water body;



         (c)   The slope must drain toward the water body;



         (d)   The average slope of 18% or more shall extend over
a distance of 50 feet or more.



      BUFFER STRIP. Undisturbed strip of land adjacent to shorelines
and wetlands consisting of native or existing vegetation.



      BUFFER WIDTH, MINIMUM. The least buffer distance allowable
measured perpendicular to the delineated wetland edge or ordinary high water
mark of the lake or stream.



      BUILDABLE LAND. Land with a slope less than 33% and outside of
any required setbacks except that on a natural environment lake where a 200
foot structure setback is required, the buildable areas calculation shall be
measured from a 153 foot setback rather than the required 200 foot setback,
and above any 100 year floodplain, drainage way, or drainage easement.



      BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.



      CLEAR CUTTING. The removal of an entire stand of trees.



      COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the
sale, lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.



      CONTROLLED ACCESS LOTS. Lots intended to provide access to the
lake for residents of a particular development.



      DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally
related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than 6
inches above ground.



      EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal
of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other non-metallic minerals, and
peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes.



      FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear-cutting of forested lands to
prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest
stand.



      HARDSHIP. See §§ 153.036et seq.



      HEIGHT OF BUILDING. See §§ 153.010et seq.



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. The area of a lot (above the ordinary high
water level) covered with buildings, including all appurtenances, driveways
and sidewalks, and similar impervious materials. For the purpose of this
section, driveways that have a gravel base shall be considered impervious.
Decks that allow drainage through the decking and that do not have a plastic
weed barrier or some other material that would impede drainage into the
ground and swimming pool water surface area shall not be considered
impervious.



      INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or
shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.



      LAKE, GENERAL DEVELOPMENT. Generally large, deep lakes of varying
size and depths with high levels and mixes of existing development. These
lakes often are extensively used for recreation and, except for the very
large lakes, are heavily developed around the shore. Second and third tiers
of development are fairly common.



      LAKE, NATURAL DEVELOPMENT. Generally small, often shallow lakes
with limited capacities for assimilation of the impacts of development and
recreational use. They often have adjacent lands with substantial constraints
for development such as high water tables, exposed bedrock, and unsuitable
soils.



      LAKE, RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. Generally medium-sized lakes of
varying depths and shapes with a variety of land form, soil and ground water
situations on the lakes around them. They often are characterized by moderate
levels of recreational uses and existing development. Development consists
mainly of seasonal and year-round residences and recreational-oriented
commercial uses.



      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of
a lot measured at the minimum required setback line from the ordinary high
water mark or road right-of-way.



      NON-RIPARIAN. A lot with no lake frontage.



      ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters shall be
an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained
for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape,
commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly
aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ORDINARY HIGH
WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For
reservoirs and flowage, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the operating
elevation of the normal summer pool. On lakes with an ordinary high water
level established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, that
elevation shall be considered the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL.



      PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes.



      RIPARIAN. A lot with lake frontage.



      RIVER, TRANSITION. A river designated as such by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



      RIVER, TRIBUTARY. Consists of watercourses mapped in the
Protected Waters Inventory that have not been assigned one of the river
classes. These segments have a wide variety of existing land and recreational
use characteristics.



      SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of
areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints
such as shallow soils over ground water or bedrock, highly erosive or
expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of
flora or fauna in need of special protection.



      SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure,
sewage treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level,
top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.



      SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. An on-site septic tank and soil
absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system.



      SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force
main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used
for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of
ultimate disposal.



      SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water
level of public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
required structure setback.



      SHORELAND. Land which meets all of the following criteria from
public waters:



         (a)   A portion of the lot must be located within 1,000
feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, or 300 feet from a river
or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by an ordinance
on a river or stream, whichever is greater;



         (b)   A portion of the lot must fall within the
Shoreland Zoning District as delineated on the Zoning Map;



         (c)   A lot must have public water frontage or be in the
next tier of lots landward that has primary access from the same public or
private road that serves the public water frontage lots (Tier Two lots).



      SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing
structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery.



      STEEP SLOPE. Land where development or agricultural activity is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness
and the site’s soil characteristics. Where specific information is not
available, STEEP SLOPE is a 12% slope measured over a horizontal distance of
50 feet.



      TIER TWO. A lot or parcel of land which is across the street from
a public or private road that serves the lots fronting a public water body.



      TOE OF THE BLUFF. The lower point of bluff with an average slope
exceeding 18%.



      TOP OF THE BLUFF. The highest point of a bluff with an average
slope exceeding 18%.



      TRIBUTARY STREAM. A stream classified as such by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



      UNCLASSIFIED BODY OF WATER. Any lake, pond, backwater, swamp,
marsh, wetland, stream, drainage way, flowage, river, floodplain, or other
water-oriented topographical features not designated as being a natural
environment lake, recreational development lake, general development lake, or
transition river or tributary stream on the Zoning Map.



      VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this
section as applied to a specific lot or property, except that modification in
the allowable uses in the district in which the property is located shall not
be allowed as a variance.



      VEGETATION, NATURAL. Plant life which is native to the location
and which would normally grow if the ground were left undisturbed.



      WETLAND. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic
systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land
is covered by shallow water. For the purposes of the section, WETLANDS must
have a predominance of hydric soils, be inundated or saturated by surface
water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions, and under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of
hydrophytic vegetation. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and
similar areas.



   (E)   Administration.



      (1)   Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters,
the size and shape of lots, the use, size, type and location of structures on
lots, the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste removal
systems, the grading and filling of any shoreland area, the cutting of
shoreland vegetation, and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance
with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. In cases
where standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the
more restrictive standard will prevail.



      (2)   Permits required.



         (a)   A permit is required for the construction of
buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as
construction of decks, fences, and signs), the installation and/or alteration
of sewage treatment systems, and grading and filling activities. Application
for a permit shall be made to the city. The application shall include the
necessary information so that the city can determine the site’s suitability
for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be
provided.



         (b)   A permit authorizing an addition to an existing
structure shall stipulate that an identified failed sewage treatment system
shall be reconstructed or replaced.



      (3)   Notification to the Department of Natural Resources.



         (a)   Copies of all notices of any public hearing to
consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls shall be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s
designated representative and postmarked at least 10 days before the
hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats shall
include copies of the subdivision/plat.



         (b)   A copy of approved amendments and
subdivisions/plats and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses
under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Commissioner
or the Commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked within 10
days of final action.



      (4)   Variances.



         (a)   Variances may only be granted in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes. No variance may be granted for prohibited uses.



         (b)   When a variance is approved after the Department
of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record,
the notification of the approved variance shall be sent to the Department of
Natural Resources and include the City Council’s summary of the public
record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported
the issuance of the variance.



         (c)   For existing developments, the application for
variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment
system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if
issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment
system.



   (F)   Shoreland classification system. The public waters of the
Forest Lake have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in
Minn. Regs. part 6120.3300 and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for
Washington County, Minnesota, and designated on the Official Zoning Map for
the City of Forest Lake.



      (1)   Natural environment lakes.



 


Natural Environment Lake

 

Protected ID#



Cranberry Lake
 

82-161



Shields Lake
 

82-162



Mud Lake
 

82-168



Higgins Lake
 

2-2




 


Department of Natural Resources protected wetlands over 10 acres in size




82-79W




82-157W




82-158W




82-160W




82-164W




82-165W




 



      (2)   Recreational development lakes.



 


Recreational Development Lake

 

Protected ID#



Sylvan Lake
 
80



 



      (3)   General development lakes.



 


General Development Lake

 

Protected ID#



Forest Lake
 

82-159



Clear Lake
 

82-163




 



      (4)   Tributary streams.



         (a)   Sunrise River.



         (b)   Hardwood Creek - Section 26, 27, and 34.



   (G)   Lot requirements. The lot area (land above the normal ordinary
high water mark) and lot width standards (at road, shoreline, and building
setback line) created after the date of enactment of this chapter for lake
and river/stream classifications are the following.



      (1)   Detached single residential lots.



         (a)   Unsewered lakes.



 


 

Area

 

Width



Recreational development
 

1.5 acres

 

150 feet



General development
 

1.5 acres

 

150 feet



Natural environment
 

5 acres

 

200 feet




 



         (b)   Sewered lakes.



 


 

Area

 

Width



General development
 

15,000 sq. ft.

 

75 feet




 



         (c)   River/stream standards. Property fronting on
rivers and streams shall meet underlying zoning density restrictions.



      (2)   Attached single-family. Where allowed by the underlying
zoning districts with public sewer and water, attached single-family homes
shall have a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet per unit and a lot width
of 65 feet per unit.



      (3)   Additional special provisions.



         (a)   A Planned Unit Development (PUD) may be utilized
in the Shoreland Overlay District as stated in § 153.343. In no case shall a
PUD increase the density beyond the density allowed by the underlying zoning
district or alter the required setback from the ordinary high water mark.



         (b)   Only land above the ordinary high water level of
public waters can be used to meet lot area standards. Lot width standards
must be met at the minimum required building setback lines from the ordinary
high water level and road right-of-way.



         (c)   Any lot intended as controlled access to public
waters or recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within
subdivisions are permissible providing all of the following standards are met:



            1.   The lot must meet the width and size
requirements for residential lots and be suitable for the intended uses of
controlled access lots;



            2.   If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of
more than 6 watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, the width
of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of
requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond 6,
consistent with the following table:



 


Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length (acres/mile)

 

Percent of Required Increase in Frontage



Less than 100 to 1
 

25% per additional watercraft



101 - 200 to 1
 

20% per additional watercraft



201 - 300 to 1
 

15% per additional watercraft



301 - 400 to 1
 

10% per additional watercraft



Greater than 400 to 1
 

5% per additional watercraft




 



            3.   The lot(s) must be jointly owned by all
purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian
lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access
lot; and



            4.   A development agreement with the city
specifying which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what
activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching,
loading, beaching, mooring, or docking. They must also include other outdoor
recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general
public use or the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by
adjacent property owners. Examples of the non-significant conflicts
activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The development
agreement must limit the total amount of vehicles allowed to be parked and
the total number of watercraft to be continuously moored, docked, stored over
water, or parked on the property, and must require centralization of all
common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to
minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also require all
parking areas and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography
as much as practical from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions. No structures are allowed to be constructed on these lots except
for docking facilities as approved by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources and Washington County.



   (H)   Vacant lots.



      (1)   Any individual lot or lots that do not contain a
seasonal or permanent home may not have a dock unless the first is contiguous
to a lot within a seasonal or permanent home having the same ownership or as
stated in § 153.343.



      (2)   No temporary structures, vehicles, or open storage are
allowed.



   (I)   Structure setback and other design criteria.



      (1)   Placement of structures on lots. When more than 1
setback applies to a site, structures and facilities shall be located to meet
all setbacks. Structures shall be located as follows.



         (a)   Structure setbacks (in feet) from ordinary high
water level:



 




CLASSES OF PUBLIC WATERS

 

SETBACKS




STRUCTURES




LAKES

 

UNSEWERED

 

SEWERED



Natural environment
 

200 feet

 

150 feet



Recreational development
 

100 feet

 

75 feet



General development
 

75 feet

 

50 feet



Unclassified waterbodies
 

50 feet

 

20 feet




RIVERS/ STREAMS

 

 





Transition
 

200 feet

 

150 feet



Tributary
 

200 feet

 

150 feet





 



         (b)   Additional structure setbacks. The following
additional structure setbacks apply regardless of the classification of the
water body:



 


SETBACK FROM

 

SETBACK (IN FEET)



(a) Top of bluff
 
30 feet


(b) Unplatted cemetery
 
50 feet


(c) Arterial road
 
150 feet from centerline or 75 feet from road right-of-way, whichever is
greater


(d) Right-of-way, road, public street, or other roads or streets not
classified
 
Per underline zoning district regulations


(e) Side yard setback
 
Per underline zoning district regulations



 



         (c)   Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory
facilities, except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff
impact zones.



         (d)   Additional regulations. Refer to Washington County
Development Code, Chapter Four, Individual Sewage Treatment System
Regulations, for requirements relating to individual sewage treatment systems.



         (e)   Additional requirements. See § 153.110.



      (2)   Design criteria for structures.



         (a)   High water elevations. The elevation of structures
located on riparian lots shall be regulated as follows: the lowest floor,
including basement and crawl space shall be placed at least 1 foot above the
100 year flood level or, if the flood level has not been established, the
lowest floor, including basement and crawlspace, shall be placed 3 feet above
the ordinary high water level.



         (b)   Stairways, lifts, walks, trails, and landings.
Stairways and lifts are the only permitted alterations for achieving access
up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. All accesses shall meet
the following design requirements:



            1.   Stairways, walks, trails, and lifts shall not
exceed 4 feet in width on residential lots. Six foot stairways may be used
for commercial properties and public open-space recreational properties. A 6
foot stair may be approved as part of a PUD;



            2.   Landings on residential lots shall not exceed
32 square feet in area;



            3.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on
stairways or landings;



            4.   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground,
provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion;



            5.   Stairways, lifts, walks, trails, and landings
shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots as
viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, whenever practical; and



            6.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility
paths for persons with disabilities are also allowed for achieving access to
the shore area, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of
items 1 to 5 above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minn.
Regs., Ch. 1340.



      (3)   Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed
on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the
site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.



      (4)   Height of structures. See underlying zoning district.



      (5)   Lot coverage. A maximum of 25% of the lot may be covered
with impervious surface. If storm water ponding is provided (as required for
new construction), certain developments may be exempt from this lot coverage
requirement. Uses in those districts located east of Lake Street, south of
2nd Avenue NE, and north of 2nd Avenue SE shall be exempt from the lot
coverage requirements of this section. This includes all structures, patios,
walks, and surfaced or unsurfaced driveways. Landscaped areas may not have an
impervious barrier installed. The removal of an impervious barrier under
landscaping shall not be considered a reduction in impervious surface area.



      (6)   Steep slopes. The City Engineer shall evaluate possible
soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before
issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion
and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and
other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming
summer, leaf-on vegetation.



   (J)   Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and
topography shall be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix
nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.



      (1)   Vegetation alterations.



         (a)   No cutting or removal of deciduous trees over 6
inches in diameter measured at a point 4.5 feet above ground level, or
coniferous trees 12 feet in height within the required building setback shall
be permitted unless the trees are determined to be dead, diseased, or pose a
safety hazard. A certificate of compliance must be obtained prior to the
removal of any trees.



         (b)   Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be
allowed, provided sufficient vegetative cover remains to screen cars,
dwellings, and other structures, piers, docks, and marinas, when viewed from
the water.



         (c)   In order to retard surface run-off and soil
erosion, natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as is feasible after
any construction project is completed.



         (d)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
normal maintenance of trees such as pruning or removal of limbs or branches
that are dead or pose safety hazards.



         (e)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the
construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction
of roads and parking areas under validly issued construction permits is
exempt from these vegetation alteration standards.



         (f)   All other requirements as set forth in §§
153.230et seq. shall apply.



      (2)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.



         (a)   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for
the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and
filling standards in this section shall be incorporated into the issuance of
permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and
driveways.



         (b)   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by
§§ 153.125 through 153.135.



         (c)   Not withstanding divisions (J)(2)(a) and (J)(2)(b)
above, a grading and filling permit will be required for:



            1.   The movement of more than 10 cubic yards of
material within the shore impact zones; and



            2.   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of
material outside of shore impact zones.



         (d)   The filling of any wetland or below the normal
high water mark must be permitted by the appropriate government agency or
jurisdiction.



         (e)   Excavations where the intended purpose is
connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and
harbors, will be allowed only after all government agencies with jurisdiction
have approved the proposed connection to public waters.



         (f)   The following considerations and conditions shall
be adhered to during the issuance of building permits, grading and filling
permits, conditional use permits, variance, and subdivision approvals:



            1.   Grading or filling in any type of wetland
must be in compliance with the Wetland Conservation Act;



            2.   Alterations shall be designed and conducted
in a manner that ensures that only the smallest amount of bare ground is
exposed for the shortest time possible;



            3.   Mulches or similar materials shall be used,
where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage and a permanent vegetation
cover must be established within 6 months;



            4.   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap
sediments before they reach any surface water feature shall be used;



            5.   Altered areas shall be stabilized to
acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the
United States Soil Conservation Service;



            6.   Fill or excavated material shall not be
placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;



            7.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on
steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope
stability and shall not create finished slopes of 33% or greater;



            8.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water
level of public waters shall first be authorized by the Department of Natural
Resources under Minnesota Statutes;



            9.   Alterations of topography shall not adversely
affect adjacent or nearby properties;



            10.   Placement of natural rock riprap, including
associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is
permitted if the finished slope does not exceed 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot
vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within 10 feet of the ordinary
high water level and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water
level does not exceed 3 feet. Riprap should be used only where necessary and
never to replace a stable, naturally vegetated shoreline area; and



            11.   At the end of excavation or filling
operations, the disturbed area shall be restored with topsoil or other
approved cover material and shall be reseeded within 1 growing season with
native indigenous vegetation.



   (K)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas.



      (1)   Public and private roads and parking areas shall be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters.



      (2)   All roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet
required setbacks.



   (L)   Buffer strips. In order to maintain water quality, reduce
flooding and erosion, and to provide sources of food and habitat for a
variety of fish and wildlife, buffer strips shall be provided and maintained
around all natural environment lakes and streams and type 3, 4, and 5
wetlands.



      (1)   Lake, wetland, stream buffer widths:



         (a)   The minimum buffer width shall apply to all buffer
widths, including those that are restored, replaced, or enhanced;



         (b)   The city may require a variable buffer width to
protect valuable adjacent habitat when considering variances for building
setbacks;



         (c)   The following buffer widths shall be maintained:



 


LAKE/WETLAND

 

NE LAKE

 

WETLAND(S)

 

STORM WATER POND



Minimum buffer width
 
50 feet
 
50% of required setback
 
10 feet



 



      (2)   An access corridor 10 feet wide or 25% of the lot width
is permitted to gain access to the water body.



   (M)   Storm water management. See City of Forest Lake Storm Water
Management Ordinance.



   (N)   Standards for non-residential uses. Any permitted use of land
adjacent to public water must meet the following standards in addition to any
other requirements of this section or the Zoning Code:



      (1)   The uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and
vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;



      (2)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for
patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions to navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the
need;



      (3)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may
use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public subject to
the following general standards:



         (a)   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for
signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or
safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or
under a permit issued by the Washington County Sheriff;



         (b)   Other outside lighting may be located within the
shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate
potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent
direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of
navigational lights.



   (O)   Agricultural use standards. General cultivation farming,
grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore bluff impact zones
are maintained in permanent vegetation as provided by a qualified individual
or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land
uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water
level.



   (P)   Additional standards.



      (1)   Uses allowed within shoreland areas shall be subject to
review and approval procedures and criteria and conditions for review of
conditional uses established in this chapter. A thorough evaluation of the
water body and topography, vegetative, and soil conditions on the site must
be made to ensure:



         (a)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible
pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;



         (b)   Limited visibility of structures and other
facilities as viewed from public waters;



         (c)   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site
sewage treatment;



         (d)   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that
the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of
public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.



      (2)   The city, upon consideration of the criteria listed
above and the purposes of any proposal, may attach such conditions as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section. The conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water
level;



         (b)   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be
removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted;



         (c)   Special provisions for the location, design, and
use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking
areas, vehicle parking areas, lighting, signage, and noise.



   (Q)   Sewage disposal. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment.



   (R)   Fences. In addition to the standards contained in §§
153.147et seq., the following standards must also be met on shoreland
property. No fence shall be constructed closer to the lake than the required
lake setback unless the existing home is located closer to the lake than the
required setback in which case the fence may be constructed even with the
lake side of the home.



   (S)   Nonconforming situations. Nonconforming situations shall be
regulated in accordance with §§ 153.050et seq. with the following
exceptions:



      (1)   All legally established nonconformities as of the date
of adoption of this section may continue, but they will be managed according
to applicable state statutes and other regulations of the city for the
subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of
the use and intensification of use, except that the following standards will
also apply in shoreland areas:



         (a)   On natural environment lakes, any separate lot or
parcel of record legally created and recorded prior to the adoption of this
section may be used for single-family detached dwelling purposes without a
variance if it is at least 1.5 acres in size, is 120 feet in width, and meets
all other requirements of this section;



         (b)   Lots with nonconforming areas. The maximum
impervious coverage may be 30% but no more than a total square footage of
3,750;



         (c)   Existing lots with impervious surface exceeding
25% may continue to exist so as not to exceed impervious areas at the time of
adoption of this section. Every effort must be made to lessen the impervious
surface when a structure is altered. Landscaped areas may not have an
impervious barrier installed. The removal of an impervious barrier under
landscaping shall not be considered a reduction in impervious surface.



      (2)   Decks not meeting the required setback from the ordinary
high water level without a variance may be allowed if all of the following
criteria and standards are met:



         (a)   The deck must be an accessory to a principal
structure that existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter;



         (b)   A thorough evaluation of the property and
structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the
existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;



         (c)   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high
water level shall not encroach more than 10 feet into the required setback,
ordinary high water level, and does not encroach closer than 35 feet,
whichever is more restrictive;



         (d)   The length of the deck may extend beyond the width
of the principal structure by 3 feet, but shall not be set back less than 6
feet from the property line allowing access to the deck;



         (e)   The deck shall not be roofed, walled, or screened.



   (T)   Subdivision provisions. See City of Forest Lake Subdivision
Ordinance.



   (U)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.



      (1)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider
variance, amendments, or conditional uses under this section must be sent to
the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative and
postmarked at least 10 days before the hearing. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the
subdivision/plat.



      (2)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivision/plats and
final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under this section
must be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or
the Commissioner’s designated representative and be postmarked within 10
days of the final action.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.344  AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and authority. The Forest Lake Airport Joint Airport
Zoning Board, created and established by joint action of the City Council of
Forest Lake and the Town Board of Columbus Township pursuant to the
provisions and authority of M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended from time
to time, hereby finds and declares that:



      (1)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of
users of the Forest Lake Airport, and property or occupants of land in its
vicinity, and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of
the area available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft,
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Forest Lake Airport and
the public investment therein.



      (2)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a
public nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Forest Lake Airport.



      (3)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the
most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards.



      (4)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation.



      (5)   The prevention of the creation or establishment of
airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or
marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for
which political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds.



   (B)   Short title. This section shall be known as "Forest Lake
Airport Zoning Ordinance". Those sections of land affected by this chapter
are indicated in "Exhibit A" which is attached to this section of Ord. 596.



   (C)   Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires:



      AIRPORT. The Forest Lake Airport located in Section 20, Township
32, Range 21, City of Forest Lake.



      AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point
on the usable landing area which elevation is established to be 933.0 feet
above mean sea level.



      AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land which
obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight
of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land
which is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the
airport.



      COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation.



      DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a
residence or sleeping place of 1 or more persons.



      ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN A BUILT-UP URBAN AREA
(ERN-BUUA). An area, which, if it existed on or before January 1, 1978 (for
low density structures and lots) and an area which, if it existed on or
before July 2, 1979 (all other land uses), shall be considered a conforming
use that shall not be prohibited except as provided below in (E)(2)(e)(1).
The following criteria shall be applied and considered in determining what
constitutes an ERN-BUUA:



         (a)   Location of the airport;



         (b)   Nature of the terrain within Safety Zones A and B;



         (c)   Existing land uses and character of the
neighborhood around the airport;



         (d)   Population of the community;



         (e)   That the average population density in all areas
within 1 mile of any point on a runway be equal to or greater than 1 dwelling
unit per acre;



         (f)   Population density near the airport compared with
population density in other areas of the community;



         (g)   The age and the economic, political, and social
stability of the neighborhood and the community as a whole;



         (h)   The proximity of supporting school, commercial,
religious, transportation and other facilities and their degree of
integration with residential land uses;



         (i)   Presence or absence of public utilities including,
but not limited to, public sanitary sewer system, electric service and gas
mains;



         (j)   Whether or not the factor listed in divisions (h)
and (i) above tend to make the community surrounding the airport a
self-sufficient unit;



         (k)   Whether the areas within 1 mile of the perimeter
of the airport property would be considered primarily residential in
character; and



         (l)   Other material factors deemed relevant by the
governmental unit in distinguishing the area in question as established,
residential, urban, and built-up.



      HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all
zones set forth in this section and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall
be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



      LANDING AREA. The area of the airport used for the landing,
taking off, or taxiing of aircraft.



      LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL LOT. A single lot located in an area
which is zoned for single-family or two-family residences and in which the
predominant land use is such type of residences.



      LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A single-family or two-family
home.



      NONCONFORMING USE. Any preexisting structure, tree, natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
section or an amendment hereto.



      NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing or
planned straight-in instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, and for which no precision approach
facilities are planned or indicated on an approved planning document.



      PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a
trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other
representative.



      PLANNED. As used in this section, refers only to those proposed
future airport developments that are so indicated on a planning document
having the approval for the Federal Aviation Administration, Mn/DOT, Office
of Aeronautics, and the City of Forest Lake.



      PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or
a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). Also, a runway for which a precision
instrument approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
planning document.



      RUNWAY. Any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered
area of the airport which is specifically designated and used or planned to
be used for the landing and/or taking off of aircraft.



      SLOPE. An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic
ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.



      STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by man, including,
but without limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead
transmission lines.



      TRAVERSE WAYS. For the purposes of determining height, limits as
set forth in this chapter shall be increased in height by 17 feet for
interstate highways; 15 feet for all other public roadways; 10 feet or the
height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse the road,
whichever is greater, for private roads; 23 feet for railroads; and for
waterways and all other traverse ways not previously mentioned an amount
equal to the height of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse
it.



      TREE. Any object of natural growth.



      UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
and less.



      VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument
approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an approved
planning document.



      WATER SURFACES. For the purpose of this section, shall have the
same meaning as land for the establishment of protected zones.



   (D)   Airspace obstruction zoning.



      (1)   Airspace zones. In order to carry out the purposes of
this section, as set forth above, the following airspace zones are hereby
established: Primary Zone, Horizontal Zone, Conical Zone, Approach Zone,
Precision Instrument Approach Zone, and Transitional Zone and whose locations
and dimensions are as follows.



         (a)   Primary Zone.



            1.   All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending
200 feet beyond each end of Runway 13/31.



            2.   The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline. The width of the primary surface is 500 feet for Runway 13/31.



         (b)   Horizontal Zone.



            1.   All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary horizontal surface 150 feet above the established airport
elevation, or a height of 1,083 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of
which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of
each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent
arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is 6,000 feet for
Runway 13/31.



            2.   When a 6,000-foot arc is encompassed by
tangents connecting 2 adjacent 10,000-foot arcs, the 6,000-foot arc shall be
disregarded in the construction of the perimeter of the horizontal surface.



         (c)   Conical Zone. All that land which lies directly
under an imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet as measured radically outward from the periphery of
the horizontal surface.



         (d)   Approach Zone.



            1.   All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended centerline
at each end of a runway. The inner edge of the approach surface is at the
same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the end of the primary
surface. The approach surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of 40:1
for Runway 13/31.



            2.   The approach surface expands uniformly to a
width of 3,500 feet for Runway 13/31 at a distance of 10,000 feet to the
periphery of the conical surface.



         (e)   Transitional Zone. All that land which lies
directly under an imaginary surface extending upward and outward at right
angles to the runway centerline and centerline extended at a slope of 7:1
from the sides of the primary surfaces and form the sides of the approach
surfaces until they intersect the horizontal surface or the conical surface.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision instrument approach
surface which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface,
extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the
precision instrument approach surface and at right angles to the extended
precision instrument runway centerline.



      (2)   Height restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations,
no structure or tree shall be constructed, altered, maintained, or allowed to
grow in any airspace zone created in division (D)(1) so as to project above
any of the imaginary airspace surfaces described in said division (D)(1)
hereof. Where an area is covered by more than 1 height limitation, the more
restrictive limitations shall prevail.



      (3)   Boundary limitations. The airspace obstruction height
zoning restrictions set forth in this section shall apply for a distance not
to exceed 1-1/2 miles beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary and in
that portion of an airport hazard area under the Approach Zone for a distance
not exceeding 2 miles from the airport boundary.



   (E)   Land use safety zoning.



      (1)   Safety zone boundaries. In order to carry out the
purpose of this section, as set forth above and also, in order to restrict
those uses which may be hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft
operating to and from the Forest Lake Airport, and furthermore to limit
population and building density in the runway approach areas, thereby
creating sufficient open space so as to protect life and property in case of
an accident, there are hereby created and established the following land use
safety zones:



         (a)   Safety Zone A. All land in that portion of the
approach zones of a runway, as defined in division (D)(1) hereof, which
extends outward from the end of the primary surface a distance equal to 2/3
of the planned length of the runway, which distance shall be 2,200 feet for
Runway 13/31.



         (b)   Safety Zone B. All land in that portion of the
approach zones of a runway, as defined in division (D)(1) hereof, which
extends outward from Safety Zone A a distance equal to 1/3 of the planned
length of the runway, which distance shall be 1,100 feet for Runway 13/31.



         (c)   Safety Zone C. All that land which is enclosed
within the perimeter of the Horizontal Zone, as defined in division (D)(1)
hereof, and which is not included in Zone A or Zone B.



         (d)   Exceptions, established residential neighborhoods.
The following described lands are designated as ”Established Residential
Neighborhoods in Built-Up Urban Areas,” based upon the state of development
of the areas on July 2, 1979. Land uses which were in existence in these
areas on July 2, 1979 are exempt from the use restrictions of divisions
(E)(2)(b) and (E)(2)(c) below, and are subject to the provisions of (E)(2)(e)
below.



            1.   Lots 21 through 25, according to the record
plat of Lakeview Grove on file in the office of the County Recorder in and
for Washington County, Minnesota.



            2.   Lots 1 through 5, Block 1, according to the
record plat of Clear View on file in the office of the County Recorder in and
for Washington County, Minnesota.



         (e)   Exceptions - isolated low density residential
building lots and low density residential structures. The following
properties in the aforesaid established residential neighborhoods are hereby
designated as either isolated, low-density residential building lots or
low-density residential structures. A “low-density residential structure”
shall mean a single-family or two-family home and an “isolated low-density
residential building lot” shall mean a single lot located in an area which
is zoned for single-family or two-family residences and in which the
predominant land use is such type of residence. The low-density uses which
were in existence on January 1, 1978 are subject to special provisions set
forth in division (E)(2)(e), exceptions below:



            1.   That part of Government Lot 7, Section 18,
Township 32, Range 21, Washington County, Minnesota which lies east of the
record plat of Lakeview Grove on file in the office of the County Recorder in
and for Washington County, Minnesota.



            2.   The North 264 feet of the East 330 feet of
the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 19, Township 32,
Range 21, Washington County, Minnesota.



      (2)   Use restrictions.



         (a)   General. Subject at all times to the height
restrictions set forth in division (D)(2), no use shall be made of any land
in any of the safety zones defined in division (E)(1) which creates or causes
interference with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the
airport or with radio or electronic communications between airport and
aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the
landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.



         (b)   Zone A. Subject at all times to the height
restrictions set forth in division (D)(2) and to the general restrictions
continued in division (E)(2)(a), areas designated as Zone A shall contain no
buildings, temporary structures, exposed transmission lines, or other similar
aboveground land use structural hazards, and shall be restricted to those
uses which will not create, attract, or bring together an assembly of persons
thereon. Permitted uses may include, but are not limited to, such uses as
agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry, raising of
livestock, wildlife habitat, light outdoor recreation (nonspectator),
cemeteries, and automobile parking.



         (c)   Zone B. Subject at all times to the height
restrictions set forth in division (D)(2) and to the general restrictions
contained in division (E)(2)(a), areas designated as Zone B shall be
restricted in use as follows:



            1.   Each use shall be on a site whose area shall
not be less than 3 acres.



            2.   Each use shall not create, attract, or bring
together a site population that would exceed 15 times that of the site
acreage.



            3.   Each site shall have no more than 1 building
plot upon which any number of structures may be erected.



            4.   A building plot shall be a single, uniform,
and non-contrived area, whose shape is uncomplicated and whose area shall not
exceed the following minimum ratios with respect to the total site area:



 




Site Area at Least (Acres)

 

But Less Than (Acres)

 

Ratio of Site Area to Bldg. Plot Area

 

Building Plot Area (Sq. Ft.)

 

Max. Site Population (15 persons/A)



3
 
4
 
12:1
 
10,900
 
45


12:1


4
 
6
 
10:1
 
17,400
 
60


10:1


6
 
10
 
8:1
 
32,700
 
90


8:1


10
 
20
 
6:1
 
72,600
 
150


6:1


20
 
and up
 
4:1
 
218,000
 
300




 



            5.   The following uses are specifically
prohibited in Zone B: churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums,
hotels and motels, trailer courts, campgrounds, and other places of frequent
public or semi-public assembly.



         (d)   Zone C. Zone C is subject only to height
restrictions set forth in division (D)(2), and to the general restrictions
contained in division (E)(2)(a).



         (e)   Exemptions, established residential neighborhoods.



            1.   Land uses which existed as of July 2, 1979 in
the Established Residential Neighborhoods set forth in division (E)(1)(d)
above, and as shown on the Zoning Map, are subject to the height restrictions
of division (D)(2) and the general restrictions of division (E)(2)(a). Land
uses which come into existence after July 2, 1979 are treated as though they
were not in a designated established residential neighborhood and are subject
to the Zone A or Zone B restrictions as the case may be.



            2.   Land uses in established residential
neighborhoods, which violate any of the following restrictions are prohibited
as safety hazards and must be acquired, altered, or removed at public
expense. Those conditions are as follows:



               a.   The following land uses if they exist
in Safety Zones A and B and in an ERN-BUUA are considered by the Commissioner
to constitute airport safety hazards so severe, either to persons on the
ground or to the air-traveling public, or both, that they must be prohibited
under local airport zoning ordinances:



                  i.   Any structure which a person or
persons customarily use as a principal residence and which is located
entirely inside Safety Zone A within 1,000 feet of the end of the Primary
Zone;



                  ii.   Any structure which a person or
persons customarily use as a principal residence and which is located
entirely within Safety Zones A and B and which penetrates an imaginary
approach surface as defined by division (D)(1);



                  iii.   Any land use in Safety Zone A
or B which violates any of the following standards:



                     A.   The land use must not
create or cause interference with the operation of radio or electronic
facilities on the airport or with radio or electronic communications between
the airport and aircraft;



                     B.   The land use must not make
it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other
lights;



                     C.   The land use must not
result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport or impair visibility
in the vicinity of the airport.



                  iv.   Any isolated residential
building lot zoned for single-family or two-family residences on which any
structure, if built, would be prohibited by divisions (E)(2)(e)2.a.i., ii. or
iii. above. An "isolated" residential building lot is one located in the area
in which the predominant land use is single-family or two-family residential
structures; and



                  v.   Any other land use which
presents, in the opinion of the Commissioner, a material danger to the
landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft or to the safety of persons on
the ground. In making such a determination, the Commissioner shall consider
the following factors:



                     A.   Possibility that the land
use may contribute to or cause a collision of 2 or more aircraft or an
aircraft and some other object;



                     B.   Possibility that the land
use may, in case of an aircraft accident, cause an explosion, fire, or the
release of harmful or noxious fumes, gases, or substances;



                     C.   Tendency of the land use to
increase the number of persons that would be injured in case of an aircraft
accident;



                     D.   Effect of the land use on
availability of clear areas for emergency landings; and



                     E.   Flight patterns around the
airport, the extent of use of the runway in question, the type of aircraft
using the airport, whether the runways are lighted, whether the airport is
controlled, and other similar factors.



      (3)   Boundary limitations. The land use zoning restrictions
set forth in this section shall apply for a distance not to exceed 1 mile
beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary and in that portion of an
airport hazard area under the approach zone for a distance not exceeding 2
miles from the airport boundary.



   (F)   Airport Zoning Map. The several zones herein established are
shown on the Forest Lake Airport Zoning Map consisting of 3 sheets, prepared
by SEH Inc., and dated January 1, 2002, attached hereto and made a part
hereof, which map, together with such amendments thereto as may from time to
time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone
boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby
adopted as part of this chapter.



   (G)   Nonconforming uses. Regulations not retroactive. The
regulations prescribed by this section shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree
not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this section,
or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to the effective date of this section, and is diligently
prosecuted and completed within 2 years thereof.



   (H)   Permits.



      (1)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in
divisions (H)(1)(a) and (H)(1)(b) hereunder, no material change shall be made
in the use of land and no structure shall be erected, altered, or otherwise
established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have
been applied for and granted by the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter
provided for. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose of
which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted.



         (a)   However, a permit for a tree or structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the
Horizontal and Conical Zones or in any Approach and Transitional Zones beyond
a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when
such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic
features, would extend the height or land use limit prescribed for the
respective zone.



         (b)   Nothing contained in this foregoing exception
shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction,
alteration, or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height
limitations established by this section as set forth in division (D) and the
land use limitations set forth in division (E).



      (2)   Existing uses. Before any existing use or structure may
be replaced, substantially altered or impaired, or rebuilt within any zone
established herein, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement,
change, or repair. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was
on the effective date of this section or any amendments thereto, or than it
is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted.



      (3)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the
Zoning Administrator determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has
been abandoned or more than 80% torn down, deteriorated, or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
Whether application is made for a permit under this paragraph or not, the
Zoning Administrator may order the owner of the abandoned or partially
destroyed nonconforming structure, at his or her own expense, to lower,
remove, reconstruct, or equip the same in the manner necessary to conform to
the provisions of this section. In the event the owner of the nonconforming
structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order for 10 days after
receipt of written notice of such order, the Zoning Administrator may, by
appropriate legal action, proceed to have the abandoned or partially
destroyed nonconforming structure lowered, removed, reconstructed, or
equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof against the land on which
the structure is or was located. Unless such an assessment is paid within 90
days from the service of notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum
shall bear interested at the rate of 8% per annum from the date the cost and
expense is incurred until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as
are general taxes.



   (I)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height
of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his or her
property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this section
may apply to the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter provided for, for a
variance from such regulations. If a person submits an application for a
variance by certified mail and the Administrator fails to grant or deny the
variance within 4 months after receiving the application, the variance shall
be deemed to be granted. When the variance is granted by reason of the
failure of the Administrator to act on the variance, the person receiving the
variance shall notify the Administrator and the Commissioner by certified
mail that the variance has been granted. The applicant shall include a copy
of the original application for the variance with this notice to the
Commissioner. The variance shall be effective 60 days after this notice is
received by the Commissioner subject to any action taken by the Commissioner
pursuant to M.S. § 360.063, Subd. 6a, as it may be amended from time to
time. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary
to the public interest but to substantial justice and be in accordance with
the spirit of this section, provided any variance so allowed may be subject
to any reasonable conditions that the Administrator or Commissioner may deem
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section.



   (J)   Hazard marking and lighting.



      (1)   Nonconforming uses. The owner of any nonconforming
structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation,
and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed
necessary by the Zoning Administrator to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards.
Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of the City of Forest Lake.



      (2)   Permits and variances. Any permit or variance deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this section and be reasonable to
effectuate the purpose of this section and be reasonable in the
circumstances, and granted by the Zoning Administrator or Board, shall
require the owner of the structure or tree in question, at his or her own
expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as
may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.



   (K)   Airport Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator of the City of Forest Lake to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the Zoning Administrator upon a form furnished by him or her.
Permit applications shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him
or her in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein. Variance
applications shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Administrator for
action by the Board hereinafter provided for.



   (L)   Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   Establishment. The Board of Appeals, City of Forest
Lake, shall serve as the Board of Adjustment for the Forest Lake Airport
Zoning Ordinance.



      (2)   Powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise
the following powers:



         (a)   To hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in
the enforcement of this section.



         (b)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms
of this section upon which such Board of Adjustment under such regulations
may be required to pass.



         (c)   To hear and decide specific variances.



      (3)   Procedures.



         (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its
governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this section.
Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine.
The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the
Board of Adjustment shall be public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be a
public record.



         (b)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written
findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted
and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or
modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes
before it under the provisions of this section.



         (c)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members
of the Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass under this section, or to effect any variation in this section.



   (M)   Appeals.



      (1)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any
decision of the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of
this section may appeal to the Board of Adjustment. Such appeals may also be
made by any governing body of a municipality, county, or airport zoning
board, which is of the opinion that a decision of the Zoning Administrator is
an improper application of this chapter as it concerns such governing body or
board.



      (2)   All appeals hereunder must be commenced within 30 days
of the Zoning Administrator’s decision, by filing with the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
In addition, any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decisions
of the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of this section
who desires to appeal such decision shall submit an application for a
variance by certified mail to the members of the Board of Adjustment in the
manner set forth in M.S. § 360.068, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time
to time.



      (3)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the
Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that
by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to
the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.



      (4)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.



      (5)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the
provisions of this section, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify
the order, requirement, decision or determine appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under
the circumstances, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning
Administrator.



   (N)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer
affected by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any governing body of
a municipality, county, or airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that
a decision of the Board of Adjustment is illegal may present to the District
Court of Washington County a verified petition setting forth that the
decision or action is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the
grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court
within 30 days after the decision is filed in the office of the Board of
Adjustment. The petitioner must exhaust the remedies provided in this section
before availing him or herself of the right to petition a court as provided
by this section.



   (O)   Penalties. Every person who shall construct, establish,
substantially change, alter or repair any existing structure or use, or
permit the growth of any tree without having complied with the provision of
this chapter or who, having been granted a permit or variance under the
provisions of this section, shall construct, establish, substantially change
or substantially alter or repair any existing growth or structure or permit
the growth of any tree, except as permitted by such permit or variance, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both. Each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The Airport
Zoning Administrator may enforce all provisions of this section through such
proceedings for injunctive relief and other relief as may be proper under the
laws of M.S. § 360.073, as it may be amended from time to time, and other
applicable law.



   (P)   Conflicts. Where there exists a conflict between any of the
regulations or limitations prescribed in this section and any other
regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect
to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter,
the more stringent limitation or regulation shall govern and prevail.



   (Q)   Severability.



      (1)   In any case in which the provision of this section,
although generally reasonable, is held by a court to interfere with the use
or enjoyment of a particular structure or parcel of land to such an extent,
or to be so onerous in their application to such a structure or parcel of
land, as to constitute a taking or deprivation of that property in violation
of the Constitution of this state or the Constitution of the United States,
such holding shall not affect the application of this section as to other
structures and parcels of land, and to this end the provisions of this
section are declared to be severable.



      (2)   Should any section or provision of this chapter be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter passed and adopted after public
hearing by the Forest Lake Airport Joint Airport Zoning Board this 20 day of
November, 2002.



(Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



RESPONSIBILITIES, ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS



§ 153.360  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.



   The responsibilities of the Community Development Department as they
relate to administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be as follows:



   (A)   Administer and enforce this chapter;



   (B)   Create and maintain a system of current and permanent records
of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
conditional uses, variances, appeals, and applications;



   (C)   Receive, file, and forward all applications for appeals,
variances, conditional uses, amendments, or other matters to the designated
official bodies;



   (D)   Determine the completeness of applications. Notify applicants
of incomplete applications within 15 days of receipt of the application;



   (E)   Maintain a system of records to ensure that the City Council
acts on applications within 60 days of being deemed complete. Notify the
applicant in writing if the city needs an additional 60 days to act on the
application;



   (F)   Provide public notice of all applications that require a
public hearing;



   (G)   Act as liaison between the Planning Commission and City
Council;



   (H)   Review and determine that all building permits, certificates
of compliance, and certificates of occupancy comply with the provisions of
this chapter;



   (I)   Periodically inspect buildings and land uses in the city for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



   (J)   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a
provision of this chapter indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it and a time frame for compliance;



   (K)   Initiate, in the name of the city, appropriate actions or
proceedings against any violator of the provisions of this chapter as
provided by law as may be necessary to insure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions. Cooperate with the City Attorney in the
prosecution of complaints.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 549, passed 5-22-2006; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.361  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   The responsibilities of the City Administrator as they relate to this
chapter shall be to implement City Council policies and to administer the
affairs of city government.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.362  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The responsibilities of the Planning Commission as they relate to the
administration of this chapter shall be to assist and advise the City Council
in administration of the City Zoning Code to conduct public hearings on
matters as required by provisions of the zoning/subdivision ordinances, and
any other matters referred to it by the City Council or by ordinance.
Following the required public hearings, the Planning Commission shall, to the
extent possible, make its reports and recommendations to the City Council.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.363  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   The responsibilities of the City Council as they relate to the
administration of this chapter shall be to exercise the legislative power of
the city, to determine all matters of policy to act on recommendations of the
Planning Commission and other boards, and to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.364  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS AND FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.



   (A)   To guarantee completion of exterior facilities and amenities
as shown on the approved plans or any conditions imposed as part of an
application granted under this chapter, applicants may be required to provide
a financial guarantee and/or development agreement before the issuance of a
building permit.



   (B)   The content of the development agreement must be approved by
the city and must define the required work, reflect the terms to the required
guarantee for the performance of the work by the applicant, and provide for
the forfeiture of the financial guarantee to the city to correct a default or
to reimburse the city for the cost of enforcement measures. Landscaping
improvements may not be deemed complete until the city has verified
survivability of all required plantings through 2 winter seasons.



   (C)   Any financial guarantee required by the development agreement
guarantees conformance and compliance with the conditions of the application
approval and this chapter.



   (D)   The amount of the financial guarantee must be established by
the city, based upon an itemized estimate of the cost of all required work as
documented by the applicant. A cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of
credit or similar financial security as approved by the City Attorney must be
in the amount of 125% of the approved estimated cost.



   (E)   The applicant may submit a separate financial guarantee for
that portion of the required work consisting solely of landscaping
improvements with another financial guarantee for all other exterior
amenities and improvements that comprise the work.



   (F)   The city may hold a financial guarantee for a period of time
as determined by the development agreement. The financial guarantee may be
periodically reduced and ultimately released by the City Council.



   (G)   Failure to comply with the conditions of the application
approval, the development agreement or this chapter may result in forfeiture
of the financial guarantee to the extent necessary to achieve compliance with
the approved plan.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)



§ 153.365  PROCEDURES TO APPEAL DECISIONS OF THE CITY.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the procedures to appeal
decisions of the city are as follows:



   (A)   The following appeals from decisions of the city are allowed:



      (1)   To the Planning Commission for decisions made by the
Community Development Director.



      (2)   To the City Council for final decisions made by the
Planning Commission.



   (B)   Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision or action may
appeal to the appropriate entity by filing a written notice with the City
Administrator within 7 days of the date of the decision stating the specific
grounds on which the appeal is made. If the last day of the 7-day period in
which the appeal is to be filed falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday,
the period runs until the end of the next day that is not one of the
aforementioned days.



   (C)   The entity hearing the appeal shall cause notice of the
hearing on the appeal to be mailed to all appellants at least 10 days prior
to the hearing. In the event the matter involves a determination of district
boundary lines or interpretations of the text of this chapter, the notice
shall also be published in the official newspaper once at least 10 days prior
to the hearing.



   (D)   The entity hearing the appeal shall expeditiously render its
decision with written findings supporting the decision.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010; Am. Ord. 638,
passed 4-14-2014)



§ 153.998  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   General. The violation of any provision of this chapter, or
the violation of the conditions or provisions of any permit issued pursuant
to this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, the
violator shall be subject to a fine, imprisonment, or both as provided in the
City Code, plus, in either case, the cost of prosecution.



   (B)   Penalties. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation
and every day on which such violation occurs or continues, constitutes a
separate offense.



   (C)   Application to city personnel. The failure of any officer or
employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this chapter
shall not subject the officer or employee to a penalty imposed for violation
unless a penalty is specifically provided for the failure.



   (D)   Equitable relief. In the event of a violation or the
threatened violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision or
condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the city, in addition
to other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation or threatened violation
and to impose a lien upon the affected property for the cost thereof to be
collected as a special assessment.



(Ord. 537, passed 11-8-2004; Am. Ord. 596, passed 2-8-2010)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 154:  FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   154.001   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose



   154.002   General provisions



   154.003   Establishment of overlay zoning districts



   154.004   Floodway Overlay District (FW)



   154.005   Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF)



   154.006   General Flood Plain Overlay District



   154.007   Subdivisions



   154.008   Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges



   154.009   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and
placement of recreational vehicles



   154.010   Administration



   154.011   Nonconforming uses



   154.012   Amendments



 



   154.999   Penalty



§ 154.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of
Minnesota has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and Ch. 462, as they may be amended from time
to time, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of
the City of Forest Lake, Minnesota does ordain as follows:



   (B)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of property and health and safety
hazards, which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.



      (2)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter is
based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent
with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.



      (3)   National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This
chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -
78, as amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.



   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those
losses described in § 154.001(B)(1) by provisions contained herein.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)



§ 154.002  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to
all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the Official Zoning
Map and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of
the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain Districts. This chapter
does not permit any use, activity or subdivision of property which is not
permitted in the underlying zone pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 150
through 153 of the City Code.



   (B)   Establishment of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map
together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. The attached material shall
include the Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map panels therein numbered
27163C0020E, 27163C0040E, 27163C0045E, 27163C0107E, 27163C0109E, 27163C0126E,
27163C0127E, 27163C0128E, 27163C0129E, 27163C0131E, 27163C0132E, 27163C0133E
and 27163C0134E, all dated February 3, 2010 and prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the
Office of the City Clerk and the Community Development Director.



   (C)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than 1 foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.



   (D)   Interpretation.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



      (2)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning
Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary
interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional
(100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at
the time the community adopted its initial flood plain chapter or on the date
of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area within the
100-year flood plain if earlier, and other available technical data. Persons
contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and
to submit technical evidence.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by
this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other
regulations inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.



   (F)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



   (G)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of
this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.



   (H)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into division (B) above may include flood plain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of
this chapter. If any of these flood plain land areas are annexed into the
city after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed flood
plain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately
upon the date of annexation into the city.



   (I)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.



      BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having
its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all 4 sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.



      CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed
in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes.



      EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the
location of floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a
stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



      FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or
in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally
dry areas.



      FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



      FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside of the
floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used
in the Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas.



      FLOOD PLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regional flood.



      FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes,
or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily
for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



      FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR.



      MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in 1 or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational
vehicle.”



      OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction, of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris earned by such water.



      PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. The primary or predominant use for
which a lot and structure, if located thereon, is conducted or maintained, as
contrasted to an accessory use or structure.



      REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between 2 consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).  A vehicle that is built on a single
chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use, For the purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE shall be synonymous with the term “travel trailer/travel vehicle.”



      REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of
the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
“base flood” 1% annual chance flood or 100-year flood elevation used in a
flood insurance study.



      REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. Shall be an elevation no
lower than 1 foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any
increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that
result from designation of a floodway.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes,
recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in this
chapter and other similar items.



      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period,
any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.



         (b)   Any alteration of an historic structure provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as an historic structure. For the purpose of this chapter, HISTORIC STRUCTURE
shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.



      VARIANCE. A modification of a specific permitted development
standard required in an official control including this chapter to allow an
alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as
defined in the city’s Zoning Code.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)



§ 154.003  ESTABLISHMENT OF OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Overlay districts:



      (1)   Floodway Overlay District. The Floodway District shall
include those areas designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 154.002(B). For lakes, wetlands and other basins, the Floodway
District shall include those areas designated as Zone AE (that do not have a
floodway designated) and Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels
adopted in § 154.002(B) that are below the ordinary high water level as
defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Flood Fringe Overlay District. The Flood Fringe District
shall include those areas designated as floodway fringe, which shall include
the areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, adopted in § 154.002(B) as
being within Zone AE but being located outside of the floodway. For lakes,
wetlands and other basins, the Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas designated as Zone AE (that do not have a floodway designated) and Zone
A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in § 154.002(B) that are
below 1% annual chance flood elevation (100-year flood elevation) but above
the ordinary high water level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14, as it
may be amended from time to time.



      (3)   General Flood Plain Overlay District. The General Flood
Plain District shall include those areas designated as Zone A and Zone AE
(without a floodway designated) on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in §
154.002(B) which are not subject to criteria in (A)(1) and (A)(2) above.



   (B)   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain Overlay
Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in §§
154.004 through 154.006 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In
addition, a caution is provided here that:



      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes
and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically § 154.009.



      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming
structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically § 154.011.



      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed
structures must be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques
must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as specified in the general provisions of this chapter and
specifically as stated in § 154.010 of this chapter.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.004  FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (FW).



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, horticulture,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      (2)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving
ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas,
parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas,
and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.



      (3)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play
areas.



   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.



      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.



      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district.



      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.



   (C)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A)
above and the uses listed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(8) below.



      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other
materials.



      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water
control structures.



      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines,
and pipelines.



      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.



      (6)   Placement of fill or construction of fences.



      (7)   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of this chapter.



      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes
and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect
agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the
10-year frequency flood event.



   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.



      (1)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill
(including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of
materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use
that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood
or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (2)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the
procedures and standards contained in § 154.010(D) of this chapter.



      (3)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the
underlying zoning district.



      (4)   Fill:



         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar
materials deposited or stored in the flood plain shall be protected from
erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.



         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations
shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan
is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to
the plan.



         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division
(D)(4)(b) immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel
operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials
which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional
flood but only after the City Council has received an appropriate plan which
assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood
warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title registered
with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.



      (5)   Accessory structures:



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for
human habitation.



         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of flood waters:



            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow; and



            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be
placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or
structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood
proofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must
be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:



            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;



            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a
structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood proofed; and



            3.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
pressure, there must be a minimum of 2 “automatic” openings in the
outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There
must be openings on at least 2 sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than 1 foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the
structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding
will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.



      (6)   Storage of materials and equipment:



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.



      (7)   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall
be subject to the provisions of M.S. Ch. 103G, as it may be amended from time
to time. City-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove
areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.



      (8)   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway
shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.005  FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (FF).



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe District
“permitted uses” listed in division (B) of this section and the
“standards for all flood fringe uses” listed in division (E) of this
section.



   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.



      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation
for structures shall be no lower than 1 foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.



      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory
structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500
square feet at its largest projection may be internally flood proofed in
accordance with § 154.004(D)(5)(c).



      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time
in excess of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division (B)(1) of this
section.



      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be
elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (5)   The provisions of division (E) of this section shall
apply.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill
or flood proofed in accordance with divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this
section and/or any use of land that does not comply with the standards in
divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section shall only be allowable as a
conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the
standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in divisions (D)
and (E) of this section and § 154.010(D) of this chapter.



   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.



      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill
may be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of
stilts, pilings, parallel walls, and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed
area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or
lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least 1 side of
the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with
flood resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are
subject to the following additional standards:



         (a)   Design and certification. The structure’s design
and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design
standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.



         (b)   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed
areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under
garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must
stipulate:



            1.   A minimum area of openings in the walls where
internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be
a minimum of 2 openings on at least 2 sides of the structure and the bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade. The automatic
openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than 1 square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would
suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and



            2.   That the enclosed area will be designed of
flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications
in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access,
parking of vehicles or storage.



      (2)   Basements, as defined by § 154.002(I) of this chapter,
shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



         (b)   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with division (D)(3) of this section.



      (3)   All areas of non-residential structures including
basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall
be flood proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing
must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or
FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.



      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as
on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads,
dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an
erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is
enforcing a state approved shoreland management chapter. In the absence of a
state approved shoreland chapter, the plan must clearly specify methods to be
used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the
100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by
a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable
to the City Council. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for
removal of the material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time
exists.



      (5)   Storage of materials and equipment:



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.



      (6)   The provisions of division (E) of this section shall
also apply.



   (E)   Standards for all flood fringe uses.



      (1)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access
at or above an elevation not more than 2 feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board
of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.



      (2)   Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards,
railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities
to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when
multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the
product number exceeds 4 upon occurrence of the regional flood.



      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be
taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along
streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such
as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements
set out in division (E)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in flood plain areas.



      (4)   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established
criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation -
FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation
if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



      (5)   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit
has not been specified on the Official Zoning Map.



      (6)   Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in §
154.009(C).



      (7)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.006  GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   The uses listed in § 154.004(A) of this chapter shall
be permitted uses.



      (2)   All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood
fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to division (B) below. Section 154.004
shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and § 154.005
shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.



   (B)   Procedures for floodway and flood fringe determinations for
streams within the General Flood Plain District.



      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other
approval from the city within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant
shall be required to furnish the following information as deemed necessary by
the Community Development Department for the determination of the regulatory
flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Overlay District.



         (a)   A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the
channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development,
and high water information, if determined to be necessary by the city.



         (b)   Survey showing elevations or contours of the
ground, pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location,
and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site,
and the location and elevations of streets.



         (c)   Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation
upstream and downstream, and soil types, if determined to be necessary by the
city.



         (d)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the
channel or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction
from the proposed development, if determined to be necessary by the city.



         (e)   Other necessary information as requested by the
city.



      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit 1 or more
copies of the above information to a designated engineer or other expert
person or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed
use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota
Regulations 1983, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The
designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed
technical evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural
Resources’ Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The
designated engineer or expert shall:



         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.



         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the
regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and
overbank areas.



         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store
the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than .5 foot. A
lesser stage increase than .5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the
additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal
degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be
assumed in computing floodway boundaries.



      (3)   The Community Development Department, Building
Department, and/or City Engineer must formally accept the technical
evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary
or deny the permit application. The city may submit the application and all
supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the Department of Natural Resources. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries have been determined, the Community Development
Department shall process the permit application consistent with the
applicable provisions of §§ 154.004 and 154.005 of this chapter.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.007  SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Land suitability review criteria. No land shall be subdivided
which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water
supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the flood plain
districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway
District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply
with the provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the
subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than 2 feet below
the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood
plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory
flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads
shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting
documents.



   (B)   FIoodway/flood fringe determinations in the General Flood
Plain District. In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide
the information required in § 154.006(B) of this chapter to determine the
100-year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries
and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.



   (C)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.008  PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.



   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as
gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood
plain shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or
elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and
bridges to be located within the flood plain shall comply with §§ 154.004
and 154.005 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these
transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or
safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of
the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower
elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not
endanger the public health or safety.



   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where
public utilities are not provided:



      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not
be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any
sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s current
statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined
to be in compliance with this section.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.009  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by § 154.007 of this chapter.



   (B)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are
located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may
be placed only if elevated in compliance with § 154.005 of this chapter. If
vehicular road access for preexisting manufactured home parks is not provided
in accordance with § 154.005(E)(1), then replacement manufactured homes will
not be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency
plan acceptable to the city.



      (1)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



   (C)   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (C)(1) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) below.



      (1)   Exemption. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
division (C)(2) below and further they meet the following criteria:



         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use.



         (b)   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks
and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions
attached to it.



         (c)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must
be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.



      (2)   Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles:



         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record.



         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds.



         (c)   Existing condominium type associations,



      (3)   Recreational vehicles exempted in division (C)(1) above
lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for
a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an
accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a
new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing
requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§ 154.004 and
154.005 of this chapter. There shall be no development or improvement on the
parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of
the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.



      (4)   New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding 5 units or dwelling sites
shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will
be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said
recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory
flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists
in accordance with § 154.005(E)(1) of this chapter. No fill placed in the
floodway to meet the requirements of this section shall increase flood stages
of the 100-year or regional flood.



         (b)   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not
meeting the criteria of division (C)(4)(a) above may, as an alternative, be
allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions
and the provisions of § 154.010(D) of the chapter. The applicant must submit
an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during
the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and
personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the
provisions of divisions (C)(1)(a) and (C)(1)(b) of this section will be met.
All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational
vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or
contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with § 154.008(C) of
this chapter.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.010  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Community Development Department. The Community Development
Department or other official designated by the City Council shall administer
and enforce this chapter. If the Community Development Department finds a
violation of the provisions of this chapter the Community Development
Department shall notify the person responsible for such violation in
accordance with the procedures stated in § 154.999 of this chapter.



   (B)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Community
Development Department in conformity with the provisions of this chapter
shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, modification,
rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of
any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of
use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam,
fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a
nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged
by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the placement of
fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment
within the flood plain.



      (2)   Application for permit. Following established process in
place per the City Zoning and Building Codes an application for a permit
shall be made in duplicate to the Community Development Department on forms
furnished by the Community Development Department and shall include the
following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed
structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing
in relation to the stream channel.



      (3)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the
Community Development Department shall determine that the applicant has
obtained all necessary state and federal permits.



      (4)   Certificate of compliance and building permit for a new,
altered, or nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance or building permit shall have
been issued by the Community Development Department stating that the use of
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications,
plans, permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Building
permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued
on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by § 154.999 of this
chapter.



      (6)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood proofing measures shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.



      (7)   Record of first floor elevation. The Community
Development Department shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions
to existing structures in the flood plain. The Community Development
Department shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures
or alterations and additions to structures are flood proofed.



      (8)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Community
Development Department shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior
to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public
waters pursuant to M.S. Ch. 103G, as it may be amended from time to time,
this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago
Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



      (9)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or
decrease the 100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not
later than 6 months after the date such supporting information becomes
available, the Community Development Department shall notify the Chicago
Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical
or scientific data.



   (C)   Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   The City Council shall act as the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals.



      (2)   Administrative review. The Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.



      (3)   Variances. Applications for variances shall be in
accordance with § 153.036 of the City Code and may be granted in cases where
it will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those
circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances
unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the Zoning
Code. In the granting of such variance, the City Council shall clearly
identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the
criteria specified in this chapter and Chapter 153 of the City Code. No
variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in
that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory
flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower
than those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:



         (a)   Variances shall not be issued by the city within
any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.



         (b)   Variances shall only be issued by the city upon
(i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure
to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters.



         (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



         (d)   The city shall submit by mail to the Commissioner
of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances
sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least 10
days notice of the hearing.



         (e)   A copy of all decisions granting variances shall
be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10 days
of such action.



      (4)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of
Adjustment may be made, and as specified in the city’s official controls
and also by Minnesota Statutes.



      (5)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Community
Development Department shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) The
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as
high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and 2) Such construction below the
100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The
city shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or
biennial report submitted to the administrator of the National Flood
Insurance Program.



   (D)   Conditional uses. Applications for a conditional use permit
shall be processed in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in
§ 153.034 of the City Code.



      (1)   Additional procedures to be followed by the Planning
Commission and City Council in passing on conditional use permit applications
within all flood plain districts are:



         (a)   The applicant shall be required to furnish such of
the following information and additional information as deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission and City Council for determining the suitability of
the particular site for the proposed use:



            1.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and
the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and



            2.   Specifications for building construction and
materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.



         (b)   Transmit 1 copy of the information described in
division (D)(1)(a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency
for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project
in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage
to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical
matters.



         (c)   The city shall submit by mail to the Commissioner
of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed conditional use
sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least 10
days notice of the hearing.



         (d)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the
designated engineer or expert, the City Council shall determine the specific
flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in
relation to the flood hazard.



      (4)   Factors upon which the decision of the City Council
shall be based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the City
Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of
this chapter, and:



         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.



         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures.



         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions.



         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community.



         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location.



         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use.



         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area.



         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.



         (l)   Such other factors which are relevant to the
purposes of this chapter.



      (5)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon
consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this chapter,
the City Council shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional
use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply
facilities.



         (b)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and
operation.



         (c)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and
deed restrictions.



         (d)   Requirements for construction of channel
modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.



         (e)   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the
State Building Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the flood proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



      (6)   A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits
shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10
days of such action.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.011  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Nonconforming uses and structures shall be subject to the
terms and conditions of §§ 153.051 and 153.053 of the City Code.



   (B)   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood
damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the
regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation
on fill or flood proofings techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 flood proofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further
restricted in this chapter.



   (C)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §
154.002(I) of this chapter, from any combination of a building addition to
the outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of
an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the
existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements of §§ 154.004 or
154.005 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.012  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall
not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the
elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he or she determines
that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended
use.



   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the
Official Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must
meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions
and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given 10 days written notice of all
hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and said notice shall
include a draft of the chapter amendment or technical study under
consideration.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional
uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by
law.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Such actions may include but are not limited to:



      (1)   In responding to a suspected chapter violation, the
Community Development Department and City Council may utilize the full array
of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to
prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for
corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for
denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The city must act
in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct chapter
violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in
the National Flood Insurance Program.



      (2)   When a chapter violation is either discovered by or
brought to the attention of the Community Development Department it shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of
the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible,
this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources’ and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along
with the city’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree
possible.



      (3)   The Community Development Department shall notify the
suspected party of the requirements of this chapter and all other official
controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these
controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development,
the Community Development Department may order the construction or
development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted
by the city. If the construction or development is already completed, then
the Community Development Department may either: (1) issue an order
identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time
period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls; or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
30 days.



      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the Community Development Department within the specified period of time,
each additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of
this chapter and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Community Development
Department shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period notify
the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 597, passed 7-12-2010)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES



      II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Description






410

 

- -19-

 

Granting to Northern States Power Company, its successors and assigns
permission to construct, operate, repair and maintain in the city an electric
distribution system and transmission lines for a period extending to December
31, 1988.




411

 

- -19-

 

Granting to Northern States Power Company, its successors and assigns
permission to erect a gas distribution system for the purpose of installing,
enlarging, operating, repairing and maintaining in the city the necessary gas
pipes, mains and appurtenances for the transmission or distribution of gas to
the city for a period extending to December 31, 1998.




446

 

9-13-1993

 

Granting Forest Lake Cable Commission authority to enforce cable television.




619

 

1-28-2013

 

Granting to Northern States Power Company, its successors and assigns,
permission to construct, operate, repair and maintain in the city an electric
distribution system and transmission lines, including necessary poles, lines,
fixtures and appurtenances for the furnishing of electric energy for a period
of 20 years.




620

 

1-28-2013

 

Implementing an electric service franchise fee on Northern States Power
Company, its successors and assigns, for providing electric service within
the city.




621

 

1-28-2013

 

Granting to Northern States Power Company, its successors and assigns,
permission to erect a gas distribution system for the purpose of
constructing, operating, repairing and maintaining in the city the necessary
gas pipes, mains and appurtenances for the transmission or distribution of
gas in the city for a period of 20 years.




622

 

1-28-2013

 

Implementing a gas service franchise fee on Northern States Power Company,
its successors and assigns, for providing gas service within the city.




623

 

1-28-2013

 

Granting to Connexus Energy, its successors and assigns, permission to
construct, operate, repair and maintain in the city an electric distribution
system and transmission lines, including necessary poles, lines, fixtures and
appurtenances for the furnishing of electric energy for a period of 20 years.




624

 

1-28-2013

 

Implementing an electric service franchise fee on Connexus Energy, its
successors and assigns, for providing electric service within the city.




631

 

11-18-2013

 

Granting a franchise to Midcontinent Communications to construct, operate and
maintain a cable system in the city for a period of 15 years.




633

 

11-18-2013

 

Granting a franchise to Midcontinent Communications to construct, operate and
maintain a cable system in the city for a period of 15 years.





 


 






 



TABLE II:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Description






501

 

11-13-2000

 

Rezoning the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 7,
Township 32 North, Range 21 West and the north 33 feet of the northwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 32 North, Range 21
West from R-R Rural Residential District to R-1 One Family Residential
District.




506

 

3-26-2001

 

Rezoning that part of the south 330 feet of the southwest quarter of the
southwest quarter, Section 6, Township 32, Range 21, lying easterly of the
center line of County State Aid Highway No. 2 (also known as Ethan Road
North), also that part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 7, Township 32, Range 21 from R-1A One Family Residential to B-3A
General Business.




507

 

3-19-2001

 

Rezoning all that part of Walker and Goodine’s Addition to the village
lying south of the centerline of 9th Avenue SW extended west to the
centerline of 4th Street SW and est to the centerline of the abandoned
Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-way; west of the centerline of the
abandoned Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-way; north of the south line
of Section 8, Township 32, Range 21; and east of the centerline of 4th Street
SW from R-1 Single Family Residential to R-4 Townhouse District.




526

 

9-22-2003

 

Rezoning Outlot A, Evergreen Ridge, from B-3A General Business District to
B-3 General Business District.





 


 

Rezoning Outlot B, Evergreen Ridge, from B-3A General Business District to
R-4 Townhouse Zoning District.




537

 

11-8-2004

 

Adopts official zoning map of the city.




551

 

6-26-2006

 

Rezoning Outlot D, Deponti 2nd Addition from I Industrial District to MXR-1
Mixed Residential Single-Family and Townhouse District.





 


 

Rezoning Outlots F, G and H, Deponti 2nd Addition from I Industrial District
to MF Multi- Family Residential District.





 


 

Rezoning Outlot L, Deponti 2nd Addition from MXR-1 Mixed Residential District
Single-Family and Townhouse District to NC Neighborhood Commercial District.





 


 

Rezoning Lots 1 and 2, Block 1, Deponti 2nd Addition from MXR-1 Mixed
Residential Single-Family and Townhouse District to I Industrial District.




553

 

8-14-2006

 

Rezoning Lot 1, Block 1, Gateway Green 2nd Addition from B-1 Limited Business
District to MXR-3 Mixed Residential District.





 


 

Rezoning Lot 2, Block 1, Gateway Green 2nd Addition from B-1 Limited Business
District to B-3 Highway Business District.




574

 

7-14-2008

 

Rezoning certain property in Walker and Goodine’s Addition from MXR-2
Single and Two-Family Residential District to MF Multiple-Family Residential
District.




611

 

9-12-2012

 

Rezoning Lot 10, Block 5 of J.W. Houle’s Addition from MXR-2 Single and Two
Family Residential to B-1 Broadway Business District.




612

 

9-12-2012

 

Rezoning the following property from I Industrial District to B-3 Limited
Industrial Business District:





 


 

Lot 2, Block 1, Deponti 1st Addition;





 


 

Lot 1, Block 2, Deponti 1st Addition;





 


 

Lot 1, Block 1, Deponti 3rd Addition;





 


 

Outlet B, Deponti 3rd Addition;





 


 

Lot 1, Block 2, Deponti 3rd Addition;





 


 

Lot 2, Block 2, Deponti 3rd Addition;





 


 

Lot 3, Block 2, Deponti 3rd Addition;





 


 

Lot 4, Block 2, Deponti 3rd Addition;





 


 

206th Street north right-of-way lying within the plat of Deponti 3rd
Addition; and





 


 

Fenston Avenue north right-of-way lying within the plat of Deponti 3rd
Addition.




671

 

12-4-2017

 

Rezoning Lot 2, Block 1 Gateway Green 2nd Addition, from B-2 Highway
Commercial District to MF Multiple Family District.




674

 

5-14-2018

 

Rezoning Outlot E, Deponti Second Addition, from I Industrial District to
MXR-1 Mixed Single-Family and Townhouse District.





 


 

Rezoning Outlot H, Deponti Second Addition from MF Multiple Family District
to MXR-1 Mixed Single-Family and Townhouse District.





 


 






 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to Minnesota Rules





References to Prior Code of Ordinances





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Cite
 
Code Section




10A.14
 
119.03


12.25
 
34.03


12.31
 
34.06


Ch. 13
 
35.01, 120.04


14.57 - 14.69
 
119.24


15.73, Subd. 3
 
98.03


15.99
 
153.034 - 153.036


Ch. 16B.59 - 16B.75
 
150.01


16B.62, Subd. 1
 
150.01


16B.70
 
150.01


17.711 - 17.729
 
100.03


84.81 - 84.915
 
71.04


84.92
 
71.06


86B.005
 
91.02


86B.205, Subd. 4
 
91.06


86B.205, Subd. 5(iii)
 
91.05


103B.231
 
151.08


103B.255
 
151.08


Ch. 103F
 
154.001


Ch. 103G
 
154.004, 154.010


103G.005, Subd. 14
 
154.003


103G.005, Subd. 15
 
151.04


Ch. 103I
 
153.262


115.01, Subd. 22
 
151.04


144.391
 
118.01


Ch. 146A
 
115.02


Ch. 152
 
130.08


Ch. 168
 
70.02


Ch. 168A
 
70.02


Ch. 169
 
70.02


Ch. 169A
 
70.02


169.045
 
71.05


169.345 Subd. 2
 
71.05


169.68
 
96.21


169.87
 
98.34


Ch. 171
 
70.02


Ch. 201
 
32.02


211B.045
 
153.205


216B.02
 
98.03


216B.02, Subd. 4
 
98.03


216B.02, Subd. 6
 
98.03


216C.06, Subd. 14
 
153.036


Ch. 216D
 
98.17


216D.01 - 216D.09
 
98.11, 98.17, 98.26


216D.04, Subd. 3
 
98.03


237.16   
 
98.01


237.162
 
98.01, 98.03, 98.19, 98.35


237.162, Subd. 4
 
98.03, 153.096


237.163
 
98.01, 98.03, 98.19, 98.35, 153.010


237.163, Subd. 2(b)
 
98.02


237.163, Subd. 6
 
98.31


237.79
 
98.01


237.81
 
98.01


Ch. 238
 
98.03


238.086
 
98.01


Ch. 299F
 
94.01


260.185
 
130.05


273.13, Subd. 23
 
153.110


300.06
 
98.07


Ch. 308A
 
98.03


325J.04, Sub. 2
 
114.06


Ch. 329
 
113.03


Ch. 340A
 
90.14, 119.01, 119.03


340A.408
 
119.09


340A.408, Subd. 5
 
119.09


340A.409
 
90.14, 119.03, 119.07, 119.21


340A.409, Subd. 4
 
119.07


340A.411
 
119.03


340A.414
 
119.03


340A.503, Subd. 1(a)(1)
 
119.63


340A.504
 
119.17


340A.707
 
119.15


340A.801
 
119.07


Ch. 349
 
116.02; 116.03; 116.10; 116.15


349.11 - 349.23
 
116.06; 116.99


349.12
 
116.04


349.123
 
116.03


349.16(2)
 
116.07


349.166
 
116.11


349.18
 
116.09; 116.10


349.213
 
116.99


360.063
 
153.344


360.063, Subd. 6a
 
153.344


360.068, Subd. 2
 
153.344


362.357, Subd. 6(2)
 
153.036


364.03, Subd. 3
 
115.09, 115.15, 115.18


364.06
 
120.04


412.221, Subd. 7
 
53.01


415.02
 
Adopting Ordinance


415.021
 
Adopting Ordinance


415.11
 
30.01


Ch. 429
 
53.04, 98.24, 152.073


429.061
 
52.67


429.081
 
151.11


429.101
 
52.67, 130.10


444.075
 
52.80


444.075, Subd. 3
 
52.45


Ch. 453
 
98.03


Ch. 453A
 
98.03


Ch. 462
 
98.24, 154.001


462.351
 
151.01


462.351 - 462.364
 
153.002


462.358
 
152.003


462.358, Subd. 4
 
152.021


462.3593
 
153.096


462.3593, Subd. 9
 
153.096


471.62
 
70.01


473.121, Subd. 24
 
52.45


Ch. 473H
 
153.340


473H.17
 
153.340


Ch. 505
 
152.021


505.03
 
152.083


515B.2-101
 
152.021


609.01 et seq.
 
130.01


609.29 - 609.352
 
112.08


609.224
 
130.01


609.52
 
130.01


609.66
 
130.01


609.68
 
130.01


609.72
 
130.01


609.74
 
130.01


609.75 - 609.763
 
116.06; 116.99


609.535
 
130.01


609.545
 
130.01


609.576
 
130.01


609.605
 
130.01


609.675
 
130.01


609.705
 
130.01


609.715
 
130.01


609.725
 
130.01


609.745
 
130.01


609.755
 
130.01


Ch. 617
 
112.07


617.23 - 617.299
 
112.08


617.241
 
112.03


624.20 - 624.25
 
94.02


624.712, Subd. 5
 
94.02


624.714
 
130.06


624.715
 
130.06


626.862
 
10.20




 



REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES



 

Minn. Rules Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 4410
 
152.074


4720.5100, Subp. 13
 
151.08


6110.1500
 
91.04


Ch. 6120
 
153.052


Ch. 7030
 
96.20


7077.0105
 
52.60


Ch. 7080
 
153.052


Ch. 7560
 
98.01, 98.11, 98.17, 98.19


7560.0150, Subp. 2
 
98.24


7819.0050 - 7819.9950
 
98.01


7819.1000, Subp. 3
 
98.09


7819.1100
 
98.03, 98.14, 98.19


7819.1250
 
98.29


7819.1300
 
98.20


7819.3000
 
98.14


7819.3100
 
98.25


7819.3200
 
98.28


7819.4000
 
98.24


7819.4100
 
98.24


7819.5000
 
98.19, 98.25


7819.5100
 
98.25


7819.9900 - 7819.9950
 
98.03


Ch. 1300.0160, Subp. 6
 
150.01




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

Prior Code Section
 
2006 Code Section




1.01
 
30.01


1.03
 
30.02


2.01, Subd. 1
 
31.01


2.01, Subd. 2
 
31.02


2.01, Subd. 3
 
31.03


2.01, Subd. 4
 
31.04


2.01, Subd. 5
 
31.05


2.01, Subd. 6
 
31.06


2.01, Subd. 7
 
31.07


2.01, Subd. 8
 
31.08


2.01, Subd. 9
 
31.09


2.01, Subd. 10
 
31.10


2.01, Subd. 11
 
31.11


2.01, Subd. 12
 
31.12


3.01
 
32.01


3.02
 
32.02


5.04
 
31.77


5.05, Subd. 1
 
90.01


5.05, Subd. 2
 
90.02


5.05, Subd. 3
 
90.03


5.05, Subd. 4
 
90.04


5.05, Subd. 5
 
90.05


5.05, Subd. 6
 
90.06


5.05, Subd. 7
 
90.06


5.05, Subd. 8
 
90.08


5.05, Subd. 9
 
90.09


5.05, Subd. 12
 
90.11


5.05, Subd. 13
 
90.12


5.05, Subd. 14
 
90.13


5.05, Subd. 15
 
90.15


5.05, Subd. 16
 
90.98


5.06
 
90.14


7.01
 
31.25


7.02
 
31.26


7.03
 
31.27


7.04
 
31.28


9.09
 
130.07


11.08
 
111.01


11.09
 
111.98


12.01
 
150.01


14.01
 
150.03


15.01, Subd. 1
 
70.01


15.01, Subd. 2
 
70.02


15.02
 
71.01


15.03
 
71.02


15.05
 
72.02


15.06
 
71.03


15.07
 
71.04


15.09
 
117.01


15.095
 
117.02


15.11
 
96.10


15.12
 
71.06


15.13
 
96.11


15.14
 
71.05


18.01, Subd. 1
 
52.20


18.01, Subd. 2
 
52.01


18.01, Subd. 3
 
52.48


18.01, Subd. 4
 
52.21


18.01, Subd. 5
 
52.22


18.01, Subd. 6
 
52.23


18.01, Subd. 7
 
52.24


18.01, Subd. 9
 
52.25


18.01, Subd. 10
 
52.25


18.01, Subd. 11
 
52.02


18.01, Subd. 12
 
52.03


18.01, Subd. 14
 
52.26


18.01, Subd. 15
 
52.26


18.01, Subd. 16
 
52.26


18.01, Subd. 18
 
52.27


18.01, Subd. 19
 
52.28


18.01, Subd. 21
 
52.04


18.01, Subd. 22
 
52.04


18.01, Subd. 20
 
52.04


18.01, Subd. 24
 
52.05


18.01, Subd. 25
 
52.06


18.015, Subd. 1
 
52.45


18.015, Subd. 2
 
52.46


18.015, Subd. 3
 
52.47


18.015, Subd. 4
 
52.48


18.02, Subd. 1
 
51.01


18.02, Subd. 2
 
51.01


18.02, Subd. 3
 
51.02


18.02, Subd. 4
 
51.03


18.02, Subd. 5
 
51.04


18.02, Subd. 6
 
51.05


18.02, Subd. 7
 
51.06


18.02, Subd. 8
 
51.07


18.02, Subd. 9(a)
 
51.08


18.02, Subd. 9(b)
 
51.09


18.02, Subd. 9(c)
 
51.10


18.02, Subd. 9(d)
 
51.11


18.02, Subd. 9(g)
 
51.12


18.02, Subd. 10
 
51.98


19.01, Subd. 1
 
96.01


19.01, Subd. 2
 
96.01


19.01, Subd. 3
 
96.02


19.01, Subd. 4
 
96.03


19.01, Subd. 5
 
96.04


19.01, Subd. 6
 
96.05


19.01, Subd. 7
 
96.06


19.01, Subd. 8
 
96.07


19.02
 
95.01


19.03
 
97.01


19.04
 
96.08


19.05
 
130.01


19.06, Subd. 1
 
130.02


19.06, Subd. 3
 
130.03


19.06, Subd. 4
 
130.03


19.06, Subd. 5
 
130.04


19.06, Subd. 6
 
130.02


19.065, Subd. 1
 
96.20


19.065, Subd. 2
 
96.21


19.065, Subd. 3
 
96.22


19.065, Subd. 4
 
96.23


19.065, Subd. 5
 
96.24


19.065, Subd. 6
 
96.25


19.065, Subd. 7
 
96.26


19.065, Subd. 8
 
96.27


19.065, Subd. 9
 
96.28


19.065, Subd. 10
 
96.29


19.065, Subd. 12
 
96.30


19.08
 
130.06


19.10
 
130.08


20.01, Subd.1
 
99.01


20.01, Subd.2
 
99.02


20.01, Subd.3
 
99.03


20.01, Subd.4
 
99.04


20.01, Subd.5
 
99.05


20.01, Subd.6
 
99.06


20.01, Subd.8
 
99.08


20.01, Subd.9
 
99.09


20.01, Subd.10
 
99.10


20.01, Subd.12
 
99.12


20.01, Subd.13
 
99.13


20.01, Subd.14
 
99.14


20.01, Subd.15
 
99.15


20.02
 
99.16


22.01
 
33.01


22.02
 
33.02


22.03
 
33.03


22.04
 
33.04


23.02
 
97.02


31.010
 
100.01


31.015
 
100.02


31.020
 
100.03


31.030
 
100.04


31.050
 
100.06


31.060
 
100.99


33.1
 
114.01


33.2
 
114.02


33.3
 
114.03


33.4
 
114.04


33.5
 
114.09


33.6
 
114.07


33.7
 
114.12


33.8
 
114.14


33.9
 
114.13


33.11
 
114.99




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




34 (town)
 
5-18-1970
 
150.02


317
 
1-12-1981
 
99.11


321
 
4-13-1981
 
117.01


333
 
7-12-1982
 
130.08


334
 
7-12-1982
 
96.10


351
 
12-12-1983
 
72.02


352
 
1-9-1984
 
52.03


—
 
5-13-1985
 
117.01


375
 
2-10-1986
 
111.01, 117.01, 150.03


379
 
9-29-1986
 
30.01


381
 
12-8-1986
 
71.06


388
 
6-26-1987
 
90.10


397
 
1-9-1989
 
30.02


398
 
1-9-1989
 
71.06


410
 
- -19-
 
T.S.O. I


411
 
- -19-
 
T.S.O. I


416
 
4-9-1990
 
100.03, 100.05


417
 
5-4-1990
 
96.11


421
 
8-13-1990
 
99.06


85 (town)
 
9-23-1991
 
95.20 - 95.25


90 (town)
 
- -
 
91.01 - 91.06, 91.98


443
 
6-14-1993
 
52.04


446
 
9-13-1993
 
T.S.O. I


455
 
10- -1994
 
30.01


457
 
- -
 
100.03


459
 
3-27-1995
 
150.01


464
 
6-26-1995
 
151.01 - 151.12, 151.98


469
 
11-11-1995
 
51.06, 51.07


479
 
11-12-1996
 
71.04


480
 
11-25-1996
 
118.02 - 118.14, 118.98


488
 
10- -1998
 
30.01


489
 
12-14-1998
 
150.01


491
 
4-26-1999
 
96.20 - 96.30


492
 
5-24-1999
 
51.06, 51.07


100 (town)
 
9-13-1999
 
93.01 - 93.04


501
 
11-13-2000
 
T.S.O. II


504
 
- -2001
 
31.40 - 31.43


507
 
3-19-2001
 
T.S.O. II


508
 
- -2001
 
31.55 - 31.59


506
 
3-26-2001
 
T.S.O. II


511
 
7-9-2001
 
70.02


518
 
7-8-2002
 
30.01


520
 
2-24-2003
 
52.04 - 51.06


523
 
4-14-2003
 
52.05


524
 
4-14-2003
 
150.01


526
 
9-22-2003
 
T.S.O. II


527
 
11-10-2003
 
92.01 - 92.12, 92.98


529
 
1-12-2004
 
112.01 - 112.16


531
 
2-9-2004
 
52.23


532
 
3-22-2004
 
31.42


533
 
3-22-2004
 
94.02


537
 
11-8-2004
 
153.001 - 153.010, 153.025, 153.026, 153.029 - 153.034, 153.036 - 153.038,
153.050 - 153.054, 153.065 - 153.079, 153.095, 153.096, 153.110 - 153.112,
153.125 - 153.134, 153.145 - 153.147, 153.185, 153.205, 153.207 - 153.212,
153.230 - 153.238, 153.250 - 153.261, 153.270 - 153.279, 153.295 - 153.302,
153.315 - 153.323, 153.326, 153.332, 153.340 - 153.343, 153.360 - 153.365,
153.998, T.S.O. II


539
 
6-27-2005
 
92.11


541
 
1-23-2006
 
90.05


542
 
3-13-2006
 
114.01 - 114.14


544
 
3-27-2006
 
31.41, 31.42


546
 
4-24-2006
 
99.17, 99.99


547
 
5-8-2006
 
31.57


549
 
5-22-2006
 
153.010, 153.026, 153.051, 153.096, 153.133, 153.147, 153.208, 153.209,
153.316 - 153.322, 153.340, 153.341, 153.360


550
 
5-22-2006
 
152.001 - 152.006, 152.020, 152.021, 152.030 - 152.036, 152.040 - 152.047,
152.050 - 152.054, 152.060 - 152.062, 152.070 - 152.072, 152.074, 152.080 -
152.094, 152.101 - 152.103, 152.999


551
 
6-26-2006
 
T.S.O. II


553
 
8-14-2006
 
T.S.O. II


554
 
8-28-2006
 
31.26


555
 
9-11-2006
 
35.01


556
 
9-25-2006
 
96.11


558
 
11-27-2006
 
130.06


560
 
12-11-2006
 
130.06


563
 
3-12-2007
 
100.03


564
 
5-21-2007
 
116.01 - 116.16, 116.99


567
 
6-25-2007
 
131.01 - 131.11


568
 
7-9-2007
 
150.01


569
 
8-13-2007
 
96.12


570
 
12-10-2007
 
153.261


571
 
12-10-2007
 
92.11


573
 
3-10-2008
 
153.208


574
 
7-14-2008
 
T.S.O. II


575
 
10-13-2008
 
120.01 - 120.05


576
 
10-27-2008
 
52.80 - 52.86


577
 
10-27-2008
 
53.01 - 53.07


578
 
12-8-2008
 
93.05


580
 
11-24-2008
 
151.01 - 151.11, 151.13, 151.98


581
 
3-9-2009
 
52.60 - 52.67, 52.98


582
 
4-13-2009
 
31.42


583
 
6-22-2009
 
92.11


584
 
9-14-2009
 
115.01 - 115.18


585
 
9-28-2009
 
111.01


586
 
10-12-2009
 
115.16


587
 
11-23-2009
 
151.05


588
 
12-14-2009
 
113.01 - 113.10, 113.99


589
 
12-14-2009
 
50.01 - 50.05, 50.98


591
 
1-11-2010
 
130.09


592
 
1-11-2010
 
130.06


593
 
1-11-2010
 
35.01


594
 
1-25-2010
 
152.091


596
 
2-8-2010
 
153.001 - 153.010, 153.025 - 153.038, 153.050 - 153.054, 153.065 - 153.079,
153.095, 153.096, 153.110 - 153.112, 153.125 - 153.135, 153.145 - 153.147,
153.185, 153.205 - 153.212, 153.230 - 153.238, 153.250 - 153.261, 153.270 -
153.279, 153.295 - 153.302, 153.306 - 153.308, 153.315 - 153.335, 153.340 -
153.344, 153.360 - 153.365, 153.998


597
 
7-12-2010
 
154.001 - 154.012, 154.999


598
 
7-26-2010
 
153.335


599
 
8-23-2010
 
130.10


600
 
8-23-2010
 
119.60 - 119.64


601
 
9-13-2010
 
52.04


602
 
11-8-2010
 
153.010, 153.332


604
 
3-28-2011
 
31.42


606
 
4-11-2011
 
96.02, 96.025


607
 
5-9-2011
 
153.010, 153.096


608
 
5-23-2011
 
153.209


610
 
9-12-2011
 
153.036


611
 
9-12-2011
 
T.S.O. II


612
 
9-12-2011
 
T.S.O. II


614
 
1-9-2012
 
99.02


615
 
4-9-2012
 
35.01, 90.14


616
 
7-9-2012
 
153.205 - 153.212


617
 
7-9-2012
 
35.01


618
 
7-23-2012
 
72.02


619
 
1-28-2013
 
T.S.O. I


620
 
1-28-2013
 
T.S.O. I


621
 
1-28-2013
 
T.S.O. I


622
 
1-28-2013
 
T.S.O. I


623
 
1-28-2013
 
T.S.O. I


624
 
1-28-2013
 
T.S.O. I


625
 
2-11-2013
 
35.01 - 35.04


626
 
3-11-2013
 
130.06


627
 
3-25-2013
 
153.096


628
 
5-13-2013
 
153.335


629
 
8-12-2013
 
130.08


631
 
11-18-2013
 
T.S.O. I


633
 
11-18-2013
 
T.S.O. I


634
 
1-27-2014
 
130.11


635
 
3-24-2014
 
153.308


636
 
3-24-2014
 
153.034 - 153.036, 153.038


637
 
3-24-2014
 
31.28


638
 
4-14-2014
 
153.365


640
 
6-8-2015
 
31.75, 31.76, 90.01 - 90.15, 90.98, 152.021, 152.060 - 152.062, 152.070,
152.071, 152.093, 153.028


642
 
6-22-2015
 
31.75, 31.76, 90.01 - 90.15, 90.98, 152.021, 152.060 - 152.062, 152.070,
152.071, 152.093, 153.028


645
 
8-24-2015
 
90.14, 96.03, 119.01 - 119.24


646
 
9-14-2015
 
153.010, 153.326 - 156.329, 156.333 - 156.335


647
 
9-14-2015
 
152.072 - 152.074


648
 
9-28-2015
 
153.035, 153.036, 153.038, 153.341


649
 
10-12-2015
 
72.01


651
 
3-14-2016
 
153.010, 153.096, 153.316 - 153.323, 153.326 - 153.329, 153.332-1 53.335,
153.340


653
 
3-14-2016
 
35.01 - 35.04


654
 
3-28-2016
 
35.01


655
 
5-23-2016
 
153.296 - 153.298, 153.300


656
 
6-13-2016
 
71.04


657
 
6-27-2016
 
35.01


658
 
7-25-2016
 
153.324, 153.330


659
 
8-8-2016
 
90.10


660
 
8-22-2016
 
153.096


661
 
11-14-2016
 
35.01 - 35.04


662
 
11-28-2016
 
118.01 - 118.14, 118.98


663
 
--
 
153.010, 153.320


665
 
6-12-2017
 
31.57


666
 
6-26-2017
 
72.01, 72.02


668
 
9-11-2017
 
153.262


669
 
12-4-2017
 
153.051, 153.110, 153.333 - 153.335


670
 
12-4-2017
 
153.096, 153.110, 153.318, 153.319


671
 
12-4-2017
 
T.S.O. II


672
 
12-4-2017
 
35.01


673
 
2-12-2018
 
31.26


674
 
5-14-2018
 
T.S.O. II


675
 
- -2018
 
115.06, 115.08, 115.09, 115.12, 115.14 - 115.16, 115.18


676
 
7-9-2018
 
153.010, 153.096, 153.316 - 153.322


677
 
7-9-2018
 
151.03, 151.04, 151.06, 151.08


678
 
7-23-2018
 
153.205, 153.210, 153.212


679
 
- -2018
 
98.01 - 98.35


680
 
10-8-2018
 
35.01

CITY OF FOREST LAKE
WASHINGTON COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 692
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 685 AS CODIFIED IN TITLE III, CHAPTER 35 OF
THE CITY CODE AND THE CITY’S FEE SCHEDULE AND ESTABLISHING FEES AND CHARGES
FOR LICENSES, PERMITS, SERVICES, AND OTHER CHARGES WITHIN THE CITY OF FOREST
LAKE, MINNESOTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FOREST LAKE ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Title III, Chapter 35 Amendment and Fee Schedule Adoption. The following schedule of licenses,
permits, and service fees and other City charges previously adopted in Ordinance 685 and codified in City Code Title III,
Chapter 35, is hereby amended by the City Council of the City of Forest Lake, Minnesota as follows, and as amended shall
constitute the 2020 City of Forest Lake Fee Schedule. The underlined text shall show additions to Chapter 35/the 2020 City
of Forest Lake Fee Schedule and the struck through text shall show the deletions to Chapter 35/the 2020 City of Forest Lake
Fee Schedule:
ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE DEPARTMENTS
Assessment Search $25.00/each
Flash Drive/Copy of Public Meetings $10.00/each
Fax (send or receive) $1.00/page
Non-Sufficient Funds Check Fee $25.00
Notary Fee $1.00/document
Photocopies $0.25/page-100 or fewer pages, black/white, legal/letter
sized paper copes.
For:
• 101 or more pages
• All other copy sizes
• Electronic Data
Costs shall be actual city costs, including staff time to
search and retrieve data, and other costs allowed under
Minn. Stat. Cha. 13.
City Code $25.00/flash drive
Community Room Rental (City Center) $30.00/hour with three hour minimum required (nonprofits excluded)
ADMINISTRATION (LICENSES AND PERMITS) DEPARTMENT
Adult Oriented Business $50.00 annual
Background Check $25.00/background
Antenna Lease
Billboard $50.00/new billboard
Carnival/Circus $100.00/event
Gambling License $50.00/application, no fee with proof of non-profit status
Gambling Premises License $100.00/for background check for each location
Garbage/Rubbish Hauler $50.00/annual
Massage Therapist $50.00/annual
Massage Location $50.00/annual
Outdoor Entertainment $50.00/event
Pawnbroker $100.00/annual, $1.00 billable transaction, bond
Peddler $200/seven day week
Group Peddler $200.00
Transient Merchant $200.00/seven day week
Solicitor No charge
Tobacco $250.00/annual
Liquor
 Off Sale $200.00/annual
 On Sale $3,000.00/annual
 3.2% Beer On Sale $200.00/annual
 3.2% Beer Off Sale $200.00/annual
 Club $300.00/annual
 Wine $500.00/annual
 Wine with Strong Beer Authorization $700.00/annual (wine & 3.2% on sale combination)
 Investigation of In-State Applicants $500.00
 Investigation of Out-of-State Applicants Billed to Applicant, not to exceed $10,000.00
 Set Up $100.00/annual
 Brewer Taproom On Sale $500.00/annual
 Brewpub Off Sale $200.00/annual
 Brewpub On Sale $200.00/annual
 Brewery Off Sale $200.00/annual
 Microdistillery Cocktail Room $700.00/annual
 Microdistillery Off Sale $200.00/annual
 Sunday On Sale $200.00/annual
 Culinary Class $100.00/annual
AIRPORT COMMISSION
Hangar E $125.00/month
Hangar Lease Transfer $200.00/transaction
Non-Commercial Leased Land $0.103/sq. ft./year
$280.00 flat charge per unit
Commercial Use Leased Land $0.155 sq. ft./year
$280.00 flat charge per unit
The $280.00 rent increase is designed to fund the cost increase associated with constructing and maintaining the paved
runway. It is the goal of the City Council to eliminate this rent increase in 2026, or earlier if Airport revenues are
sufficient to pay the increased costs.
Tie Downs
 Monthly $45.00/month
 Daily $2.00/day
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION (PERMITS AND LICENSES) DEPARTMENT
Building Permit Fee
 Permit fee to be based on job cost valuation or a fixed fee as stated in this schedule. The determination of value or
 valuation shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and plan
 review fees shall be the total of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work,
 painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other
 permanent equipment.
 Valuation Based Permit Fee Schedule See EXHIBIT A for fees
Fixed Fee Schedule for One and Two Family Dwellings
 Attic Insulation $50.00
 Deck $100.00
 Drain Tile $75.00
 Fence (over seven (7) feet) $75.00
 Siding, Residential Single-family $100.00
 Siding, Residential Multi-family $60.00/unit
 Roofing, Residential Single-family $100.00
 Roofing, Residential Multi-family $60.00/unit
 Swimming Pool, Above Ground $100.00
 Swimming Pool, Below Ground $150.00
 Window and/or Door Replacement $25.00/window-door, $100.00 Maximum
Demolition Permit
 Base Fee: Parcels not connected to City utilities $25.00
 Base Fee: Parcels connected to City utilities $50.00
 Escrow Fee $1.00/ sq. ft. along with signed Demolition Assessment
Agreement
OR
Escrow of 125% of the demolition costs
Manufactured Home Permit Fee (manufactured home park)
 New installation or replacement (valuation based fee
 scheduled to be applied for manufactured homes
 installations outside of parks)
$100.00
Moving Permit Fee
 Moving a building within or into the City $50.00
Salon Compliance Inspection
 Building code compliance inspection when required for
 license requirements $55.00
Building Service Equipment Fees
 Plumbing – Residential* $50.00 plus $9.00/fixture
 Plumbing – Commercial* $85.00 plus 2% of estimated job cost
 Mechanical – Residential* $25.00/piece of equipment ($50.00 minimum fee)
 Mechanical – Commercial* $75.00 plus 2% of estimated job cost
 *A state surcharge of one-half mill (.0005) of the fee or $1.00 (whichever is greater) is charged on all fixed fee
 permits as set by the State of Minnesota.
OTHER BUILDING AND PERMITTING FEES
Inspection Fees
 Inspections outside normal business hours $80.00/hour, two (2) hour minimum
 Reinspections $55.00/hour, one (1) hour minimum
Investigation Fee – Work Without Permit
 Whenever any work for which a city permit is required has commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special
 investigation shall be made before a permit will be issued. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall
 be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of
 the permit fee required by this schedule. The payment for such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from
 compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
Plan Review Fee
 When a building permit is required and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid. Plan
 review fees for all buildings shall be 65% of the building permit fee. The fee for similar plans shall be 25% of the
 normal building permit fee as defined in MSBS, Section 1300.
 The plan review fees specified are separate fees from the building permit fees specified and are in addition to the
 permit fees. Plan review fees will be charged for any plan review even if a permit is not issued.
 When submittal documents are incomplete or change so as to require additional plan review, or when the project
 involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the above rate.
 Expiration of a plan review: Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of
 application shall expire by limitation; plans and other documentation submitted for review may thereafter be
 returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action
 by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon request of the applicant with evidence that 
 circumstance beyond the applicant’s control have prevented required action. No application shall be extended
 more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and
 pay a new plan review fee.
Refund Fee
 The building official may authorize refunding any fee paid under this schedule that was erroneously paid or
 collected.
 The building official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been
 done under an issued permit.
 The building official shall not authorize refunding of the plan review fee when an application for a permit is
 withdrawn or cancelled after a plan review has been completed.
 The building official shall not authorize refunding any fee paid except on written application filed by the original
 permittee not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
Renewal Fee
 Permits renewed within six (6) months after a permit has expired shall be charged a permit renewal fee of $25.00.
 Permits not renewed within six (6) months after a permit has expired and work remains incomplete shall be
 charged as required for a new permit.
Licenses
 Gas Installer License $50.00/annual
 Excavator License $50.00/annual
FIRE (INSPECTIONS) DEPARTMENT
Fire Permit Fee
 Permit fee to be based on job cost valuation or a fixed fee as stated in this schedule. The determination of value or
 valuation shall be made by the fire official. The value to be used in computing the fire permit and fire plan review
 shall be the total of all work for which the permit is issued.
Required Construction Permits
 Fire Suppression and Fire Alarm Permit (valuation
 based)
See EXHIBIT A
 Plan Review 65% of permit fee
 Temporary Tent or Canopy (as defined by State Fire
 Code)
$50.00/tent or canopy
 Construction Permits Required in MNFC Section 105.7 See EXHIBIT A
Required Operational Permits
 Fire Code Inspection
 Initial Inspection and Follow Up Inspection No charge
 All Subsequent Reinspections $50.00/hour (one (1) hour minimum)
 After Hours Inspections $80.00/hour (two (2) hour minimum)
 Inspections Without Assigned Fee $50.00/hour (one (1) hour minimum)
 Open Burning Permit No charge
 Fireworks/Pyrotechnic Display $250.00/event
 Retail Sale of Fireworks $250.00/application
 Hazardous Material (storage tank) $4,150.00/tank
 Permits Required in IFC Section 105.6 $100.00/application
 Permit Reinspection (upon request revoked permit
 holder)
$55.00/hour (one (1) hour minimum)
 Double Permit Two (2) times normal fee
 Daycare Inspection $50.00/inspection
Investigation Fee – Work Without Permit
 Whenever any work for which a city permit is required has commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special
 investigation shall be made before a permit will be issued. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall
 be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of
 the permit fee required by this schedule. The payment for such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from
 compliance with all other provision of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
Plan Review Fee
 When a fire permit is required and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid. Plan review 
 fees shall be 65% of the fire permit fee.
 The plan review fees specified are separate fees from the building permit fees specified and are in addition to the
 permit fees. Plan review fees will be charged for any plan review even if a permit is not issued.
 When submittal documents are incomplete or change so as to require additional plan review, or when the project
 involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the above rate.
 Expiration of a plan review: Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of
 application shall expire by limitation; plans and other documentation submitted for review may thereafter be
 returned to the applicant or destroyed by the fire official. The building official may extend the time for action by
 the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon request of the applicant with evidence that circumstances
 beyond the applicant’s control have prevented required action. No application shall be extended more than once.
 In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan
 review fee.
Refund Fee
 The fire official may authorize refunding any fee paid under this schedule that was erroneously paid or collected.
 The fire official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
 under an issued permit.
 The fire official shall not authorize refunding of the plan review fee when an application for a permit is withdrawn
 or cancelled after a plan review has been completed.
 The fire official shall not authorize refunding any fee paid except on written application filed by the original
 permittee not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment.
Renewal Fee
 Permits renewed within six (6) months after a permit has expired shall be charged a permit renewal fee of $25.00.
 Permits not renewed within six (6) months after a permit has expired and work remains incomplete shall be
 charged as required for a new permit.
PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Arts in the Park Booth Fees
 Food Trucks Full season rate: $200.00; Single night rate: $40.00
 Commercial Full season rate: $90.00; Single night rate: $20.00
 Farmer’s Market; Handmade Crafts Seasonal rate: $65.00; Single night rate: $15.00
 Non-Profit No charge
Park Rentals
 Gazebo Rental Full day rental: $95.00; Half day rental: $65.00
 Park Special Event $150.00/event/day
 Park Shelters $15.00/hr
 Community Garden Rental $30.00/plot
 Damage Deposit (refundable) $150.00
Field and Rink Rentals
 Athletic Field Rental $15.00/field/day
 Ice Rink Rental $15.00/hour
 Warming House Reservation (with rink attendant) $15.00/hour
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT
Comprehensive Guide Plan Amendment Application Fee $4,000.00
Conditional Use Permit (includes site plan review) $1,000.00
Conditional Use Permit Amendment $500.00
Interim Use Permit $1,000.00
Rezoning $1,000.00
Documents
 Comprehensive Guide Plan Cost of production + tax
 Zoning Ordinance Cost of production + tax
 Other Studies and Ordinances Cost of production + tax
Zoning Maps
 Color 8-1/2x11 $5.00 + tax
 Color 11x17 $10.00 + tax
 Color 17x20 $15.00 + tax
 Color 24x36 $20.00 + tax
 Color 35x39 $25.00 + tax
 GIS Map $3.20 + tax
Environmental Assessment Worksheet; Escrow fee – City
Consultant Services
$10,000.00
Certificate of Compliance $50.00
Certificate of Compliance; Seasonal Sales $250.00
Grading Permit
 50-100 Cubic Yards $50.00
 More Than 100 Yards $500.00
Planned Unit Development
 Concept Plan $500.00
 Preliminary Plan $1,500.00
 Plus Per Acreage Charge $20.00/acre
 Final Plan $1,000.00
 PUD Amendment $1,000.00
Signs
 Valuation Exceeding $2,000.00 See EXHIBIT A
 Valuation Under $2,000.00 $50.00
 Temporary Banner Permit No Charge
Site Plan Review
 Site: Less Than One (1) Acre $500.00
 Site: One (1) Acre or More $1,000.00
 Site Plan Amendment $500.00
Subdivision
 Concept Plan $500.00
 Preliminary Plat $1,000.00
 Residential Add $10.00 per residential unit
 Commercial/Industrial Add $50.00 per unit
 Final Plat $500.00
 Minor Subdivision $500.00
 Administrative – Lot Line Adjustment $250.00
 Other Subdivision (waive of subdiv per State Statute) $250.00
 Lot Combination $250.00
Vacation of ROW Easement $250.00
Variance $500.00
Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment $1,000.00
Single Family Landscape Escrow (pd w/bldg permit) $1,000.00 per unit
Single Family Erosion Control Escrow (pd w/bldg permit) $1000.00 per unit
Park Dedication Fee per Housing Unit – Residential $2,500.00
Park Dedication Fee – Commercial $2,500.00 base and $2,500.00 per acre
Tree Mitigation Fee $75.00 per caliper inch
Development Fees See EXHIBIT B
City Staff and Consulting Billing
 For applications which include excessive staff time, services performed by City personnel will be billed at two –and-
 one-half (2.5) the actual payroll hourly rate. Services provided by City consultants will be billed at the current
 consultant rates. All recording fees will be billed at the current rate.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Recording on CD/DVD $10.00
Background Check $25.00
Finger Printing $20.00
Lock-out (opening a locked vehicle) $25.00
Parking Ticket (violation on city street 2AM to 6AM) $35.00
Municipal Parking Lot Violation $35.00
Photos (on CD) $10.00
Photos (hard copy) $0.25 per page
Police Reports $0.25 per page
Body Worn Camera Video on DVD or USB drive (when
instituted)
$20.00 pre-payment + staff costs
City Staff and Consulting Billing
 Services provided by City consultants will be billed at the current consultant rates. All recording fees will be billed at
the current rate. Costs for providing data in response to a request under Minn. Stat. Cha. 13 shall be those allowed by
state statute and as shown under the Administration and Finance Departments section of this fee schedule.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Right-of-Way Permit
 Major Excavation Permit $300.00 plus $2,500.00 cash escrow
 Minor Excavation Permit $100.00 per permit / $500.00 annual permit
 Small Wireless Facility $100.00
Equipment: Per Hour Charge (does not include operator)
 Weed Whip $5.00
 21-in Push Mower $9.00
 Paint Striper $22.00
 3-in Water Pump $24.00
 Brush Chipper $25.00
 Equipment Trailer $25.00
 Plate Compactor $25.00
 Asphalt Saw $25.00
 Zero Turn Mower $30.00
 1-Ton Dump Truck $35.00
 Asphalt Roller $35.00
 12 Foot Wing Mower $35.00
 Front Mount Mower $35.00
 Pick Up Truck $35.00
 Groundmaster Mower $35.00
 Air Compressor $45.00
 21 Foot Wing Mower $45.00
 8 Foot Ditch Mower $45.00
 Tandem Axel Truck $45.00
 Compact Tractor $45.00
 60 Inch Boom Mower $50.00
 Bucket Truck $50.00
 Skid Loader $50.00
 Street Sweeper $65.00
 Tractor Loader Backhoe $65.00
 5 Foot Snow Blower $65.00
 924G Cat Loader $85.00
 143H Cat Road Graded $85.00
 8 Foot Snow Blower $150.00
 Jetter/Vacuumed Truck $200.00
Street Signs Vendor Price + 10%
Swing-Away Mail Box and Post (installed) $135.00
Public Works Operator/Inspector $56.50/hour
Utilities
 Meter Reconnection/Disconnection $50.00
 Water Turn On/Off $50.00
 Water Shutoff Locating (no fee if turn on/off
 performed)
$50.00
 Water Emergency Turn On/Off $163.00
 Water Meter Accuracy Check $125.00 (Over 1 inch = consulting fee + 25%)
 Water Meter Installation $50.00 (Over 1 inch plumber installed)
 Water & Sewer Inspection (Residential) $50.00
 Storm Water Utility $40.00 per REF/year; billed annually
 Water User Fee See EXHIBIT C
 Sewer User Fee See EXHIBIT C
 Metropolitan Council SAC Fee See EXHIBIT B
 Street Opening Excavator’s License $50.00 annual
 Street Opening $50.00
 Street Opening Deposit $3,500.00
Meters See EXHIBIT D
Horns See EXHIBIT D
Hydrant Meter Deposit, 2-1/2 Inch Meter Rental Deposit
(Refundable)
$2,000.00
Hydrant Water Rental & Usage Fee, 2 1-2 inch and ¾ inch
Meter Rental Usage per 1,000 Gallons
$114.00 (includes use of meter and 5,000 gallons of
water)
Usage per 1,000 Gallons $4.00
Fill Station $3.00/1,000 gallons
Sewer/Water Capping/On Site Septic Abandonment/Well
Sealing
$500.00 escrow
Late Payment Charge 3%
Non-Compliant Sump Pump Charge $100.00/month
All Prices are subject to change as they are based on manufacturer’s and vendor’s costs PLUS sales tax.
Section 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance becomes effective upon its adoption and publication according
to law, but not prior to January 1, 2020.
Adopted by the City Council of the City of Forest Lake this ______ day of _________________________, 2019.
CITY OF FOREST LAKE
By: ________________________________
Mara Bain
Its: Mayor
Attested:
By: ________________________________
Karin Derauf
Its: Deputy City Clerk
(Summary published in the Forest Lake Times on __________________, 2019)
EXHIBIT A
VALUATION BASED PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
TOTAL VALUATION FEE
$1.00 - $500.00 $25.00
$501.00 - $20,000.00 $25.00 for the first $500.00 plus $3.35 for each additional $100.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $20,000.00
$20,001.00 - $25,000.00 $73.75 for the first $20,000.00 plus $14.75 for each additional $1,000.00
or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 - $50,000.00 $413.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.75 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 - $100,000.00 $681.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.50 for each additional $1,000.00
or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 - $500,000.00 $1,056.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,456.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001 and up $5,956.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof
Note: A state surcharge is added to all valuation based fees equaling the following:
1) If the valuation of the structure, addition, or alteration is $1,000,000.00 or less, the surcharge is equivalent to
one-half mill (.0005) of the valuation of the structure, addition or alteration
2) 2) if the valuation is greater than $1,000,000.00, the surcharge is $500.00 plus two-fifths mill (.0004) of the value
between $1,000,000.00 and $2,000,000.00
3) If the valuation is greater than $2,000,000.00, the surcharge is $900.00 plus three-tenths mill (.0003) of the
value between $2,000,000.00 and $3,000,000.00
4) If the valuation is greater than $3,000,000.00, the surcharge is $1,200.00 plus one-fifth mill (.0002) of the value
between $3,000,000.00 and $4,000,000.00
5) If the valuation is greater than $4,000,000.00, the surcharge is $1,400.00 plus one-tenth mill (.0001) of the value
between $4,000,000.00 and $5,000,000.00
6) If the valuation exceeds $5,000,000.00, the surcharge is $1,500.00 plus one-twentieth mill (.00005) of the value
that exceeds $5,000,000.00
EXHIBIT B
FEES FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
TYPE OF PROJECT FEES
Project Design Letter of Credit 15-20% 18-22% of construction costs (determined by City
Engineer)
Public/Private Improvement Costs Letter of Credit 100% 125% of construction costs
Private Improvement Costs Letter of Credit 100% of construction costs
Landscaping Letter of Credit 75% of approved landscaping costs
Sealcoat Escrow $0.25/ SF $0.28 per square foot of public road
Water System Area Charges $4,585.00 per acre (pay at time of signing Development
Agreement)
Sanitary Sewer Area Charges $3,150.00 per acre (pay at time of signing Development
Agreement)
Metropolitan Council SAC Fee $2,485 per SAC unit or as set by Metropolitan Council (pay at
time of building permit)
City WAC Fee $3,600.00 per unit (pay at time of building permit)
City Core Sewer Core Fee $3,600.00 per unit (pay at time of building permit)
Parkland Dedication Fee
 Residential Zoned Areas $2,500.00 per residential unit
 Commercial/Industrial Zoned Areas $2,500.00 base fee and $2,500.00 per acre
Note: Other fees or costs may be required as part of the Development Agreement for special public improvement needs
associated with project, such as existing street improvements, traffic signals, materials testing, drainage, etc.
All plans for public improvement projects, including private street projects with public utilities, may be prepared by a
qualified engineer as stipulated by a Zoning Code amendment adopted by the City. Construction is to be funded
privately by the project developer. Financial guarantees in the form of a letter of credit for engineering and construction
costs is to be posted with the City prior to the start of construction.
EXHIBIT C
SANITARY SEWER AND WATER WORKS USER RATES/CHARGES
WATER RATE SCHEDULES
2020 Water Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2020)
Service
Meter
Size
Inches
Minimum
Units per
Quarter
Cost
per
Unit
Fixed
Charge
Quarterly
Bill
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter
Cost per
Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Meter
Fee per
Quarter
¾ 5 $6.10 $30.50 5 $4.34 $4.76 15 $4.54 $6.22 $2.42
1 10 $5.88 $58.80 10 $4.34 $4.76 30 $4.54 $6.22 $2.75
1-1/2 22 $5.88 $129.36 22 $4.34 $4.76 66 $4.54 $6.22 $2.97
2 40 $5.88 $235.20 40 $4.34 $4.76 120 $4.54 $6.22 $3.30
3 90 $5.88 $529.19 90 $4.34 $4.76 270 $4.54 $6.22 $3.52
4 160 $5.88 $940.79 160 $4.34 $4.76 480 $4.54 $6.22 $3.85
6 320 $5.88 $1,881.58 320 $4.34 $4.76 960 $4.54 $6.22 $3.85
Lead Testing: 1.59 per quarter
2021 Water Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2021)
Service
Meter
Size
Inches
Minimum
Units per
Quarter
Cost
per
Unit
Fixed
Charge
Quarterly
Bill
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter
Cost per
Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost per
Unit
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter
Cost per
Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Meter
Fee per
Quarter
¾ 5 $6.53 $32.64 5 $4.64 $5.10 15 $4.86 $6.65 $2.59
1 10 $6.29 $62.92 10 $4.64 $5.10 30 $4.86 $6.65 $2.94
1-1/2 22 $6.29 $138.41 22 $4.64 $5.10 66 $4.86 $6.65 $3.18
2 40 $6.29 $251.66 40 $4.64 $5.10 120 $4.86 $6.65 $3.53
3 90 $6.29 $566.24 90 $4.64 $5.10 270 $4.86 $6.65 $3.77
4 160 $6.29 $1,006.65 160 $4.64 $5.10 480 $4.86 $6.65 $4.12
6 320 $6.29 $2,013.29 320 $4.64 $5.10 960 $4.86 $6.65 $4.12
Lead Testing: 1.59 per quarter
2022 Water Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2022)
Service
Meter
Size
Inches
Minimum
Units per
Quarter
Cost
per
Unit
Fixed
Charge
Quarterly
Bill
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter
Cost per
Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Meter
Fee per
Quarter
¾ 5 $6.98 $34.92 5 $4.96 $5.45 15 $5.20 $7.12 $2.77
1 10 $6.73 $67.32 10 $4.96 $5.45 30 $5.20 $7.12 $3.15
1-1/2 22 $6.73 $148.10 22 $4.96 $5.45 66 $5.20 $7.12 $3.40
2 40 $6.73 $269.28 40 $4.96 $5.45 120 $5.20 $7.12 $3.78
3 90 $6.73 $605.87 90 $4.96 $5.45 270 $5.20 $7.12 $4.03
4 160 $6.73 $1,077.11 160 $4.96 $5.45 480 $5.20 $7.12 $4.41
6 320 $6.73 $2,154.22 320 $4.96 $5.45 960 $5.20 $7.12 $4.41
Lead Testing: 1.59 per quarter
EXHIBIT C (cont.)
SANITARY SEWER AND WATER WORKS USER RATES/CHARGES
2023 Water Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2023)
Service
Meter
Size
Inches
Minimum
Units per
Quarter
Cost
per
Unit
Fixed
Charge
Quarterly
Bill
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winter
Quarter
Cost per
Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Water
Above
Units
per
Quarter
Fall/Winte
r Quarter
Cost per
Unit
Spring/Summer
Quarter Cost
per Unit
Meter
Fee per
Quarter
¾ 5 $7.19 $35.97 5 $5.11 $5.62 15 $5.36 $7.33 $2.85
1 10 $6.93 $69.34 10 $5.11 $5.62 30 $5.36 $7.33 $3.24
1-1/2 22 $6.93 $152.55 22 $5.11 $5.62 66 $5.36 $7.33 $3.50
2 40 $6.93 $277.36 40 $5.11 $5.62 120 $5.36 $7.33 $3.89
3 90 $6.93 $624.05 90 $5.11 $5.62 270 $5.36 $7.33 $4.15
4 160 $6.93 $1,109.42 160 $5.11 $5.62 480 $5.36 $7.33 $4.54
6 320 $6.93 $2,218.85 320 $5.11 $5.62 960 $5.36 $7.33 $4.54
Lead Testing: 1.59 per quarter
SEWER RATE SCHEDULES
2020 Sewer Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2020)
Meter Size Inches Minimum Units*
per Quarter
Cost per Unit* Minimum
Quarterly Bill
Sewer Above
Units*
Cost per Unit
Above Minimum
¾ inch 5 $13.13 $65.62 5 $6.83
Maximum charge for ¾ inch residential per quarter $108.34
1 inch & Larger 5 $13.12 $65.62 5 $6.83
Sewer Flat Rage per Quarter $108.34
*Units are per 1,000 gallons
Sewer charge for ¾ inch based on winter quarter water use on residential accounts
Sewer flat rate charge for unmetered residential or other accounts shall be the established flat rate per quarter
multiplied by the number of SAC units
2021 Sewer Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2021)
Meter Size Inches Minimum Units*
per Quarter
Cost per Unit* Minimum
Quarterly Bill
Sewer Above
Units*
Cost per Unit
Above Minimum
¾ inch 5 $13.91 $69.56 5 $7.24
Maximum charge for ¾ inch residential per quarter $114.84
1 inch & Larger 5 $13.91 $69.56 5 $7.24
Sewer Flat Rage per Quarter $114.84
*Units are per 1,000 gallons
Sewer charge for ¾ inch based on winter quarter water use on residential accounts
Sewer flat rate charge for unmetered residential or other accounts shall be the established flat rate per quarter
multiplied by the number of SAC units
EXHIBIT C (cont.)
SANITARY SEWER AND WATER WORKS USER RATES/CHARGES
2022 Sewer Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2022)
Meter Size Inches Minimum Units*
per Quarter
Cost per Unit* Minimum
Quarterly Bill
Sewer Above
Units*
Cost per Unit
Above Minimum
¾ inch 5 $14.75 $73.73 5 $7.68
Maximum charge for ¾ inch residential per quarter $121.73
1 inch & Larger 5 $14.75 $73.73 5 $7.68
Sewer Flat Rage per Quarter $121.73
*Units are per 1,000 gallons
Sewer charge for ¾ inch based on winter quarter water use on residential accounts
Sewer flat rate charge for unmetered residential or other accounts shall be the established flat rate per quarter
multiplied by the number of SAC units
2023 Sewer Rate Schedule (Effective January 1, 2023)
Meter Size Inches Minimum Units*
per Quarter
Cost per Unit* Minimum
Quarterly Bill
Sewer Above
Units*
Cost per Unit
Above Minimum
¾ inch 5 $15.63 $78.15 5 $8.14
Maximum charge for ¾ inch residential per quarter $129.03
1 inch & Larger 5 $15.63 $78.15 5 $8.14
Sewer Flat Rage per Quarter $129.03
*Units are per 1,000 gallons
Sewer charge for ¾ inch based on winter quarter water use on residential accounts
Sewer flat rate charge for unmetered residential or other accounts shall be the established flat rate per quarter
multiplied by the number of SAC units
EXHIBIT D
METER CHARGES
T10 METERS INSIDE
5/8 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $238.89 $245.71
5/8 X 3/4 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $238.89 $245.71
3/4 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $293.06 $301.43
3/4 SL T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $293.06 $301.43
1 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $368.06 $378.57
1-1/2 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $677.14 $697.06
2 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG $818.57 $842.65
T10 METERS PIT
5/8 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $252.78 $260.00
5/8 X 3/4 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $252.78 $260.00
3/4 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $306.94 $315.71
3/4 SL T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $306.94 $315.71
1 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $381.94 $392.88
1-1/2 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $691.43 $711.76
2 T10 MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $818.57 $842.65
TURBINE METER
1-1/2 HP TURBINE V4 R900I USG PIT $901.47
2 HP TURBINE MTR V4 900I USG PIT $901.47
3 HP TURBINE MTR V4 900I USG PIT $1,507.35
4 HP TURBINE MTR V4 900I USG PIT $1,701.47
6 HP TURBINE MTR V4 900I USG PIT $3,061.76
COMPOUND METER
2 HP T/F CMPD MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $1,950.00
3 HP T/F CMPD MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $2,791.18
4 HP T/F CMPD MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $3,551.47
6 HP T/F CMPD MTR V4 R900I USG PIT $5,814.71
MISC
R900 V4 WLL MIU METER COUPLING/FLANGE KIT $107.14
5/8 STR MTR COUP W/WIRE HOLE (2) $22.65
3/4 STR MTR COUP W/WIRE HOLE (2) $25.63
1 STR MTR COUP W/WIRE HOLE (2) $39.49 $32.44
1-1/2 MTR FLG KIT $116.58 $67.38
2 MTR FLG KIT $171.64 $69.15
HORNS
3/4 INCH (includes UFR and 2 swivels) $235.90
1 INCH (includes 2 swivels) $140.66
Corp Valve, 1 inch $73.36 $71.04
Curb Stops, 1 inch $120.28 $134.91
1-1/4 Curb Box with Rod $67.42 $69.58
Lockable Valve Box $76.55 $87.09
Locking Valve Box Lid (replacement) $28.86 $22.54
All Prices are subject to change as they are based on manufacturer’s and vendor’s costs PLUS sales tax.
 
 
 
 
 




 


