FAIRMONT CITY CODE 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 1987 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF FAIRMONT, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Deborah J. Foster 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ruth Cyphers 
Wayne Hasek 
Tom Hawkins 
Bruce Peters 
Randy Lubenow 
City Council 
____________ 
Elizabeth W. Bloomquist 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mike Humpal, CEcD 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Patricia J. Monsen 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF FAIRMONT, MINNESOTA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert N. Malliet 
Mayor 
____________ 
Gordon Benschoter 
Dale Martens 
Marlin Gratz 
Chuck Fowler 
Bill Small 
Charles Schaaf 
Donna Holstine 
Maynard Senf 
City Council
____________ 
Richard Berens 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Gary Klaphake 
City Administrator 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the City of Fairmont, Minnesota of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1984 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1984 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the first section of Chapter 2 is 2-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 2-1 and 2-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 2-1.1, 2-1.2 and 2-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 2 and 3, it will be designated as Chapter 2.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Gary Klaphake, City Administrator, Mr. Richard D. Berens, City Attorney, and Ms. Lois Cairns, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 87-12 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Fairmont, Minnesota; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Fairmont, as follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Fairmont City Code" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 26, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 6, 1986, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Wherever in the Fairmont Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of the Code shall be a penal offense punishable by a fine not exceeding seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of any provision of the Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Whenever an offense in the Code is substantially similar to an offense in state law, the penalty for such offense shall be as provided for such state offense. The city may bring an action to restrain, enjoin or abate violations of the Code. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 6, 1986, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance takes effect on the 9th day of November, 1987. 
/s/ Robert N. Malliet 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Lois J. Cairns 
      City Clerk   Adopted on: November 9, 1987 
Posted on: November 23, 1987 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 18 2009-04  5-11-09 Included 2009-09 11-23-09 Included 2010-03  2-22-10 Included 2010-05  6-28-10 Included 2010-06  7-26-10 Included Supp. No. 19 2011-04  1-10-11 Included 2011-05  2-28-11 Included 2011-08  8-22-11 Included 2011-09  8-22-11 Included Supp. No. 20 2012-02  2-27-12 Included 2012-03  3-12-12 Included 2012-06  6-11-12 Included 2012-08 10-22-12 Included 2012-09 10-22-12 Included Supp. No. 21 2013-01  2-11-13 Included 2013-04  2-25-13 Included 2013-06  2-11-13 Included 2013-07  9-23-13 Included Supp. No. 22 2014-02  4-28-14 Included 2014-04  8-11-14 Included Supp. No. 23 2015-03  3-23-15 Included Supp. No. 24 2016-02  3-28-16 Included 2016-03  5- 9-16 Included 2016-04  8-11-16 Included 2016-06 10-24-16 Included Supp. No. 25 2017-02  5-22-17 Included 2017-03  5-22-17 Included 2017-04  5-22-17 Included 2017-07  7-31-17 Included 2017-08  8-28-17 Included Supp. No. 26 2018-02  2-12-18 Included 2018-03  2-12-18 Included 2018-04  2-12-18 Included 2018-05  2-12-18 Included 2018-06  2-12-18 Included 2018-07  2-12-18 Included 2018-08  2-12-18 Included 2018-09  2-12-18 Included 2018-10  2-12-18 Included 2018-11  3-12-18 Included 2018-12  3-26-18 Included 2018-13  6-11-18 Included 2018-14  6-25-18 Included 2018-16  8-27-18 Included 2018-17 10-22-18 Included 2018-18 12-10-18 Included 2019-02  1-28-19 Included 2019-08  2-25-19 Included  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Fairmont, Minnesota, as amended. Source materials for this publication were the city charter compilation previously used by the city (which stated that it contained the charter as adopted on March 18, 1927, and amended on August 19, 1946; September 14, 1965; March 1, 1968, and July 2, 1975) and subsequent amendments thereto. As the existing charter compilation was inconsistent stylistically (i.e., capitalization, treatment of numbers, etc.), a style consistent with the new code has been used. In addition, section catchlines have been placed on separate lines from the charter text and the charter text has been treated as the beginning of new paragraphs. (In the previous charter compilation, charter catchlines were treated as the beginning of new paragraphs and the text was treated as a continuation of the paragraphs started by the catchlines.) In addition, enumerations within sections have been "blocked" for clarity. Except for the correction of spelling errors, all other changes are encased in brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - NAME, BOUNDARIES, POWERS, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01. - Name and boundaries. 
    The City of Fairmont, in the County of Martin and State of Minnesota, upon the taking effect of this charter, shall continue to be a municipal corporation, under the name and style of the City of Fairmont, with the same boundaries as now are or hereafter may be established. 
Sec. 1.02. - Division of the city into wards. 
    The City of Fairmont is hereby divided into four (4) wards, to be called the First, Second, Third and Fourth Wards, respectively, to be limited and bounded as established on September 14, 1965, and continuing to the date of adoption of this charter. In the event of the adoption of an ordinance code the administrative portion thereof shall accurately describe ward boundaries presently in existence. The council may at any time, and shall after each federal census, consider changes in ward boundaries. But any change in ward boundaries shall be for the sole purpose of making the wards as nearly equal in population as practicable, so as to provide equal representation. Any future changes in ward boundaries shall be by ordinance. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers of the city. 
    The city shall have all powers which it may now or hereafter be possible for a municipal corporation in this state to exercise in harmony with the constitutions of this state and of the United States. It is the intention of this charter that every power which the people of the City of Fairmont might lawfully confer upon themselves, as a municipal corporation, by specific enumeration in this charter shall be deemed to have been so conferred by the provisions of this section. This charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the generality of the power herein sought to be conferred. 
Sec. 1.04. - Charter a public act. 
    This charter shall be a public act and need not be pleaded or proved in any case. It shall take effect upon its adoption as provided by law. 
CHAPTER 2. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 2.01. - Form of government. 
    The form of government established by this charter is the "Mayor-Council Plan." The council shall exercise the legislative power of the city and determine all matters of policy. 
Sec. 2.02. - Boards, committees, and commissions. 
    The council may by resolution establish, regulate and abolish such committees from within its membership, and for such purposes, as it shall deem necessary or desirable. The council may establish, regulate and abolish such boards and commissions from without its membership, to advise the council with respect to any municipal function or activity, to investigate any subject of interest to the city, or to perform quasi-judicial functions. If the purpose for which such board or commission is established is reasonably anticipated to continue beyond the period during which the initial membership thereof would be expected to serve, then establishment shall be by ordinance, otherwise it may be by resolution. 
Sec. 2.03. - Elective officers. 
    There shall be a city council composed of the mayor and five (5) members. One (1) council member shall be nominated and elected by the voters of each of the four (4) wards. One (1) council member shall be nominated and elected by the voters of the city at large. 
    At the first municipal election under this amended charter, presently scheduled for November 2, 1993, five (5) council members shall be elected. The council member elected at large and the council members from the even numbered wards shall serve for terms of four (4) years. The council members from odd numbered wards shall serve for terms of two (2) years. Thereafter, all council members shall serve for terms of four (4) years. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 2.04. - Incompatible officers. 
    No member of the council shall hold any other municipal office or become an employee of said city while serving as such council member. No former member shall be appointed to any paid office or employment of the city, which office or employment was created, or the emoluments of which were increased, during his/her term as council member or mayor, until two (2) years after the expiration of the term for which he/she was elected. 
Sec. 2.05. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a council member shall become vacant upon the member's death, resignation, removal from office or forfeiture of office in any manner authorized by law. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. A council member shall forfeit that office if the council member: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during the term of office for which elected any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, with the exception of the residency requirement in the event that a council member moves from the ward in which he or she was elected to another ward within the city limits; 
(2)  Violates any express prohibition of this charter; 
(3)  Is convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(4)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by the council. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. In the event that a vacancy in the city council should occur, the council shall by a resolution passed at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, declare such vacancy to exist and shall promptly appoint an eligible person to fill the vacancy until the next regular municipal election, when the office shall be filled for the unexpired term. The appointment of a qualified person shall be affirmed by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council. If the council fails to so appoint an eligible person within thirty (30) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, a special election shall be called to fill the vacancy, to be held not sooner than sixty (60) days and not later than ninety (90) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, and to be otherwise governed by law. Notwithstanding any requirement with respect to a quorum, if at any time the membership of the council is reduced to less than three (3), the remaining members may, by majority action, appoint additional members to raise the membership to five (5). 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 2.06. - The mayor. 
    At the regular election, a mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4) years. The mayor shall be elected by and from the electors of the city at large. The mayor shall be a member of the city council, but shall only have a vote as a member of the council in case of a tie. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall exercise all powers and shall perform all duties conferred and imposed upon him/her by this charter, the ordinances of the city, and the laws of the state. The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purposes of serving civil process, and by the Governor for the purposes of martial law. In time of public danger or emergencies, the mayor may, with the consent of the council, take command of the police, maintain order, and enforce the law. The mayor shall also appoint with the advice and consent of the council the members of citizen advisory boards and commissions and perform other duties specified by the council. The Councilmembers-at-large shall also be the mayor pro-tem and shall serve as mayor pro tem in the mayor's absence and mayor in case of the mayor's temporary disability or absence from the city. The mayor pro-tem shall retain the right to vote upon all matters before the council. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, 3-20-95) 
Sec. 2.07. - Salaries. 
    The council shall fix the salaries of all officers of the city, either elective or appointive, including heads of departments. The compensation for mayor and council members shall be established in such a manner as to provide equal benefit based upon each position's duties. The compensation for mayor and council members shall be reviewed and set by council action no later than the first council meeting in June of each municipal election year. The salary of no elected officer shall be increased during the term for which he/she is elected. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 2.08. - Investigation of city affairs. 
    The council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. The council shall provide for an audit of the city's accounts at least once a year by the state department in charge of such work or by a public account. At any time, the council may provide for an examination or audit of the accounts of any city officer or agency and it may provide for any survey or research study of any subject of municipal concern. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 2.09. - Interference with administration. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officer or employee, but the council may express its views and freely discuss with the administrator anything pertaining to appointment and removal of officers and employees. Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation under section 2.08 the council and its members shall deal with the city administrative officers and employees under the jurisdiction of the administrator solely through the administrator, and neither the council nor any council member shall give orders to any subordinate of the administrator either publicly or privately. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 2.10. - City administrator-appointment and qualifications. 
    The city council, by an affirmative vote of three (3) of the five (5) council members, shall appoint a city administrator for an indefinite term and fix the administrator's compensation. The city administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91; Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 2.11. - Power and duties of the city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall be the chief administrator of the city, responsible to the council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the administrator's charge by or under this charter. The city administrator shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove any city employee and appointed administrative officer, except the city attorney, provided for by or under this charter, except as is otherwise provided for by law and due process, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. The city administrator may authorize any administrative officers subject to the administrator's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings. The city administrator shall have the right to take part in discussion, but shall not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city administrator, or by officers subject to the administrator's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the city administrator's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city; 
(9)  Make recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city; 
(10)  Provide staff support services for the mayor and council members; 
(11)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter, or may be required by the city council. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 2.12. - City administrator-Removal. 
    The city administrator may be suspended by a resolution approved by an affirmative vote of three (3) of the five (5) council members, which shall set forth the reasons for suspension and proposed removal. A copy of such resolution shall be served immediately upon the city administrator. The city administrator shall have fifteen (15) days in which to reply thereto, in writing and upon request shall be afforded a public hearing, which shall occur not earlier than ten (10) days, nor later than fifteen (15) days after such hearing is requested. After the public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the city council by an affirmative vote of three (3) of the five (5) council members may adopt a final resolution of removal. The city administrator shall continue to receive full salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91; Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 2.13. - Acting city administrator. 
    By letter filed with the city clerk, the city administrator shall designate a city officer or employee to exercise the power and perform the duties of city administrator during the administrator's temporary absence or disability. The city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city administrator returns. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 2.14. - Legal officer. 
    There shall be a legal officer of the city appointed by the city council. The legal officer shall serve as chief legal advisor to the council, the city administrator, and all city departments, offices, and agencies, shall represent the city in all legal proceedings, and shall perform any other duties prescribed by this charter or by ordinance. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 2.15. - City clerk. 
    A city clerk shall be appointed and perform all duties imposed by law upon a city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a journal of council proceedings and such other records and perform such other duties as this charter or the council may require. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
CHAPTER 3. - PROCEDURE OF COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.01. - Council meetings. 
    At the first regular meeting in January following a regular municipal election, the newly elected members of the council shall assume their duties. Thereafter the council shall meet at such times each month as may be prescribed or allowed by ordinance. The mayor or any two (2) members of the council may call special meetings of the council upon such notice as may be prescribed by ordinance. All meetings of the council shall be public and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at all reasonable times. 
Sec. 3.02. - Secretary of council. 
    The council shall have the power to appoint a secretary of the council, who may be the same person as holds the office of city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 3.03. - Rules of procedure and quorum. 
    The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. Three (3) council members shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. The council shall by rule provide a means by which a minority may compel the attendance of absent members. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 3.04. - Ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
    Except as in this charter otherwise provided, all legislation dealing with regulations of and within the city, shall be by ordinance. A formal statement or policy of the council shall be presented in written form, identified as a resolution of the council, and acted upon by a vote of the council. All other actions deemed necessary by the council may be initiated by motion of the council members. Motions may be adopted by a simple majority of the members present. The aye and no voted on ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be recorded unless the vote in unanimous. An affirmative vote of three (3) of the five (5) council members shall be required for the adoption of all ordinances and resolutions, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 3.05. - Procedure on ordinances. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be in the words, "The City of Fairmont does ordain." Every ordinance shall be presented in writing. No ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced. At least three (3) days shall elapse between the introduction and the final adoption of all ordinances other than emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.06. - Emergency ordinances. 
    An emergency ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare in which the emergency is defined and declared in a preamble thereto, and is adopted by majority vote. No prosecution shall be based upon provisions of any emergency ordinance until twenty-four (24) hours after the ordinance has been filed with the city clerk and posted in three (3) conspicuous places or until the ordinance has been once published in the official newspaper, unless the person charged with violation had actual notice of the adoption of the ordinance prior to the act or omission complained of. 
Sec. 3.07. - Procedure on resolutions. 
    Every resolution shall be presented in writing and read in full before a vote is taken thereon, unless such presentation and reading of a resolution are dispensed with by unanimous consent. 
Sec. 3.08. - Signing, posting and publication of ordinances and resolutions. 
    Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the council shall be signed by the mayor or mayor pro tem, attested by the city clerk and filed and preserved by him/her. Every ordinance shall be published once in the official newspaper or posted in three (3) conspicuous places within the city. To the extent and in the manner provided by law an ordinance may incorporate by reference a statute of Minnesota, a state administrative rule or a regulation, a code, or ordinance or part thereof without publishing or posting the material referred to in full. 
Sec. 3.09. - When ordinances and resolutions take effect. 
    A resolution and an emergency ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption or at such later date as fixed in it. Every other ordinance shall take effect immediately after its publication or posting as required by this charter, or at such later date as is fixed therein. Every ordinance and resolution adopted by the voters of the city shall take effect immediately upon its adoption, or at such later time as is fixed therein. 
Sec. 3.10. - Amendment and repeal of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance purporting to amend an ordinance shall set forth therein the section or sections of the original ordinance in the form that such section or sections will read when amended. Every ordinance for the repeal of an ordinance shall refer to the ordinance to be repealed by its number and caption. Repeal of codified ordinance may be by reference to chapter and section numbers only, and amendment of codified ordinances may be by setting forth the chapter and section numbers and amended form thereof. 
Sec. 3.11. - Revision and codification of ordinances. 
    The city may revise, rearrange and codify its ordinances with such additions and deletions as may be deemed necessary by the council. Such ordinance code shall be published in book, pamphlet or continuously revised loose-leaf form and copies shall be made available by the council at the office of the city clerk for general distribution to the public free or at a reasonable charge. Distribution in such published form shall be a sufficient notice of any ordinance provision not previously published or posted if a notice that copies of the codification are available at the office of the city clerk is published in the official newspaper or posted in three (3) conspicuous places within the city for at least two (2) successive weeks. 
Sec. 3.12. - Fines and penalties. 
    The council may establish by ordinance that a violation of a city ordinance is either a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with state law. In addition, the council may establish by ordinance a procedure for imposing a civil penalty not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation of a city ordinance. This procedure must provide an opportunity for the accused to be heard by a neutral party or neutral three person panel. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § 1, 9-22-97) 
CHAPTER 4. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 4.01. - The regular municipal election. 
    A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year commencing in 2002 at such place or places as the city council may designate. The city clerk shall give at least two (2) weeks previous notice of the time and place of holding such election and of the officers to be elected by posting in at least one (1) public place in each voting precinct or by publication at least once in the official newspaper, but failure to give such notice shall not invalidate such election. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 4.02. - Special elections. 
    The council may by resolution order a special election and provide all means for holding it. At least two (2) weeks' published notice of a special election shall be given in the official newspaper or by posting such notice in at least one (1) public place in each voting precinct. The procedure at such election shall conform as nearly as possible to that prescribed for other municipal elections. 
Sec. 4.03. - Nominations for office. 
    At any time not more than seventy (70) days preceding any municipal election and at least fifty-six (56) days prior to such election, any eligible person may become a candidate for any office elective under the provisions of this charter by filing an affidavit with the city clerk, specifying therein the office for which he or she is a candidate at the ensuing election, and that he or she is a candidate for such office. At the time of filing said affidavit he or she shall pay to the said city clerk a fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. No. 95-12, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 99-9, 7-26-99) 
Sec. 4.04. - Canvass of elections. 
    The council shall meet and canvass the election returns within five (5) days after any regular or special election, and shall make full declaration of the results as soon as possible, and file a statement thereof with the city clerk. This statement shall include: 
(a)  The total number of good ballots cast; 
(b)  The total number of spoiled or defective ballots; 
(c)  The vote for each candidate with an indication of those who were elected; 
(d)  A true copy of the ballots used; 
(e)  The names of the judges and clerks of election; and 
(f)  Such other information as may seem pertinent. 
The city clerk shall forthwith notify all persons elected of their election. 
Sec. 4.05. - Procedure at elections. 
    Subject to the provisions of this charter and applicable state laws, the council may by ordinance further regulate the conduct of municipal elections. Except as otherwise provided in this charter or in ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, the general laws of the State of Minnesota pertaining to elections shall apply to municipal elections. 
CHAPTER 5. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 93-13, adopted Sept. 27, 1993, amended Ch. 5 to read as herein set out in §§ 5.01-5.09. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 5, §§ 5.01-5.18 pertained to similar subject matter and carried no history note. 

Sec. 5.01. - General authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The registered voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the council and, if the council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a city election, but such power shall not extend to the budgeted capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees. 
(b)  Referendum. The registered voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance and, if the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, but such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.02. - Commencement of proceeding; petitioners' committee; affidavit. 
    Any five (5) registered voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the city clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.03. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the total number of registered voters registered to vote at the last regular municipal election. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one (1) instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the person circulating it stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.04. - Procedure after filing. 
(a)  Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the petition is filed, the city clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk within two (2) days after receiving the copy of his or her certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section 5.03, and within five (5) days after it is filed the clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present his or her certificate to the council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the council. The council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.05. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; 
(3)  The council repeals the ordinance; or 
(4)  Thirty (30) days have elapsed after a vote of the city of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.06. - Action on petitions. 
(a)  Action by council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article II or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the city. 
(b)  Submission to voters. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not later than one (1) year from the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.07. - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the registered voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum. If a majority of the registered voters voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.08. - The recall. 
    In the recall petition of any elected official of the city, the committee shall certify to the city administrator the name of the elected official whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal in not more than two hundred fifty (250) words, and their intention to bring about the elected official's recall. The copy of this certificate shall be attached to each signature paper and no signature paper shall be put into circulation previous to such certification. A recall petition will be found sufficient if it contains the number of signatures of registered voters equal to at least fifteen (15) percent of the registered voters at the last regular municipal election. All of the signatures of the registered voters on the recall petition must be residents of the ward which the elected official to be recalled represents. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
Sec. 5.09. - Recall election. 
    If the petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the city administrator shall transmit it to the council without delay, and shall also officially notify the person sought to be recalled of the sufficiency of the petition and of the pending action. The council shall, at its next meeting, by resolution, provide for the holding of a special recall election not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty-five (45) days after such meeting, but if the opening of filing for the council seat shall occur within ninety (90) days after such meeting, the council may, in its discretion, provide for the holding of the recall election at the next municipal election for which the filings will be opened within that ninety-day time period. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, 9-27-93) 
CHAPTER 6. - ADMINISTRATION OF CITY AFFAIRS 

Sec. 6.01. - General powers and duties of the council. 
    All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council, except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, and the council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. The city council shall be considered the legislative branch of the city government. The city administrator shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city government and shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all city affairs. 
(Ref. of 11-5-91) 
Sec. 6.02. - Powers and duties of the council. 
    It shall be the duty of the council to act in the best interest of the entire city and it shall have all powers to so act, except as limited by statute or the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 6.03. - Purchase and contracts. 
    The council shall be the chief purchasing agent of the city. All city purchases and contracts shall be made in compliance with the Uniform Municipal Contracting Law, and whenever competitive bids are required, the contract shall be let to the "lowest responsible bidder". "Lowest responsible bidder" shall be interpreted as giving the council the right to accept any bid which it determines is more advantageous to the city. The council may, however, reject any and all bids. All contracts, bonds, and instruments of any kind to which the city is a party, shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk on behalf of the city and shall be executed in the name of the city. The council may delegate the administration of purchasing procedures according to rules adopted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 2, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 6.04. - Contracts, how let. 
    In all cases of work to be done by contract, of any kind, where the amount involved is more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), unless otherwise provided by an emergency ordinance, the council shall procure bids in such manner as may be designated by the council. Contracts of this magnitude shall be let only by the council to the lowest responsible bidder. The council may, however, reject any and all bids. Subject to the provisions of this charter, the council may by ordinance adopt further regulations for the making of bids and the letting of contracts. All contracts shall be let to the "lowest responsible bidder", and shall be interpreted as giving the council the right to accept any bid which it determines is more advantageous to the city. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 2, 3-22-93) 
CHAPTER 7. - TAXATION AND FINANCE 

Sec. 7.01. - Council to control finances. 
    The council shall have the full authority over the financial affairs of the city, and shall provide for the collection of all revenues and other assets, the auditing and settlement of amounts, and the safekeeping and disbursement of public moneys, and in the exercise of sound discretion shall make appropriations for the payment of all liabilities and expenses. The council may, by ordinance, provide for any means of auditing and allowing accounts which is otherwise permitted by law. 
Sec. 7.02. - Fiscal years. 
    The fiscal years of the city shall be the calendar year. 
Sec. 7.03. - System of taxation. 
    Subject to the state constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by the state legislation, the council shall have full power to provide by ordinance for a system of local taxation. In the taxation of real and personal property as such, the city shall conform as fully as possible to the general state law as to the assessment of such property and the collection of such taxes. 
Sec. 7.04. - Board of equalization. 
    The council shall appoint a board of equalization, to review the assessments on property for taxation purposes according to law. All members shall be residents of the city and at least three (3) shall be members of the council. 
Sec. 7.05. - Preparation of the annual budget. 
    The city administrator shall prepare the estimates for the annual budget. The budget shall be by funds and shall include all the funds of the city, except the funds made up of proceeds of bond issues and utility funds, and may include any of such funds at the discretion of the council. The estimates of expenditures for each fund budgeted shall be arranged for each department or division of the city under the following heads: 
(1)  Ordinary expenses (for operation, maintenance, and repairs); 
(2)  Payment of principal and interest on bonds and other fixed charges; 
(3)  Capital outlays (for new construction, new equipment, and all improvements of a lasting character). 
Ordinary expenses shall be subdivided into: 
(a)  Personal services. Salaries and wages, with a list of all salaried offices and positions, including the salary allowance and the number of persons holding each; 
(b)  Other expenses with sufficient detail to be readily understood. 
All increases and decreases shall be clearly shown. In parallel columns shall be added the amounts granted and the amounts expended under similar heads for the past two (2) completed fiscal years and the current fiscal year, actual to date and estimated for the balance of the year. In addition to the estimates of expenditures, the budget shall include for each budgeted fund a statement of the revenues which have accrued for the past two (2) completed fiscal years with the amount collected and the uncollected balances together with the same information, based in so far as necessary on estimates, for the current fiscal year and an estimate of the revenues for the ensuing fiscal year. The statement of revenues for each year shall specify the sums derived from the following items: 
(a)  taxation; 
(b)  fees; 
(c)  fines; 
(d)  interest; 
(e)  miscellaneous, not included in the foregoing; 
(f)  sales and rentals; 
(g)  earnings of public utilities and other public enterprises, provided that if there is a public utilities commission, in existence that such fund shall be under its jurisdiction and included in its budget; and 
(h)  special assessments. 
Such estimates shall be printed or typewritten and there shall be sufficient copies for each member of the council, for the city administrator, and three (3), at least, to be posted in public places in the city. The city administrator may submit with the estimates such explanatory statement or statements as he/she may deem necessary. The estimates shall be submitted to the council pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 7.06. - Adoption of the budget. 
    The budget shall be adopted at such time and in such manner as prescribed by state law. Budget meetings shall be so conducted as to give interested citizens a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The budget estimates shall be presented in full and the city administrator shall explain the various items thereof as fully as may be deemed necessary by the council. The annual budget finally agreed upon shall set forth in detail the complete financial plan of the city for the ensuing fiscal year for the funds budgeted and shall be signed by the majority of the council when adopted. It shall indicate the sums to be raised and the sums to be spent and for what purposes according to section 7.05. The total sum appropriated shall be less than the total estimated revenue for a safe margin. The council shall adopt the budget by a resolution which shall set forth the total for each budgeted fund and each department with such segregation as to objects and purposes of expenditures as the council deems necessary for the purposes of budget control. The council shall also adopt a resolution levying whatever taxes it considers necessary within statutory limits for the ensuing year for each fund. The tax levy resolution shall be certified to by the county auditor in accordance with state law. At the beginning of the fiscal year, the sums fixed in the budget resolution shall be and become appropriated for the several purposes named in the budget resolution and no other. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 7.07. - Enforcement of the budget. 
    It shall be the duty of the council and city administrator to enforce strictly the provisions of the budget. They shall not approve any order upon the city treasury for any expenditure unless an appropriation has been made in the budget resolution, nor for any expenditure covered by the budget resolution unless there is a sufficient unexpended balance left after deducting the total past expenditures and the sum of all outstanding orders and incumbrances. No officer or employee of the city shall place any orders or make any purchase except for a purpose and to the amount authorized in the budget resolution. Any obligation incurred by any person in the employ of the city for any purpose not authorized in the budget resolution or for any amount in excess of the amount therein authorized shall be a personal obligation upon the person incurring the expenditure. 
Sec. 7.08. - Alterations in the budget. 
    After the budget resolution has been adopted, the council shall have no power to increase the amounts fixed in the budget resolution, by the insertion of new items or otherwise, beyond the estimated revenues and/or reserves, unless the actual receipts exceed the estimates and then not beyond the actual receipts. The council may at any time, by resolution, approved by three (3) of the five (5) council members, reduce the sums appropriated for any purpose by the budget resolution, or by an affirmative vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members, authorize the transfer of sums from unencumbered balance of appropriations in the budget resolution to other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93; Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 7.09. - Emergency appropriation in budget. 
    The council may include an emergency appropriation as a part of the budget but not to exceed ten (10) percent of the total budget. A transfer from the emergency appropriation to any other appropriation shall be made only by an affirmative vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members and shall be used only for the purposes designated by the council. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 7.10. - Disbursements, how made. 
    No disbursement of city funds shall be made except by check signed by the mayor or mayor pro tem and city clerk and such other officer as the council may direct and specifying the purpose for which the disbursement is made and the fund from which it is drawn. No such check shall be issued until there is money to the credit of the fund from which it is to be paid sufficient to pay it together with all outstanding incumbrances upon the fund. No such check shall be issued until the claim to which it relates has been supported by an itemized bill, payroll, or timesheet approved and signed by the responsible city officer who vouches for its correctness and reasonableness, provided that this provision may be waived by the city clerk by having printed on the reverse side of each check issued by the city, the following words: "The undersigned payee, endorsing this check, declares that the same is received in payment or a just and correct claim against the City of Fairmont, Minnesota, and that no part of it has theretofore been paid." The city clerk shall note on each contract requiring the payment of money by the city the particular fund out of which it is to be paid. The council may by ordinance make further regulations for safe-keeping and disbursement of the funds of the city. 
Sec. 7.11. - Funds to be kept. 
    Subdivision 1. There shall be maintained in the city treasury funds provided for in the following subdivisions. 
    Subdivision 2. A general fund for the payment of such expenses of the city as the council may deem proper. Into this fund shall be paid all money not provided herein or by statute to be paid into any other fund. 
    Subdivision 3. A debt service fund, into which shall be paid all receipts from taxes or other sources for the payment of principal and interest of all obligations issued by the city except bonds issued on account of any municipally owned utility. Out of this fund shall be paid the principal and interest of such obligations when due. Any surplus in such fund not needed immediately for debt service may be invested under the direction of the council in such securities as are authorized by statute for the investment of such funds; and such investments may be liquidated at any time. To the extent required by law, a separate account in the debt service fund shall be maintained for each issue of city obligations. 
    Subdivision 4. A public utility fund into which shall be paid all money derived from the sale of obligations issued on account of any municipally owned utility and all money derived from the sale of utility services, and from the sale of any property acquired for or used in connection with any such utility. There shall be paid out of this fund the cost of the purchase, construction, operation, maintenance and repair of such utility, including the principal of and interest upon obligations which have been or shall be issued on its account. Separate accounts within the public utility fund shall be kept for all utilities which are operated separately. Such funds shall be under the management of the public utilities commission and included in its budget. 
    Subdivision 5. In addition to the foregoing funds, there may be maintained in the city treasury, whenever the council deems it advisable, the following funds: 
(a)  one (1) or more working capital or revolving fund, for financing self-sustaining activities not accounted for through other funds; 
(b)  one (1) or more trust and agency funds, for the care and disbursement of money received and held by the city as trustee or custodian or in the capacity of any agent for individuals or other governmental units; 
(c)  such other funds as may be required by statute or ordinance. 
    Subdivision 6. In lieu of establishing any of the types of funds specified in subdivision 5, the council may provide for the recording of operations or activities for which the use of such funds might be suitable through the maintenance of separate accounts in any appropriate fund already established. The council shall have full power by ordinance or resolution to make inter-fund loans, except from trust and agency funds, as it may deem necessary and appropriate from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93; Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 7.12. - Accounts and reports. 
    The city finance director shall be the chief accounting officer of the city and of every branch thereof, and the council may prescribe and enforce proper accounting methods, forms, blanks, and other devices consistent with the law, this charter, and the ordinances adopted in accord therewith. He/she shall submit to the council a statement each month or for such other periods as the council shall direct showing the amount of money in the city treasury, the status of all funds, the amount spent as chargeable against each of the annual budget allowances and the balances left in each, and such other information about the finances of the city as the council may require. Once each year, as prescribed by state law, the city finance director shall submit a report to the council covering the entire financial operations of the city for the past year. This report shall show: the actual receipts and expenditures, omitting duplications and stating the cash balance at the beginning of the last fiscal year and at the close; the total outlays for operation and maintenance, and the total capital outlays; the condition of each of the funds; the total receipts by sources and the total expenditures by general purposes, the total outstanding bonds and debts of the city, when due, the amount of new bonds issued and the amount redeemed, and the interest rate of each; the condition of all the annual budget allowances; an inventory of all the property owned by the city; and such further information as the city finance director deems advisable or the council requires. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 7.13. - City indebtedness. 
    Except as provided in sections 7.14 and 7.15, no obligations shall be issued to pay current expenses but the council may by resolution issue and sell obligations for any other municipal purpose in accordance with the proceedings and within the limits prescribed by the laws of Minnesota except in the case of obligations for which an election is not required by this charter or by state law, no such obligations shall be issued and sold without the approval of a majority of the electors of the city voting thereon at a general or special election. 
Sec. 7.14. - Tax anticipation certificates. 
    At any time after January 1st, following the making of an annual tax levy, the council may issue certificates of indebtedness in anticipation of the collection of taxes levied for any fund and not collected. The total amount of certificates issued against any fund for any year with interest thereon until maturity shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the total current taxes for the fund uncollected at the time of issuance plus the cash on hand in the fund. Such certificates shall be issued on such terms and conditions as the council may determine, but they shall become due and payable not later than the first day of April of the year following their issuance. The proceeds of the tax levied for the fund against which tax anticipation certificates are issued and the full faith and credit of the city shall be irrevocably pledged for the redemption of the certificates in the order of their issuance against the fund. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 7.15. - Emergency debt certificates. 
    If, in any year, the receipts from taxes or other sources should, from some unforeseen cause, become insufficient for the ordinary expenses of the city, or if any calamity or other public emergency should subject the city to the necessity of making extraordinary expenditures, the council may, by ordinance, issue and sell on such terms and in such manner as the council determines emergency debt certificates to run not to exceed three (3) years. A tax sufficient to pay principal and interest on such certificates with the margin required by law shall be levied as required by law. The ordinance authorizing an issue of such emergency debt certificates shall state the nature of the emergency and be approved by an affirmative vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members. It may be passed as an emergency ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93) 
CHAPTER 8. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 8.01. - Power to make improvements and levy assessments. 
    The city shall have the power to make any and every type of public improvement not forbidden by the laws of this state and to levy special assessments to pay all or any part of the cost of such improvements as are of a local character. The amounts assessed to benefited property to pay for such local improvements may equal the cost of the improvement, including all costs and expenses connected therewith, with interest, until paid, but shall in no case exceed the benefits to the property. The council may prepare and adopt a comprehensive ordinance prescribing the procedures which shall be followed thereafter in making all local improvements and levying assessments therefore. In the absence of such ordinance, all local improvements may be made and assessments levied therefore as prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 8.02. - Assessments for services. 
    The council may provide by ordinance that the cost of sprinkling, snow or rubbish removal, or of any other service to streets, sidewalks, or other public property, or the costs of any services to private property undertaken by the city may be assessed against the property benefited and collected in like manner as are special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 8.03. - Local improvements regulations. 
    After this charter takes effect local improvements commenced prior thereto shall be completed and assessments may be levied and securities issued for the financing thereof as prescribed by the law (or charter provisions) applicable thereto. The council may prepare and adopt a comprehensive ordinance prescribing the procedure which shall be followed thereafter in making all local improvements and levying assessments therefor. Such ordinances shall supersede all other provisions of the law on the same subject. In the absence of such ordinance all local improvements may be made and assessments levied therefore as prescribed by an applicable law. 
Sec. 8.04. - Public work: how performed. 
    Public works, including all local improvements, may be constructed, extended, repaired, and maintained either directly by day labor or by contract. The city shall require contractors to give bonds for the protection of the city and all persons furnishing labor and materials pursuant to the laws of the state. 
Sec. 8.05. - Assessments for fines and civil penalties. 
    The council may provide by ordinance that fines and civil penalties imposed by the city, including late payment penalties, may be assessed against the real property which was the subject matter, or related to the subject matter, of the fines and penalties. The ordinance shall provide that the city must first attempt to obtain voluntary payment of the fines and penalties. The ordinance shall further require the city to give notice and an opportunity to be heard to the property owner listed on the official tax records before the assessments are imposed. The assessments shall be collected like special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § 2, 9-22-97) 
CHAPTER 9. - EMINENT DOMAIN 

Sec. 9.01. - Power to acquire property. 
    The city may acquire, by purchase, gift, device, or condemnation, any property, corporeal or incorporeal, either within or without its corporate boundaries, which may be needed by the city for any public use or purpose. Easements for slopes, fills, sewers, building lines, poles, wires, pipes and conduits for water, gas, heat and power may be acquired by gift, devise, purchase, or condemnation in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 9.02. - Proceedings in acquiring property. 
    The necessity for the taking of any property by the city shall be determined by the council and shall be declared by a resolution which shall describe such property as nearly as may be and state the use to which it is to be devoted. In acquiring property by exercising the power of eminent domain, the city shall proceed according to the laws of this state, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 9.03. - Payment of award. 
    When an award of damages is confirmed in any proceedings for the taking of property for public use by right of eminent domain, or whenever the court renders final judgment in any appeal from any such award and the time for abandoning such proceedings by the city has expired, the city shall, as provided by statute, pay the amount of the award or judgment of the court, as the case may be; and if not so paid, judgment therefore may be had against the city. 
Sec. 9.04. - City may abandon proceedings. 
    The city may, by resolution of the council at any stage of the condemnation proceedings or at any time within thirty (30) days after final determination thereof, abandon such proceedings as to all or any part of the property sought to be acquired and shall pay all reasonable costs and expenses thereof, including fees of counsel. 
Sec. 9.05. - City may take entire plant. 
    If the city condemns a public utility which is operated at the time of the commencement of the condemnation proceedings as one (1) property or as one (1) system, it shall not be necessary in the condemnation proceedings or any of the proceedings of the council, to describe or treat separately the different kinds of property composing such system; but all of the property, lands, articles, franchises, and rights, which comprise such system may, unless otherwise ordered by the court, be treated together as one (1) property and an award for the whole property in one (1) lump sum may be made by the commissioners or other body assessing the damages on condemnation. This does not prevent the city, when the plant and property are separable into distinct parts, from acquiring only such part or parts thereof as may be necessary in the public interest. 
CHAPTER 10. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 10.01. - Franchises defined. 
    The word "franchise" as used in this chapter shall be construed to mean any special privileges granted to any person, co-partnership, or corporation, in, over, upon, or under any of the highways or public places of the city, whether such privilege has heretofore been granted by it or the State of Minnesota, or shall hereafter be granted by the city or by the State of Minnesota. 
Sec. 10.02. - Franchise ordinances. 
    The council may grant franchises by ordinance adopted by an affirmative vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members, but in no case shall a franchise be granted by an emergency ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons or legal entities requesting use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with the public's right in such places, or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places. A franchise shall be required for the construction or operation of the following enterprises, which shall include but not be limited to: a street or other railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transportation by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city or its inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas, cable television, or any other such utility, or for any other such purpose shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets of public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93; Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 10.03. - Term of franchise limited. 
    No perpetual franchise shall ever be granted, nor shall any franchise be granted for a longer period than twenty-five (25) years. 
Sec. 10.04. - Power of regulation reserved. 
    The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the exercise by all persons or legal entities of any franchise, however acquired, and whether such franchise has been heretofore granted by it or by the State of Minnesota, or shall hereafter be granted by the city or by the State of Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 10.05. - Regulation of rates and charges. 
    All persons or legal entities exercising franchises in the city shall give courteous, efficient, and adequate service at reasonable rates. A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management, normally yield above all operating expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon all money honestly and efficiently invested in the plant and equipment used by the company in the public service within the city. This shall not be construed as a guarantee of a return and in no case shall there be any return upon franchise value. The city council shall have the right to regulate rates, if permitted by state or federal law, and if determined by the council to be in the best interest of the city to have rates so regulated. Within these limits, the determination of the maximum price or rate to be charged by any company for service rendered to the city or to any person or persons within the city may be made by direct negotiations between the company and the council at public hearings. In case of failure to reach an agreement by this method, the council shall, not less than thirty (30) days before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative; the company shall appoint a representative; and these two (2) select a third person, preferably an expert in valuation and rate making, who shall together constitute a board of arbitration. This board shall report its findings as soon as possible and the rate which it shall agree upon by a majority vote shall be the legal rate, subject to revision by any court of competent jurisdiction. Schedules or rates thus fixed shall be as flexible as may be. The parties may by mutual agreement revise existing schedules of rates at any time, proceeding in each case as provided for the original rates. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 10.06. - Conditions in every franchise. 
    All conditions specified in this section shall be a part of every franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise: 
(a)  That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the terms of sections 10.01 to 10.08, inclusive, as well as all other pertinent provisions of this charter. 
(b)  Fares, rates, and charges shall be at all times just, fair and reasonable for the services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed in the manner provided in section 10.05 of this charter. 
(c)  That the council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public. 
(d)  That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its value. 
(e)  That no sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee shall have filed in the office of the city clerk an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder. The assignee or lessee shall also file a bond in such amount and with such conditions as the council may require, which bond shall run to the city as obligee, with sureties satisfactory to the council, and shall obligate the assignee or lessee to discharge all obligations and liabilities imposed by said franchise. 
(f)  That every grant in said franchise contained of permission for the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the street for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the council shall have the power to require such alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting thereof, as the council may at any time deem necessary for the safety, health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing under ground of all wires for whatsoever purpose used. 
(g)  Every franchise and every extension or renewal of such franchise, shall contain a provision for its acceptance in writing by the grantee within thirty (30) days after its passage by the council. In the event that a petition for referendum is received by the council, the franchise agreement or its extension or renewal shall be signed by the grantee prior to its submission to the vote of the people. No such franchise shall be binding upon the city until its acceptance by the grantee. Such acceptance shall be construed to be an acceptance of, and consent to all the terms, conditions, and limitations contained in the ordinance granting the franchise as well as of the provisions of this charter. 
(h)  Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute. Whenever ten (10) percent of the registered voters of the last municipal election petition the council to acquire a franchise, the council shall within thirty (30) days after the presentation of such petition, submit the same to the voters of the city, at an election for that purpose, provided that if any other municipal election is to occur within ninety (90) days after the presentation of said petition the council may in its discretion submit said matter at such election. The violation by the holder of any franchise or any of the express provisions prescribed by this section shall be a sufficient cause for the forfeiture of the franchise by a resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 10.07. - Further provisions of franchises. 
    The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension thereof such other and further conditions and restrictions as the council may deem proper to protect the city's interests, nor shall anything contained in this charter limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing franchises. 
CHAPTER 11. - PUBLIC OWNERSHIP AND OPERATION OF UTILITIES 

Sec. 11.01. - Acquisition and operation of utilities. 
    The city may own and operate any gas, water, heat, power, light, telephone or other public utility for supplying its own needs for utility service or for supplying utility service to private consumers or both. It may construct all facilities reasonably needed for that purpose and may acquire any existing utility properties so needed. The city shall have power to acquire the public utilities by gift, purchase or combination under the power of eminent domain. The operation of all public utilities owned by the city shall be under the supervision of the council, except as to such duties as may be delegated and reserved to the public utilities commission. 
Sec. 11.02. - Department of administration [Public Utilities Commission]. 
(a)  The public utilities commission is in charge of the water and light utilities and any other utilities that may hereafter be acquired by the city. The public utilities commission shall be composed of five (5) members. One (1) member may be a rural consumer of the utility services, notwithstanding any ordinance or charter requirement limiting membership on boards and commissions to city residents. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of three (3) years. Their appointment shall be confirmed and their salary fixed by the council. No member shall be reappointed who has served five (5) three-year terms. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business. 
(b)  A maximum of ten (10) percent of the gross income of the public utilities commission may be transferred annually to the general fund provided that such transfer does not impair present obligations and only if debt service and proper reserves for bonded indebtedness will not be impaired by such transfers. Once its annual budget has been adopted, no other transfers may be made without public utilities commission approval. No other loans, grants, or transfers shall be made from any utility funds to any non-utility fund without prior approval of the public utilities commission. 
(c)  The public utilities commission shall: 
(1)  Recommend candidates to the city administrator for appointment as the director of public utilities from those recruited by the city administrator with the assistance of the public utilities commission. 
(2)  Develop qualifications and job descriptions for the director of public utilities. 
(3)  Delegate the day-to-day operation of the utilities to the public utilities director. 
(4)  Develop policies, procedures, and plans to serve as guidelines to the public utilities division, in the performance of its tasks and roles. 
(5)  Formulate policies, procedures, and plans consistent with the overall goals and objectives of the city as determined by the council. 
(6)  Recommend to the council all agreements and contracts. 
(7)  Approve purchases of materials, supplies, services, and equipment used in the operation and maintenance of the public utilities division, where such items have received prior approval through budgetary process, subject to the following: 
a.  The commission must comply with uniform purchasing procedures when competitive bids are required. 
b.  Follow the same guidelines for purchasing as provided by law and city procedures. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 3, 3-22-93) 
Sec. 11.03. - Rates and finances. 
    Upon recommendations made by the public utilities commission or upon its own motion, the council may fix rates, fares and prices for municipal utilities but such rates, fares and prices shall be just and reasonable. In like manner the council may prescribe the time and manner in which payments for all such services shall be made, and may make such other regulations as may be necessary and prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 4, 3-22-93) 
Sec. 11.04. - Purchase in bulk. 
    The council may, in lieu of providing for the local production of gas, electricity, water, and other utilities, purchase the same in bulk and resell them to local consumers at such rates as it may fix. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 4, 3-22-93) 
Sec. 11.05. - Lease of plant. 
    The council may, if the public interests will be served thereby, contract with any responsible person(s) or legal entity(ies), for the operation of any utility owned by the city, upon such rentals and conditions as it may deem necessary; but such contract shall be embodied in and let only by an ordinance approved by unanimous vote of the council and subject to popular referendum. Such ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance. In no case shall such contract be for a longer term than ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 4, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 93-19, 1-10-94) 
Sec. 11.06. - Public utility; how sold. 
    No public utility owned by the city shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city unless the full terms of the proposition of sale or other disposition are embodied in an ordinance approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at a general or special election. In the case of a water works or light plant, any sale, lease, or abandonment shall be subject, in addition, to the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, § 4, 3-22-93) 
CHAPTER 12. - MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12.01. - Official publications. 
    The council shall annually designate a legal newspaper of general circulation in the city as its official newspaper in which shall be published ordinances and other matters required by law to be so published as well as such other matters as the council may deem in the public interest to have published in this manner. 
Sec. 12.02. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the city shall before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath of office in substantially the following form: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) to support the constitution of the United States and of this state and to discharge faithfully the duties developing upon me as (mayor, council member, city administrator, city clerk, etc.) of the City of Fairmont to the best of my judgment and ability." 
Sec. 12.03. - City officers not to be interested in contracts. 
    Except as otherwise permitted by law, no officer of the city who is authorized to take part in any manner in any contract with the city shall voluntarily have a personal financial interest in such contract or personally benefit financially therefrom. 
Sec. 12.04. - Official bonds. 
    The city administrator, and such other officers and employees of the city as may be provided for by ordinance, shall each before entering upon the duties of his/her respective office or employment, give a corporate surety bond to the city in such amount as may be fixed by the council as security for the faithful performance of his/her official duties and the safekeeping of the public funds; such bonds may be either individual or blanket bonds in the discretion of the council. They shall be approved by the city council, and approved as to form by the city attorney, and filed with the city clerk. The provisions of the laws of the state relating to official bonds not inconsistent with this charter shall be complied with. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 12.05. - Sale of real property. 
    No real property of the city shall be disposed of except by ordinance. The proceeds of any sale of such property shall be used as far as possible to retire any outstanding indebtedness incurred by the city in the purchase, construction, or improvement of this or other property used for the same public purpose. If there is no such outstanding indebtedness, the council may by ordinance or resolution designate some other public use for the proceeds. 
Sec. 12.06. - Vacation of streets. 
    The council may, by resolution approved by an affirmative vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members, vacate any street or alley or part thereof within the city; such vacation may be made only after published or posted notice and an opportunity has been given to affected property owners and the public to be heard, and upon such further terms and by such procedure as the council by ordinance may prescribe. A notice of completion of such proceedings shall be filed with the proper county officers in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 93-11, 8-23-93) 
Sec. 12.07. - City to succeed to rights and obligations of former city. 
    The city shall succeed to all the property, rights, and privileges, and shall be subject to all the legal obligations of the city under the former charter. 
Sec. 12.08. - Effective date of this charter and terms of present officers. 
    This charter shall take effect on the date or at the times stated in the amending ordinance. The first election under this charter shall be held on the date herein specified, in the year 1969. The terms of all present elected officers shall continue unchanged to the expiration of such terms. Thereafter, only such elected officers as are provided for herein shall be elected. 
Sec. 12.09. - Statutes not affected by charter. 
    All general laws and statutes of the state applicable to all cities operating under home rule charters, or applicable to cities of the same class as the City of Fairmont operating under home rule charters, and not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, shall apply to the City of Fairmont, and shall be construed as supplementary to the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 12.10. - Existing ordinances continued. 
    All ordinances and regulations of the city in force when this charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, are hereby continued in full force and effect until amended or repealed. 
Sec. 12.11. - Pending condemnations and assessments. 
    Any condemnation or assessment proceeding in progress when this charter takes effect shall be continued and completed under the laws under which such proceedings were begun. All assessments made by the city prior to the time when this charter takes effect shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as if this charter had not been adopted. 
Sec. 12.12. - Ordinances to make charter effective. 
    The council shall by ordinance make such regulations as may be necessary to carry out and make effective for provisions of this charter. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
;adv10; The following table shows the location in the Charter of amendments to same adopted after July 2, 1975: 
Ordinance 
Number Adopted Charter 
Section 57  5-20-76 6.03  
Adoption 
Date Section  Section 
this Code Ref. of 11-5-91 2.03, 2.08-2.14 
6.01  
Ordinance 
Number Adopted Section  Section 
this Code 93-4  3-22-93 2       Rpld 6.03       Rnbd 6.04, 6.05       as 6.03, 6.04 3       Added 11.02 4       Rnbd 11.02-11.05       as 11.03-11.06 93-11  8-23-93 2.10, 2.12, 
3.04, 7.08, 
7.09, 
7.11 sub. 5, 
7.15, 10.02, 
12.06 93-13  9-27-93 2.05       Rpld 5.01-5.18       Added 5.01-5.09 93-19  1-10-94 2.07, 3.02, 
3.03, 6.03, 
7.05, 7.06, 
7.08, 7.11, 
7.12, 7.14, 
8.01, 8.02, 
9.02, 10.02, 
10.04, 10.05, 
10.06(b), (g), (h), 
11.05       Added 2.15 95-8  3-20-95 2.06 95-12  9-11-95 4.03 97-4  9-22-97 1 3.12 2 8.05 99-9  7-26-99 4.01, 4.03  
CITY CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Fairmont City Code" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, § 130) 
Charter reference- Revision and codification of ordinances, § 3.11. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify, M.S. § 415.021. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter of the context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling, unless they are clearly in conflict with the provisions of this Code, or otherwise clearly inapplicable, the rules of construction established for the state statutes apply in the construction of this Code. 
    Abandoned property. The words "abandoned property" means tangible or intangible property that has come into the possession of the city, remains unclaimed by the owner and has been in the possession of the city for at least sixty (60) days and has been declared such by resolution of the council. 
    City. The words "city" or "the city" mean the City of Fairmont, Martin County, Minnesota. 
    City council or council. The words "city council" or "council" mean the council of Fairmont, Minnesota. 
    Code. The word "Code" means the Fairmont City Code as designated in section 1-1. 
    Conjunctions. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    County. The word "county" means Martin County, Minnesota. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a position appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May. The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The words "may not" state a prohibition and have a prohibitory effect. 
    Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city by title only, i.e., "mayor," "city manager," "clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of this city. 
    Ordinance or city ordinance. The unqualified use of the term "ordinance" or "city ordinance" shall be construed to be followed by the phrase "of the City of Fairmont, Minnesota." 
    Owner. The word "owner" shall, when applied to a building or land, include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Property. The word "property" includes real, personal and mixed property. 
    Real property. The words "real property," include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means a way, public or private, comprising a portion of the boulevard of a street, including that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, which is improved, designed or intended for the principal use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. A signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write, provided that the person's name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" or "state" mean the State of Minnesota. 
    Street. The word "street" means a way, public or private, for the conveyance principally of vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, avenue, parkway, road, alley, lane, throughway, expressway, highway, place or however otherwise designated, consisting of a roadway and boulevard, the latter of which may contain a sidewalk. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" means seven (7) days. 
    Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. Unless otherwise designated, the word "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, §§ 310, 410, 420, 440) 
State Law reference- Interpretation of statutes generally, M.S. § 645.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Computation of time. 
(a)  When the term "successive weeks" is used in any ordinance providing for the publishing of notices, the word "weeks" shall be construed as calendar weeks. The publication upon any day of such weeks shall be sufficient publication for that week, but at least five (5) days shall elapse between each publication. At least the number of weeks specified in "successive weeks" shall elapse between the first publication and the day for the happening of the event for which the publication is made. 
(b)  When, in any ordinance, the lapse of a number of months before or after a certain day is required, such number of months shall be computed by counting the months from such day, excluding the calendar month in which such day occurs, and including the day of the month in the last months so counted having the same numerical order as the day of the month from which the computation is made, unless there be not so many days in the last month so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire the last day of the month so counted. 
(c)  Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment, or thing is ordered or directed, and the period of time or duration for the performance or doing thereof is prescribed and fixed by law, the time, except as otherwise provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from the computation. 
(d)  When an application, payment, return, claim, statement or other document is to be delivered to or filed with a department, agency or instrumentality of this city on or before a prescribed date and the prescribed date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, it is timely delivered or filed if it is delivered or filed on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, § 430) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. §§ 645.13-645.151. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes, etc., references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, § 320) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 645.49. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Appropriating funds or establishing or relating to the annual budget; 
(3)  Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)  Establishing positions, classifying employees or setting salaries not codified in this Code; 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way; 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing street grades; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way streets, speed limits, load limits or loading zones not inconsistent with this Code; 
(9)  Which rezones specific property or adopts a zoning map; 
(10)  Dedicating, accepting or rejecting any plat or subdivision; 
(11)  Annexing or deannexing property; 
(12)  Relating to cable television; 
(13)  Whose purpose has been accomplished; 
(14)  Which is special although permanent in effect; 
(15)  Which is temporary although general in effect; 
and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, § 210) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 645.35. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, § 220) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. §§ 645.35, 645.36. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Wherever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be a penal offense punishable by a fine not exceeding seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Whenever an offense in this Code is substantially similar to an offense in state law, the penalty for such offense shall be as provided for such state offense. 
(c)  The city may bring an action to restrain, enjoin or abate violations of this Code. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, §§ 510-540) 
State Law reference- Authorized penalty for ordinance violations, M.S. § 609.034. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code or any ordinance is held or declared to be unconstitutional, inoperative or void, such holding or invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code or any ordinance, and it shall be construed to have been the legislative intent to adopt this Code or the ordinance without the unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative part therein, and the remainder of this Code or the ordinance after the exclusion of such part or parts shall be deemed and held to be valid as if such part or parts had not been included herein. If this Code or any ordinance or any provision thereof is held inapplicable to any person, group of persons, property or kind of property, or circumstances or set of circumstances, such holding shall not affect the applicability hereof to any other person, property or circumstance. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, § 230) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have been obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code for example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
In no case may changes in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code be made. 
(Code 1984, Title 1, §§ 160, 170) 
Charter reference- Ordinance amendments, § 3.10. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
    The city seal shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk and affixed by him/her to documents. The official city seal shall be a circular disk having engraved thereon "The City of Fairmont" and such other words, figures or emblems as the council may, by resolution, designate. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 540; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 2-2. - Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings. 
    The council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before the council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine questions therein presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective thirty (30) days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and decorum in such proceedings. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 530) 
Sec. 2-3. - Civil defense. 
    The model municipal civil defense ordinance set forth in Bulletin No. 14, dated January 22, 1968, prepared and published by the state department of civil defense, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city administrator, is adopted as the civil defense ordinance of the city. Every provision contained in such ordinance is hereby adopted and made a part of this section as fully as if set forth explicitly herein. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, Ch. 14) 
Charter reference- Adoption by reference, § 3.08. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62. 
ARTICLE I.5. - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND CIVIL PENALTIES 

Sec. 2-4. - Specified. 
    Sections 2-4 through 2-12 shall govern administrative citations and civil penalties for violations of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98) 
Sec. 2-5. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that there is a need for additional alternative methods of enforcing the City Code. While criminal fines and penalties have been the most frequent enforcement mechanism, the administrative enforcement of the municipal code may increase compliance with the Code, encourage citizens to become involved in the process of enforcement, and is more informal and cost effective by keeping minor violations out of the criminal court system. Accordingly, the city council finds that the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate alternative method of enforcement of the Municipal Code that is also an effective way to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. This method of enforcement shall be in addition to and not exclusive of any other legal remedy including the filing of criminal charges which may be pursued for City Code violations. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98) 
Sec. 2-6. - General provisions. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of the City Code is an administrative offense, which may be subject to an administrative citation and civil penalties pursuant to sections 2-4 through 2-12. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fines for offenses initiated by administrative citation. The city council is not bound by that schedule when a matter is appealed to it for administrative review. The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to administrative hearing officers. 
(d)  The city administrator must adopt procedures for administering the administrative citation program. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98) 
Sec. 2-7. - Administrative citation. 
(a)  Any person authorized to enforce provisions of the City Code may issue an administrative citation upon belief that a Code violation has occurred. The citation will be issued in person or by mail to the person responsible for the violation or attached to the motor vehicle in the case of a vehicular offense. The citation must state the date, time, and nature of the offense, the name of the issuing officer, the amount of the scheduled fine, and the manner for paying the fine or appealing the citation. 
(b)  The person responsible for the violation must either pay the scheduled fine or request a hearing within fourteen (14) days after issuance. Payment of the fine constitutes admission of the violation. A late payment fee of ten (10) percent of the scheduled fine amount shall be imposed in accordance with section 2-11. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98) 
Sec. 2-8. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  The city council shall periodically approve a list of people, from which the city administrator will randomly select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is requested. The hearing officer is a public officer as defined by Minnesota Statutes section 609.415. The hearing officer must not be a city employee. 
(b)  The person charged with a violation may request a hearing before a single hearing officer. 
(c)  The person charged with a violation shall have the right to request no later than five (5) days before the date of the hearing that the assigned hearing officer be removed from the case. One (1) such request for each case will be granted automatically by the city administrator. A subsequent request must be directed to the assigned hearing officer who will decide whether he or she can fairly and objectively review the case. The city enforcement officer may remove a hearing officer only by requesting that the assigned hearing officer find that he or she cannot fairly and objectively review the case. If such a finding is made, the officer shall remove himself or herself from the case, and the city administrator shall assign another hearing officer. 
(d)  Upon the hearing officer's own initiative or upon the written request of the person charged with a violation or the city, the officer may issue a subpoena for the attendance of a witness or the production of books, papers, records, or other documents that are material to the matter being heard. The party requesting the subpoena shall be responsible for serving the subpoena in the manner provided for in civil actions and for paying the fees and expenses of any witness. A person served with a subpoena may file an objection with the hearing officer promptly but no later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance. The officer may cancel or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable or oppressive. Any person who, without just cause, fails or refuses to attend and testify or to produce the required documents in obedience to a subpoena shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Alternatively, the party requesting the subpoena may seek an order from district court directing compliance. 
(e)  Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the person charged with the violation at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, unless a shorter time period is agreed to by all parties. At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer shall tape record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits. The officer shall receive and give weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence, which possesses probative value that is not outweighed by prejudicial effect. 
(f)  The hearing officer has the authority to determine that a violation occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine, and to reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon compliance with appropriate conditions. When imposing a penalty for a violation, the hearing officer will consider the following factors: 
(1)  The duration of the violation; 
(2)  The frequency or reoccurrence of the violation; 
(3)  The seriousness of the violation; 
(4)  The history of the violation; 
(5)  The violator's conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing; 
(6)  The good faith effort by the violator to comply; 
(7)  The economic impact of the penalty on the violator; 
(8)  The impact of the violation upon the community; and, 
(9)  Any other factors appropriate to a just result. 
    The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine for more than one (1) day of the continuing violation, but only upon a finding that (1) the violation caused a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety, or welfare or that (2) the accused intentionally and unreasonably refused to comply with the code requirement. The hearing officer's decision and supporting reasons must be in writing. 
(g)  The failure to pay the fine or request an appeal within thirty (30) days after the citation or the failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator's rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the violation. A hearing officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. Examples of "good cause" are: death or incapacitating illness of the person charged with a violation; a court order requiring the person charged to appear for another hearing at the same time; and lack of proper service of the citation or notice of the hearing. "Good cause" shall not include: forgetfulness and intentional delay. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2018-16 , 8-27-18) 
Sec. 2-9. - Judicial review. 
    An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the hearing officer in accordance with state law. The request for judicial review shall be filed in Martin County District Court and served upon the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the final decision of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2018-16 , 8-27-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-16 , adopted Aug. 27, 2018, repealed the former § 2-9 and redesignated the former §§ 2-10-2-12 as §§ new §§ 2-9-2-11 to read as set out herein. Former § 2-9 pertained to administrative review and derived from Ord. No. 98-3, adopted Feb. 23, 1998. The redesignated sections have retained their historical notations. 
Sec. 2-10. - Recovery of civil penalties. 
(a)  If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it shall constitute: 
(1)  A lien upon the real property upon which the violation occurred if the property or improvements on the property was the subject of the violation and the property owner was found responsible for that violation, or 
(2)  A personal obligation of the violator in all other situations. 
(b)  A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same manner as taxes. 
(c)  A personal obligation may be collected by any appropriate legal means. 
(d)  A late payment fee of ten (10) percent of the fine shall be assessed for each thirty-day period, or part thereof, that the fine remains unpaid after the due date. 
(e)  During the time that a civil penalty remains unpaid, the provisions of City Code section 14-24 shall apply to any license, permit, or other city approval sought by the violator or for property under the violator's ownership or control. 
(f)  Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending or revoking a license associated with the violation. 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2018-16 , 8-27-18) 
Note- See editor's note at § 2-9. 
Sec. 2-11. - Criminal penalties. 
    The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state law: 
(1)  Failure, without good cause, to pay a fine or request a hearing within thirty (30) days after issuance of an administrative citation. 
(2)  Failure, without good cause, to appear at a hearing which was scheduled under section 2-8. 
(3)  Failure to pay a fine or comply with conditions imposed by a hearing officer within thirty (30) days after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the hearing officer 
(Ord. No. 98-3, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2018-16 , 8-27-18) 
Note- See editor's note at § 2-9. 
Secs. 2-12-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 2-16. - Salaries. 
    The salary of the mayor shall be forty-eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) per year. The salary of each council member shall be twenty-four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per year. A per diem payment shall be made to the mayor and each council member for attending out-of-town meetings, seminars and conferences. The per diem for out-of-town meetings shall be at the rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per full-day meetings and twenty dollars ($20.00) per half-day meetings. A full-day meeting is hereby defined as any meeting lasting more than four (4) hours. A half-day meeting is hereby defined as any meeting lasting four (4) or less hours. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 190(1); Ord. No. 89-16, 11-27-89; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 2008-04, § 1, 6-9-08) 
Sec. 2-17. - Group insurance. 
    The mayor and the council members shall be eligible for all insurance benefits provided full-time salaried city employees. The cost of the insurance shall be paid by the city in the same proportion as is provided to full-time employees. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 190(2); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
State Law reference- Group insurance authorized, M.S. § 471.616. 
Sec. 2-18. - Reimbursement of expenses. 
    The mayor and each council member shall be reimbursed for necessary disbursements incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 190(3); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 2-19. - Organization meetings. 
    At its first regular meeting in January in each even-numbered year the council shall, in the order herein stated and prior to commencing its regular order of business, reorganize by: 
(1)  Having all new officers and officials take and subscribe their oath of office; 
(2)  Seating all new members of the council; 
(3)  Selecting a mayor pro tem; 
(4)  Selecting a secretary of the council who may be the city clerk; and 
(5)  Performing such other organizational acts or functions as may be permitted or required. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 160) 
Charter reference- Mayor pro tem, § 2.06. 
Sec. 2-20. - Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second, and fourth Monday of each month in the council chambers of the city hall. Council meetings shall be at 5:30 p.m. 
    At the first regular meeting in January of each year the council shall determine the dates, if any, of meeting which may be rescheduled because of the regular meeting date falling on a holiday. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 120; Ord. No. 90-1, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 94-2, 2-14-92; Ord. No. 96-9, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 99-6, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 5-22-17) 
Charter reference- Council meetings, § 3.01. 
State Law reference- Minnesota Open Meeting Law, M.S. § 471.705. 
Sec. 2-21. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the council may be called by majority vote of the council at any meeting. Special meetings of the council may also be called by the mayor or two (2) council members, upon at least twelve (12) hours' notice to each member of the council. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally to each member or left at his/her usual place of residence or business with some responsible person, provided, however, that notice of a special meeting may be waived when a written waiver of notice has been signed by all members of the council. Any written waiver of notice shall contain the act, time, and place specified for such meeting, and a general listing of all items of notice shall be appended to and become a part of the minutes of the meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be posted. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 150; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Charter reference- Special meetings, § 3.01. 
State Law reference- Minnesota Open Meeting Law, M.S. § 471.705. 
Sec. 2-22. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at regular meetings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Roll call; 
(3)  Determination of a quorum; 
(4)  Consent agenda; 
(5)  Approval of minutes (actual reading may be waived if each member of the council was furnished with a copy thereof, and if unanimous consent is given); 
(6)  Scheduled hearings and bid lettings; 
(7)  Administrative appeals; 
(8)  Financial reports; 
(9)  Reports of boards, committees, and department heads; 
(10)  Licenses and permits; 
(11)  Old business; 
(12)  New business; 
(13)  Bills; 
(14)  Adjournment. 
(b)  The order of business may be varied by the presiding officer, but all public hearings shall be held at the time specified in the notice of hearing. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, §§ 130, 140) 
Charter reference- Council to determine its order of business, § 3.03. 
Sec. 2-23. - Robert's rules. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised shall govern all council meetings as to procedural matters not provided for by charter or ordinance. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 130) 
Charter reference- Council to determine its rules, § 3.03. 
Sec. 2-24. - Committees. 
(a)  There is hereby created a committee of the whole composed of all members of the city council. The committee of the whole shall be the only standing committee of the council. 
(b)  The council may create committee to assist in the conduct of the operation of the city government with such duties as the council may specify not inconsistent with the City Charter or City Code. 
(c)  Membership and selection of members shall be as provided by the council if not specified by the City Charter or City Code. 
(d)  Any committee so created shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special purpose for which it was created, or when abolished by a majority vote of the council. 
(e)  No committee so appointed shall have powers other than advisory to the council except as otherwise specified by the City Charter or City Code. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 180; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Charter reference- Authority to establish committees, § 2.02. 
Sec. 2-25. - Administrative appeals. 
    If any person deems himself aggrieved by any administrative decision of the city administrator, or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the council upon serving a written request therefor upon the mayor and city administrator at least five (5) days prior to any regular council meeting. Such request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At such hearing the appellant may present any evidence he/she deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with the time requirements and on his/her own motion or the motion of the appellant, the city administrator, or member of the council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 502; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 2-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-13, adopted October 2, 1995, amended the Code by repealing § 2-26 in its entirety. Former § 2-26 pertained to term limits, and derived from Ord. No. 94-10, adopted November 8, 1994. 
Secs. 2-27-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Oath of office, § 12.02; official bonds, § 12.04. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-41. - Personnel rule. 
    The council may establish personnel rules setting forth rights, duties, and responsibilities of employees. Such rules may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 510) 
Charter reference- General authority of council over employees, §§ 2.07, 2.09. 
Sec. 2-42. - Interim emergency succession. 
(a)  Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly elected and lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices. 
(b)  In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the mayor, council, and city administrator shall be forthwith notified by any such persons and by any means available to gather at the city hall. In the event that safety or convenience dictates, an alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a chairman and secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively. 
(2)  They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done, or the imminence thereof. 
(3)  They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency. 
(4)  By majority of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions on the council, (including the office of mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who are unable to be present. 
(c)  Interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again available and returns to his/her position, or the sate of emergency has passed and a successor is designated and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first. 
(d)  The interim emergency council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices, and appoint other key governmental officials to serve during the emergency. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, §§ 710-730; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
State Law reference- Local Interim Emergency Succession Act, M.S. § 1.27. 
Secs. 2-43-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- City administrator generally, § 2.10. 

Sec. 2-56. - Bond. 
    The city administrator shall be bonded at the city's expense through a position bond which will indemnify the city in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 220) 
Charter reference- Official bonds, § 12.04. 
Sec. 2-57. - Functions. 
(a)  The city administrator shall have general supervisory control over all divisions and employees with managerial and operational authority and responsibilities during such time as the council is not in regular or special session. 
(b)  The city administrator shall have the following responsibilities, duties, and limitations: 
(1)  Boards, commissions, citizen advisory committees, and committees. He/she shall take an active part in the activities of all boards, commissions, citizen advisory committees, and committees and shall assist the chairman of all boards, commissions, citizen advisory committees, and committees in personal liaison work with the council. 
(2)  Overall administration. He/she shall provide overall direction and coordination for city planning, administration, and operations to ensure effective municipal services, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies established by the city council. 
(3)  Appointment of personnel. He/she shall appoint all city employees (except the city attorney) and shall have the power to dismiss, suspend, and discipline, in accordance with the City Charter, personnel policy, union contracts, state and federal laws. He/she also shall have the power to authorize a department head to appoint and remove subordinates serving under the department head. 
(4)  Attendance at council meetings. He/she shall attend meetings of the council and shall participate in its discussion, but he/she is not entitled to vote at council meetings. 
(5)  Recommend ordinances and resolutions. He/she shall recommend to the council for adoption, such proposals as he/she may deem necessary for the welfare of the people and the efficient administration of the affairs of the city. 
(6)  Additional duties. He/she shall fulfill all job requirements as adopted by the council. He/she shall also perform such other duties as may be required of him/her by City Charter, ordinance, resolution, or statutes adopted by the city, the state or the United States of America. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, §§ 210, 230(1)-(6); Ord. No. 84-5, 3-12-84; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 2-58. - Reversal, modification, etc., of actions. 
    The council may rescind, modify, or reverse any action taken by the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 230(7)) 
Secs. 2-59-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City clerk, § 2.11. 

Sec. 2-71. - Council meeting agendas. 
(a)  The city clerk shall, prior to the appropriate regular council meeting, assemble the following items: 
(1)  An agenda for the forthcoming meeting. 
(2)  A statement showing the condition of each fund. 
(3)  A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified accounts claiming payment for goods or services rendered the city during the preceding month, such list to be called the "accounts payable listing." 
(4)  A copy of all minutes to be considered and reports of division directors. 
(b)  The city clerk shall cause to be mailed or delivered to the mayor and council members copies of all documents specified in subsection (a). 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 460(1); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 2-72. - Secretary to council. 
    The city clerk shall serve as secretary to the council, arrange and post notice of meetings, record minutes of all proceedings, maintain accurate and complete records of all actions, and perform other duties as directed by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 460(2)) 
Sec. 2-73. - Other duties. 
    The city clerk shall prepare and publish legal notices and issue other requests for bids, register voters, maintain related records, and perform all other duties as required by law. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 460(3)) 
Secs. 2-74-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HEALTH OFFICER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Obstructing health officer, § 15-3. 

Sec. 2-86. - Generally. 
    The health officer shall be a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of Minnesota. He/she shall be appointed by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 310; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
State Law reference- Health officer to be physician, M.S. § 145.01. 
Sec. 2-87. - Duties. 
    The health officer shall have and exercise all authority and powers, and perform all duties granted or imposed upon health officers by law. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 330(1)) 
Secs. 2-88-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-101. - Divisions established. 
    The following divisions of the city are established: 
(1)  Community development. 
(2)  Finance and administration. 
(3)  Public works. 
(4)  Public safety. 
(5)  Public utilities. 
(6)  Legal. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 310; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 99-8, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 2001-01, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 2-102. - Division directors generally. 
(a)  The divisions and departments of the city shall be under the supervision of division directors with responsibilities as set forth herein. 
(b)  All division directors shall report directly to the city administrator. 
(c)  The city administrator may rescind, modify, or reverse any action taken by any division director. 
(d)  All division directors shall perform the duties required of their offices by state and federal law, the Charter, this Code, and such other duties not in conflict there with as may be required by the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, §§ 410, 420; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 99-8, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 2001-01, 2-14-00) 
Charter reference- Bonds, § 12.04. 
Secs. 2-103-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIVISION 

Sec. 2-116. - Departments. 
    The community development division shall consist of the following departments: 
(1)  Building inspector. 
(2)  Planning and zoning administration. 
(3)  Economic development. 
(4)  Fire marshal. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 320; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; planning and development, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 2-117. - Director of community development. 
(a)  The director of community development shall supervise the economic development staff, city planning, city building inspector, the fire marshal, and the zoning official. 
(b)  He/she shall provide direction to all community development functions of the city, directed toward the effective achievement of city improvements and future development, consistent with the goals and objectives developed and approved by the city planning commission, the city council, and other commissions and boards which may be involved. 
(c)  He/she shall fulfill all job requirements as related to the community development division as adopted by the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 430; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Secs. 2-118-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION 

Sec. 2-131. - Departments. 
    The public works division shall consist of the following departments: 
(1)  Airport. 
(2)  Dredge. 
(3)  Parks. 
(4)  Engineering. 
(5)  Streets. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 330; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 99-8, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 2001-01, 2-14-00) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 2-132. - Director of public works. 
(a)  The director of public works shall supervise the parks department, dredge activities, street department, engineering and airport manager. 
(b)  He/she shall provide direction to all public works functions of the city to ensure continuing maintenance of those services and to plan for modification, upgrading or extension of those services as may be consistent with the goals and objectives of the city council. 
(c)  He/she shall fulfill all job requirements as related to the public works division as adopted by the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 440; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 99-8, 5-24-99; Ord. No. 2001-01, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 2-133-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINANCE DIVISION 

Sec. 2-146. - Departments. 
    The finance division shall consist of the following departments: 
(1)  Finance. 
(2)  Accounting. 
(3)  Data processing. 
(4)  Insurance. 
(5)  Investments. 
(6)  Liquor store. 
(7)  Collections. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 340) 
Cross reference- Municipal liquor store, § 3-116 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 2-147. - Director of finance. 
(a)  The director of finance shall supervise the municipal liquor store and the accounting and data processing departments. 
(b)  He/she shall direct all city functions involving financial planning and financial operations, including the provision of financial reporting to the council, and the public utilities commission, as well as administrative functions for the other divisions and for the council. 
(c)  He/she shall coordinate the responsibilities of his/her office with appropriate council committees. 
(d)  He/she shall act in the capacity as city treasurer. 
(e)  He/she shall fulfill all job requirements as related to the finance division as adopted by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 450; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Secs. 2-148-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION 

Sec. 2-161. - Departments. 
    The public safety division shall consist of the following departments: 
(1)  Police. 
(2)  Civil defense. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 350; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 10-16 et seq.; police department, § 21-16 et seq. 
Sec. 2-162. - Director of public safety. 
(a)  The director of public safety shall supervise the police department, and department of civil defense. 
(b)  He/she shall provide coordination and overall direction to the public safety functions of the city, to ensure that the city facilities, equipment, and staff are adequate in all ways to protect the welfare of the citizens. 
(c)  He/she shall fulfill all job requirements as related to the public safety division as adopted by the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 470; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Secs. 2-163-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PUBLIC UTILITIES DIVISION 

Sec. 2-181. - Departments. 
    The public utilities division shall consist of the following departments: 
(1)  Electric energy. 
(2)  Steam heating. 
(3)  Waste water. 
(4)  Water. 
(5)  Other utilities as deemed appropriately by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 360) 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 25. 
Sec. 2-182. - Director of public utilities. 
(a)  The director of public utilities shall supervise the separate utility departments as listed in section 2-181. 
(b)  He/she shall plan and direct the efficient and effective operation of the city's utility operation, consistent with the goals and objectives of the public utilities commission and the council. 
(c)  He/she shall coordinate the responsibilities of his/her office with the director of community development, director of public works and the director of finance. 
(d)  He/she shall fulfill all job requirements as related to the public utilities division as adopted by the public utilities commission and the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 480; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Secs. 2-183-2-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LEGAL DIVISION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Division 7, § 2-188, is derived from Code 1984, tit. 2, § 370, omitted from inclusion at time of publication. 

Sec. 2-188. - Legal department. 
(a)  Appointment. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council and shall, prior to such appointment, be admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the State of Minnesota. Assistant city attorneys may be appointed in the same manner. Assistant city attorneys may be assigned duties as the city attorney sees fit. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The city attorney shall represent the city in all causes in which the city is interested. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor to the mayor, to the council, and to all departments and agencies of the city except as may be otherwise provided by the Charter. The city attorney shall prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and against the city and every department and agency thereof. In the furtherance of these general powers, the city attorney shall: 
(1)  Advise officers, Advise the mayor, the council or its committees, and the heads of all departments, agencies, boards, and commissions on all matters relating to their official powers, duties and functions. 
(2)  Prepare ordinances. Be responsible for the preparation of all ordinances and resolutions as requested by the mayor or the council. 
(3)  Give opinions. Render legal opinions upon any question of law submitted by the mayor, the council, or the heads of all departments, agencies, boards, or commissions. 
(4)  Attend council meetings. Attend all council meetings in their entirety for the purpose of giving the council any legal advice requested by its members, and at the request of the presiding officer, attend committee board or commission meetings. 
(5)  Prepare legal instruments. Prepare, review, and approve all contracts, deeds, documents, and instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the city, its departments and agencies. 
(6)  Prosecute criminal violations of state statutes, as authorized by law, and city ordinance violations. 
(7)  Deliver records to successor. Deliver all records, documents and property of every description in his/her possession, belonging to his/her office or to the city, to his/her successor in office. 
(8)  Special counsel. In case of special or unusual circumstances or in any case where the city attorney by reason of conflict of interest cannot represent the city, the council, upon the request of the city attorney, may by resolution appoint special counsel and fix his/her compensation as well as any other terms of agreement. 
(c)  Attorney service by contract. At any time that there is not a full time city attorney in office, the city may, by action of the majority of the city council, retain an attorney on a contract basis. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 370; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
DIVISION 8. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No 2001-01, adopted Feb. 14, 2000, deleted former Div. 8 of this article in its entirety. Former Div. 8, § 2-189, pertained to the engineering division and derived from Ord. No. 99-8, adopted May 24, 1999. 

Secs. 2-189-2-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation and finance, § 7.01 et seq. 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits, and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 2-196. - Purchasing procedure. 
    It is unlawful for any agent or employee of the city to order the purchase of any supplies or materials or contracts for any services except upon forms and according to procedures duly adopted therefor. All purchase orders shall be approved by the head of the division for which purchase is being made and by him/her presented to the director of finance for approval. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 550; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Charter reference- Purchases and contracts, §§ 6.04, 6.05. 
Sec. 2-197. - Contracts to be under seal. 
    All contracts to which the city is a party shall, in addition to being signed by the mayor and city clerk, have the city seal impressed thereon. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 540) 
Sec. 2-198. - Disbursement of funds and allowance of bills. 
    All disbursements shall be made by order signed by the mayor, director of finance and the city clerk, duly authorized by the council, and shall indicate that it is to be paid out of the proper fund. No such order shall be paid until there is money to the credit of the fund out of which it is to be paid sufficient to pay the same together with then outstanding encumbrances upon such fund, provided that temporary transfers of funds may be made by the director of finance as required, and such transfers shall be included in any required reports. No claim against the city shall be allowed, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, unless accompanied by an itemized bill and voucher, payroll, or time sheet signed by a responsible officer who has personal knowledge of the facts in the case and certified to the correctness and reasonableness of the claim; provided, however, that the council may provide for the regular payment without specific individual authorization or filing of an itemized bill and voucher, payroll or time sheet of the salaries and wages of regular employees or laborers, and any other fixed charges which have been previously duly and regularly authorized. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 560) 
Sec. 2-199. - Facsimile signatures. 
    The mayor, director of finance, and city clerk are authorized to request any depository of the city funds to honor an order for payment when such instrument bears a facsimile of their signatures, and to charge the same to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn as effectively as though it were their manually written signatures. Such authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time and effort. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 570) 
Sec. 2-200. - Commercial building loan program. 
(a)  In this section: 
(1)  Rehabilitation means to restore a structure to a condition of adequate construction in compliance with state and local building codes, to adequately house a commercial business and not endanger the life or safety of the general public or occupants of the structure. "Rehabilitation" does not include the remodeling of a structure for the sole purpose of housing a new tenant or upgrading the use for an existing tenant except as stated for building code purposes. 
(2)  Small and medium sized commercial buildings means a building that is all of the following: 
a.  Is suitable for use or is currently being used in connection with a trade or business. 
b.  Is not subsidized by the State of Minnesota or the United States government or any agency thereof. 
c.  Is not solely residential. 
(b)  The city establishes a commercial building loan program pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 459.31 for rehabilitation loans, according to the terms set forth herein. 
(c)  Eligible applicants for the loan program shall be the owners of a small and medium sized commercial building which is physically deteriorating, under used, economically inefficient or functionally obsolete, and is in need of rehabilitation to meet applicable building codes. The applicant must show that the building is in need of rehabilitation, that he is unable to afford rehabilitation loans in the private mortgage market and that granting the rehabilitation loan will be in the best interests of the city. 
(d)  The city council shall by resolution establish the application procedure and may by resolution change the same from time to time. 
(e)  Priority consideration shall be given to buildings which are required, pursuant to any court order, statute or ordinance, to be repaired, improved or rehabilitated. Other applications shall be considered on a first-come, first-served basis within the available fund limits during each loan cycle. 
(Ord. No. 83-3, §§ 1, 2, 4, 3-28-83) 
Secs. 2-201-2-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ABANDONED PROPERTY, SURPLUS PROPERTY, ETC. 

Sec. 2-216. - Scope. 
(a)  Procedure set forth in this article shall be applicable to any manner or means of transfer, change of ownership, conveyance of property belonging to the city unless otherwise provided by the council. The city may, under some circumstances, dispose of property by ordinance not in accordance with this procedure with a two-thirds vote of the members of the council. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to perishable property, dated property, or property that has been received by the city in excess of quantities needed, when such property is disposed of in a manner approved by the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 630) 
Sec. 2-217. - Disposal of unclaimed property. 
    The following applies to unclaimed property: 
(1)  If the city clerk knows the identity and location of the owner, he shall serve written notice upon him at least thirty (30) days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and location of whom are known by the city clerk, notice shall also be served upon him. Such notice shall describe the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the council after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(2)  Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned property, the city clerk shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if known), and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a brief description of such property. The text of such notice shall also state the time, place and manner of sale of all such property, except cash and negotiables. Such notice shall be published once at least three (3) weeks prior to sale. The sale shall be made to the highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the council in its resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice. 
(3)  Lost property. Paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to any item which is surrendered to the city as lost property. The city will make a reasonable effort to identify and locate the rightful owner of the lost property. Any such item shall be retained by the city for a period of six (6) months and shall be returned to its owner upon proper written request and proof of ownership at any time during that period. Within the six-month time period, the finder may upon a proper written request, make a claim for return of the property upon the expiration of the retention period. The city council may require as a recondition of return of the property to its finder or owner, that such person pay all costs reasonably incurred by the city in connection with its efforts to identify and locate the owner. After six (6) months, any item which has not been returned to its owner or claimed by the finder, shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of as provided in section 2-218 of this article. No owner or finder shall have a claim against the city for disposition of lost property, if a good faith effort has been made to comply with this paragraph. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to stolen property, keys, firearms, dangerous weapons, illegal items, liquor, or narcotics. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 610(2); Ord. No. 91-4, 5-28-91) 
State Law reference- Unclaimed property, M.S. § 471.195. 
Sec. 2-218. - Disposal of excess property. 
(a)  The city clerk may recommend to the council that certain personal property owned by the city is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the council, the property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated, and the city clerk authorized to dispose of the property in the manner stated in this section. 
(b)  The city clerk may sell surplus property with a total value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) through negotiated sale. 
(c)  The city clerk shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale either by publication once in the official newspaper or by posting in a conspicuous place in the city hall at the city clerk's option. Such sale shall be by auction. 
(d)  The city clerk shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property worth a total estimated value over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Notice of public sale shall be given, stating the time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper. Such sale shall be to the person submitting the highest sealed bid. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 620) 
Sec. 2-219. - Use of funds received from sale. 
    All proceeds from sale made pursuant to this article shall be paid into the appropriate fund of the city and expense thereof paid therefrom. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 640) 
Sec. 2-220. - Payment of proceeds of sale to owner. 
    The former owner, if he makes claim within eight (8) months from the date of publication of the notice provided for in this article, and upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest. Such payment shall be made from the general fund. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 650) 
Sec. 2-221. - Restrictions on sale to city employees. 
    No property shall be sold to any officer or employee of the city unless the sale is open, public, and competitive. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 660) 
Secs. 2-222-2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish, etc., committees, boards, etc., § 2.02. 
Cross reference- Park board, § 18-16 et seq.; planning commission, § 20-26 et seq.; public utilities commission, § 25-199 et seq.; board of appeals and adjustments, § 26-56 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-236. - General authority of council. 
    The council shall have the power to change any rule or regulation of any board, commission, or citizen advisory committee, or any appointment, or any rates or changes, or any item in the budget, and shall have full and complete power over every detail of the operation of any board, commission, or citizen advisory committee. The council shall not exercise such power until after ten (10) days' notice in writing shall have been given to the board, commission, or citizen advisory committee, specifying the particulars in detail in which the council intends to exercise such power, and a public hearing given thereon. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 110) 
Sec. 2-237. - Appointment and term of members. 
(a)  Except as provided by statute, the city charter, or by ordinance all board, commission and citizen advisory committee members shall be appointed by the council for a term of three (3) years. 
(b)  All board, commission, and citizen advisory committee appointments authorized by ordinance or resolution shall be made by the council at the first meeting in January of each year. New appointees shall assume office on February 1. January 31 is the date of expiration of terms. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner for unexpired terms. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 120) 
Sec. 2-238. - Membership restrictions. 
(a)  No appointed board, commission or citizen advisory committee member shall be an employee of the city. 
(b)  Only residents of the city shall be considered for appointment to a board, commission or citizen advisory committee. 
(c)  No person shall serve on more than one (1) board, commission or citizen advisory committee. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 150) 
Sec. 2-239. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of any board, commission, or citizen advisory committee may be removed from office by a two-thirds vote of the entire council, but such member shall be entitled to a public hearing before such a vote is taken. The council may remove a member without a hearing if he misses three (3) successive meetings. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 130) 
Sec. 2-240. - Remuneration. 
    All appointed board, commission, and citizen advisory committee members may be compensated in an amount to be fixed by the city council, and may also be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in performance of their duties, when such expenses have been authorized by the council before incurred. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 160) 
Sec. 2-241. - Officers. 
    The chairman and secretary and any other officer so determined by any board, commission, or citizen advisory committee shall be chosen from and by the board, commission, or citizen committee membership at its first meeting in February of each year. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 140(1)) 
Sec. 2-242. - Council liaison. 
    At least one (1) council member shall act as liaison with each board, commission, and citizen advisory committee. The council member shall be permitted to participate in discussion, but is not entitled to vote at such meetings, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 140(2); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 2-243. - Staff appointment. 
    A member of the city staff shall serve in an advisory capacity on each board, commission, and citizen advisory committee. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 140(3)) 
Secs. 2-244-2-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF EQUALIZATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Board of equalization, § 7.04. 

Sec. 2-256. - Composition. 
    The board of equalization shall consist of three (3) members. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 210) 
Sec. 2-267. - Meetings. 
    The board of equalization will meet annually at a date established by the county assessor. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 220) 
Sec. 2-258. - Duties. 
    The board of equalization shall: 
(1)  Hold public hearings on property tax assessments. 
(2)  Review and make determinations on individual property tax assessments. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 230) 
Secs. 2-259-2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF HEALTH[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Obstructing board of health, § 15-3. 

Sec. 2-271. - Composition. 
    The council shall serve as the board of health. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 310) 
State Law reference- Local board of health, M.S. § 145.01. 
Sec. 2-272. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the board of health may be called by any member of the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 320) 
Sec. 2-273. - Duties. 
    The board of health, shall have and exercise all authority and powers, and perform all duties granted or imposed upon local boards of health by law. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 330(1)) 
Secs. 2-274-2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SAFETY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-286. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a safety council. 
Sec. 2-287. - Members. 
    The safety council shall consist of five (5) members. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1110; Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-16) 
Sec. 2-288. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the safety council shall be on a regular basis or at such other times as may be deemed necessary, providing adequate notice is furnished. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1120) 
Sec. 2-289. - Duties. 
    The safety council shall: 
(1)  Serve as the committee to receive complaints and suggestions from citizens regarding traffic and pedestrian safety issues, and other items which pertain to the general safety, and make recommendations to the council. 
(2)  Develop solutions to complaints in consultation with the chief of police, director of community development, or the director of public works. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the council in any area affecting the general health and well-being of residents of the community. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1130; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Secs. 2-290-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-301. - Established. 
    The Fairmont municipal airport advisory board is established. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 2-302. - Members. 
    Such board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by a majority of the council. Two (2) persons shall be appointed to serve until January 31, 1997 and three (3) persons shall be appointed to serve until January 31, 1988. Thereafter, the terms shall be for three (3) years. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms on the board. Appointed members shall include at least one (1) and no more than three (3) pilots and/or aircraft owners. Ex officio members of the board will include the fixed base operator, maintenance supervisor, and city staff as assigned by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 2-303. - Filling of vacancies and removal. 
(a)  Vacancies on the board shall be reported to the city council and filled by like appointment for the unexpired term. 
(b)  A member of the board may be removed from the board prior to the expiration of his or her term by a four-fifths vote of the city council. By a majority vote, the board may recommend to the city council, the removal of any board member for failure to attend board meetings or other just causes. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 2-304. - Officers, meetings and organizations. 
(a)  The board shall organize itself and elect one (1) its members as president. The president shall be responsible for calling and presiding at all meetings. The board shall also elect one (1) of its members as vice president, who shall perform the duties of the president in the absence of the president. The board shall also elect one (1) of its members as secretary, who shall record the proceedings of the board. 
(b)  The board must establish a regular time and place of meeting and must hold at least one (1) regular meeting bimonthly. Special meetings of the board may be called at any time by the president or by any three (3) or more members of the board. 
(c)  A majority of all members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and all business may be transacted by a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 2-305. - Duties. 
    The board shall advise the city council in the following matters: 
(1)  In promoting and attracting and otherwise encouraging the development of aviation related trades; 
(2)  In creating and implementing public relations and information in programs of the airport; 
(3)  In maintaining policies with respect to the safe operation and management of the airport; 
(4)  In maintaining a high quality environment in the maintenance and operation of both public and private facilities at the airport; 
(5)  In reviewing the annual maintenance program and facility development programs; 
(6)  In negotiations of the FBO and maintenance agreements; and 
(7)  In performing all other duties assigned to the board from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, 12-12-94) 
Secs. 2-306-2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-401. - Human rights commission created. 
    There is hereby established a human rights commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 2-23-98) 
Sec. 2-402. - Policy. 
    It is the policy and goal of the city to strive to improve human relations in the city, and in cooperation with the Minnesota Department of Human Rights ("MnDHR"), to secure for all citizens equal opportunities in housing, employment, public accommodations, public services and education. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 2-23-98) 
Sec. 2-403. - Establishment and composition. 
    A Fairmont human rights commission (hereinafter "commission," for purposes of this article), comprised of nine (9) members and advisory to the council, is hereby established, subject to the provisions of City Code sections 2-236 to 2-243. Commission members shall be appointed upon recommendations of the mayor and with the approval of the council. One commission member shall be a city council member. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-28-02) 
Sec. 2-404. - Terms. 
    Members of the commission shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years; provided, that the first commission shall be comprised of two (2) members whose terms expire January, 1999; two (2) members whose terms expire January 2000; two (2) members whose terms expire January 2001; and a council member. The two (2) new members appointed to increase the membership from seven (7) to nine (9) shall have their first terms staggered with one expiring in January 2003 and one in January 2004. Members whose terms have expired may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. No member shall serve more than three (3) consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-28-02) 
Sec. 2-405. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties of the commission are as follows: 
(1)  To generally advise the council regarding civil rights and human rights issues and policies; 
(2)  To adopt by-laws and/or rules of conduct for its affairs; 
(3)  To develop and implement, in cooperation with MnDHR, programs of formal and informal education and conflict resolution. 
(4)  To formulate and submit to the council for consideration and approval a human rights program for the city, to give increased effectiveness, direction, and encouragement to the work of all individuals and agencies addressing themselves to planning, policy making, and educational programming in the area of civil rights and human rights, and to help people identify their responsibilities and opportunities to bridge cultural, racial, religious, and other differences. 
(5)  To coordinate efforts with the human rights commissions of neighboring communities, where appropriate; 
(6)  To make recommendations on issues of civil rights and human rights, to the city administrator and the council in regard to [1] any aspect of city government, and [2] the adoption of specific policies or actions needed to provide for full equal opportunity in the community. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 2-23-98) 
Secs. 2-406-2-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-501. - Policy and purpose. 
    Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: 
(1)  To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters. 
(2)  To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters. 
(3)  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions. 
(4)  To comply with provisions of M.S. § 12.25, which requires that each political subdivision of Minnesota shall establish a local organization for emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-502. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings herein set out:] 
    Disaster means a situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action. 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, without limitations, except functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. Emergency management includes those activities sometimes referred to as "civil defense" functions. 
    Emergency management forces means the total personnel resources engaged in city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this resolution or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies. 
    Emergency management organization means the staff responsible for coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state program requirements. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 2, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-503. - Establishment of an emergency management organization. 
    There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the director of public safety, hereinafter called the director. The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 3, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-504. - Powers and duties of the director. 
(a)  The director, or designee, with the consent of the city administrator, shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for emergency management. The director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency plan. 
(b)  The director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions subject to approval of the council. 
(c)  The director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present such plan to the council for its approval. When the council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plan of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions within the state. 
(d)  In accordance with the state and city emergency plan, the director shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the city emergency plan when a disaster occurs. 
(e)  The director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the city's emergency management organization and to the governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency. 
(f)  The director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency. 
(g)  Consistent with the state emergency services law, the director shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as provided by M.S. § 12.25. 
(h)  The director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the governor with reference to emergency management. 
(i)  The director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when requested by the council. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 4, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-505. - Local emergencies. 
(a)  A local emergency may be declared only by the mayor or his or her legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three (3) days except by or with the consent of the council. Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance thereunder. 
(c)  No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 5, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-506. - Emergency regulations. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the governor or the council, the council may by resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulation, drills, or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies. 
(b)  Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing: shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulation and their availability for inspection at the city clerk's office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or at such other places in the affected area as the council shall designate in the resolution. By resolution, the council may modify or rescind any such regulation. 
(c)  The council may rescind any such regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded every such regulation shall expire at the end of thirty (30) days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent such conflict exists. 
(d)  During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. § 12.31 and notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds including, not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of call for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 6, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-507. - Emergency management a government function. 
    All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 7, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-508. - Participation in labor dispute or politics. 
    The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 8, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 2-509. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article or any regulation adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, § 9, 3-22-99) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages in parks, § 18-40. 
State Law reference- Liquor act, M.S. § 340A.101 et seq.; local restrictions authorized, M.S. § 340A.509. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one (0.5) percent alcohol by volume. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 2. 
    Brew pub means a brewer who also holds one (1) or more retail on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one (1) licensed premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted in M.S. §340A.24, subdivision 2. 
    Brewer means a person who manufacturers malt liquor for sale. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 4. 
    Church means a building which is principally used as a place where persons of the same faith regularly assemble for the public worship of God. 
    Club means an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which: 
(1)  Has more than fifty (50) members; 
(2)  Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one (1) year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; 
(3)  Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 7. 
    Distilled spirits means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whisky, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 9. 
    Eligible organization means any fraternal, religious, veterans, or other nonprofit organization which has been in existence for at least three (3) years and which has at least thirty (30) active members. 
    Hotel or motel means any establishment having a resident proprietor or manager, where in consideration of payment therefor, food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients, which maintains for the use of its guests not less than eighty (80) guest rooms with bedding and other usual, suitable and necessary furnishings in each room, which is provided at the main entrance with a suitable lobby, desk and office for the registration of its guests on the ground floor, which employs an adequate staff to provide suitable and usual service, and which maintains under the same management and control as the rest of the establishment and has, as an integral part thereof, a restaurant as defined herein. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 13. 
    Interest means any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a retail liquor establishment, but does not include bona fide loans; bona fide fixed sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures, or supplies to such establishment; or an interest of ten (10) percent or less in any corporation holding a license. A person who receives money from time to time directly or indirectly from a licensee, in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining "bona fide" the reasonable value of goods or things received as consideration for any payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the prohibitions of this definition shall be considered. 
    Intoxicating liquor means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt beverages, containing in excess of three and two-tenths (3.2) percent of alcohol by weight. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 14. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on one (1) of the businesses regulated and licensed under this chapter. 
    Low alcohol malt liquor means a fermented malt beverage containing two (2) percent or less of alcohol by weight. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 15a. 
    Manufacturer means every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of materials, prepares or produces intoxicating liquor for sale. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 17. 
    Nonintoxicating malt liquor means malt liquor that contains not less than one-half of one percent (0.5) alcohol by volume nor more than three and two-tenths (3.2) percent alcohol by weight. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 19. 
    Off-sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed premises only. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 20. 
    On-sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 21. 
    Package means a sealed or corked container of alcoholic beverages. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 22. 
    Restaurant means an establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly served at tables to the general public, and having facilities for seating not less than thirty (30) guests at one (1) time. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 25. 
    Retail means sale for consumption. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 26. 
    Sale, sell, or sold means all forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to persons. 
    Table or sparkling wine means a beverage made without rectification or fortification and containing not more than twenty-five (25) percent of alcohol by volume and made by the fermentation of grapes, grape juice, other fruits, or honey. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 27. 
    Wine means sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than seven (7) percent nor more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 29. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 110; Ord. No. 2017-03 , 5-22-17) 
Sec. 3-2. - Exemption. 
    This chapter does not apply to: 
(1)  Medicines intended for therapeutic purposes and not intended as a beverage; 
(2)  Industrial alcohol designed for mechanical, chemical, scientific, pharmaceutical, or industrial purposes; or 
(3)  Nonpotable compounds or preparations containing alcohol. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 6110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.906. 
Sec. 3-3. - State law adopted. 
    The liquor act [M.S. Ch. 340A] is adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter. 
Charter reference- Adoption by reference, § 3.08. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62. 
Sec. 3-4. - Sale or delivery of intoxicating liquor. 
(a)  Intoxicating liquor shall not be sold or possession thereof delivered within the city, or cause to be sold or possession thereof delivered by any person except by a person holding an intoxicating liquor license issued by the city and upon premises licensed by the city. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, delivery and sale of intoxicating liquor shall be deemed to occur at the place at which purchaser accepts possession of the intoxicating liquor from the seller thereof or any agent or employee. If the purchaser of intoxicating liquor permits the seller thereof or any employee or agent of such seller to retain or require possession thereof, the place of delivery of possession and sale for the purpose of this section shall be deemed to be at the place at which possession of such liquor is thereafter re-delivered to the purchaser. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to deliveries of liquor by wholesale liquor dealers, warehousemen, or breweries, by themselves or their carriers, to the municipal liquor store or deliveries of intoxicating liquor to any licensee of this city, or to such wholesale dealer, nor shall it apply to deliveries to any club licensee. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(26)) 
Sec. 3-5. - Public consumption. 
    No person shall consume alcoholic beverages upon public sidewalks or streets of the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 270(4), 690(2), (7)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages in parks, § 18-40. 
Sec. 3-6. - Nudity, sexual conduct, etc., in licensed establishments. 
(a)  In this section: 
(1)  License means any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(2)  Licensed premises means the real estate in the city for which a license is issued. 
(3)  Nudity means the showing of the post-pubertal human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of a post-pubertal female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purposes of this definition, the female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola are covered. 
(4)  Sado-masochistic abuse means scenes involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually-revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, or binding or other physical restraint of any such persons, in an apparent act of sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(5)  Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(b)  The following acts or conduct in a premises which has been issued a license are contrary to the public welfare and, therefore, no license issued under this chapter shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted to occur: 
(1)  The licensee, owner, or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any nudity to occur in the licensed establishment. 
(2)  The licensee, owner, or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any sado-masochistic abuse to occur in the licensed establishment. 
(3)  The licensee, owner, or manager of any licensed establishment permitting or allowing any sexual conduct to occur in the licensed establishment. 
(c)  The city council may suspend or revoke a license for violation of this section upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with this section. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing. This section shall not be deemed to preclude other civil remedies, including injunctive relief, pending the outcome of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 84-15, § 1(1610-1630), 9-10-84) 
Sec. 3-7. - Social host liability. 
(a)  Definitions for this section: 
(1)  Alcohol. "Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, or any other distilled spirits, including dilutions and mixtures thereof. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage. "Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid containing alcohol, which contains one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume. 
(3)  Event or gathering. "Event" or "gathering" means any group of three (3) or more persons who have gathered together. 
(4)  Host or allow. "Host" or allow" means to conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a gathering or event. 
(5)  Underage person. "Underage person" is any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
a.  Host or allow an event or gathering where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when an underage person consumes any alcohol or alcoholic beverage and, 
b.  The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent consumption by the underage person. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parents' household. 
(2)  This section does not apply to legally protected religious observances. 
(3)  This article does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or three and two-tenths (3.2) percent malt liquor licenses, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are regulated by M.S. Section 340A.503, Subd. 1 (a) (1). 
(Ord. No. 2018-18 , 12-10-18) 
Secs. 3-8-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONINTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-26. - Inspections. 
    No licensee under this article shall prevent a peace officer from entering upon and inspecting the public portion of the premises of a licensee under this article during business hours without a search warrant. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 260(8)) 
State Law reference- Search warrants authorized, M.S. § 340A.704. 
Sec. 3-27. - Minors selling beer. 
    No minor shall be employed to sell or serve nonintoxicating malt liquor in any establishment holding a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 260(5)) 
Sec. 3-28. - Spiking. 
    No person licensed under this article shall permit consumption of intoxicating liquor upon his licensed premises, or permit any person to bring the same thereon unless the premises is otherwise licensed so as to permit consumption of intoxicating liquor on the premises. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 260(9)) 
Sec. 3-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3-29, prohibiting the holder of a federal retail liquor dealer's tax stamp from holding or owning a beer license in the city, derived from Code 1984, tit. 5, § 260(2), was repealed by Ord. No. 86-3, adopted Apr. 14, 1986. 
Secs. 3-30-3-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL LICENSE 

Sec. 3-41. - Required. 
    No person shall sell, or otherwise dispose of or keep or offer for on-sale or off-sale any nonintoxicating malt liquor unless a license therefor is first obtained from the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 210) 
State Law reference- Nonintoxicating malt liquor licenses generally, M.S. § 340A.401. 
Sec. 3-42. - Classification. 
    Licenses required by this division shall be of three (3) kinds: 
(1)  Off-sale licenses; 
(2)  On-sale licenses; 
(3)  Special temporary licenses. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 220) 
Sec. 3-43. - Fee and term. 
(a)  The fees to be paid to the city for off-sale, on-sale and special temporary licenses for nonintoxicating malt liquor shall be as determined by resolution of the council. 
(b)  Off-sale and on-sale nonintoxicating malt liquor licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. The fee for a license year shall be prorated on a monthly basis, and each part of a month shall constitute a full month. 
(c)  Temporary on-sale nonintoxicating malt liquor licenses shall be granted for periods not exceeding seven (7) successive calendar days and sales may be made only upon public parks specifically designated by the council or upon property owned or leased by the applicant. No more than two (2) such licenses shall be granted to an applicant during any calendar year. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 230) 
State Law reference- Nonintoxicating malt liquor license fees, M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 1; term of licenses, M.S. § 340A.411, subd. 2. 
Sec. 3-44. - Persons eligible for special temporary on-sale licenses; license applications. 
(a)  Special temporary on-sale licenses for the sale of nonintoxicating malt liquor may be issued at the discretion of the council and only to the following organizations: 
(1)  Nonprofit corporations duly organized pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 317.02. 
(2)  Congressionally chartered and incorporated veteran's organizations which have been in existence for at least ten (10) years. 
(3)  Religious organizations associated with or an integral part of a duly established church located within the city and owning real estate in the city. 
(4)  A brewer sponsoring a social event within the municipality. 
(b)  An applicant for a special temporary on-sale nonintoxicating malt liquor license must submit a written application for such license upon forms prepared for that purpose at least fourteen (14) days prior to the anticipated sale. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 250; Ord. No. 2017-03 , 5-22-17) 
State Law reference- Temporary on-sale nonintoxicating malt liquor licenses, M.S. § 340A.403, subd. 2. 
Sec. 3-45. - Manufacturers ineligible. 
    No license required by this division shall be granted to a manufacturer of alcoholic beverages or to any person holding a financial interest in such manufacture except to a brewer as permitted by Minnesota Statute §340A.301, subd. 7. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 260(3); Ord. No. 2017-03 , 5-22-17) 
State Law reference- Manufacturers not to own businesses holding retail nonintoxicating malt liquor licenses, M.S. § 340A.301, subd. 1. 
Sec. 3-46. - Transfer. 
    Each license required by this article shall be issued to the applicant only. Each license shall be issued for the location described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or another place without the approval of the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 260(7)) 
State Law reference- Retail licenses limited to space specified in license application, M.S. § 340A.410, subd. 7. 
Secs. 3-47-3-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON-SALE INTOXICATING LIQUOR 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-66. - Inspections. 
    Any police officer, building inspector, or any properly designated officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect and search the public portion of the premises of a licensee under this article during business hours without a search warrant. The business records of each intoxicating liquor licensee, including federal and state tax returns, shall be available for inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city or the council at all reasonable times. Any such licensed premises may be inspected by the health officer at such time or times as necessary or advisable to maintain clean and sanitary conditions. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(11), (12), (16)) 
State Law reference- Search warrants authorized, M.S. § 340A.704. 
Sec. 3-67. - Enlargement, alterations, or extension of premises. 
    Proposed enlargement, alteration, or extension of premises licensed under this article shall be reported to the council at or before the time application is made for a building permit for any such change and the licensee shall also give such information as is required by ordinances. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(27)) 
Sec. 3-68. - Mixing in unlicensed public places. 
    No person shall mix or prepare intoxicating liquor for consumption, in any public place not licensed by the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 690(2)) 
Sec. 3-69. - Employment of persons with criminal records on licensed premises. 
    No person shall be employed on premises licensed under this article who has been convicted of a felony or of any law relating to the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquor. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(20)) 
Sec. 3-70. - Sale for off-premises consumption. 
    No licensee under this article shall sell intoxicating liquor off-sale, except for brewer off-sale licensees. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(5); Ord. No. 2017-03 , 5-22-17) 
Sec. 3-71. - Presence of minors in licensed establishments. 
    No minor shall be employed in a room where "on-sales" are made and no such person shall be allowed to be or remain in such room unless accompanied by his parent or guardian, except that minors may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a busboy or dishwashing services. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(7)) 
State Law reference- Employment of minors in places where intoxicating liquor sold for on-premises consumption, M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 10. 
Sec. 3-72. - Ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits. 
    No intoxicating liquor licensee shall keep ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits on any licensed premises or permit their use on the premises as a beverage or mixed with a beverage. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(15)) 
State Law reference- Sales of ethyl alcohol and neutral spirits prohibited, M.S. § 340A.506. 
Sec. 3-73. - Possession of federal wholesale liquor dealer's stamp or gambling stamp. 
    No intoxicating liquor licensee shall apply for or possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer's special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680 (14)) 
State Law reference- Gambling prohibited on premises, M.S. § 340A.410, subd. 5. 
Sec. 3-74. - Sales by clubs. 
    All sales of intoxicating liquor by organizations holding club licenses under this article shall be made to bona fide members and guests only. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 690(3)) 
Sec. 3-75. - Sales in hotel and motel rooms. 
    No sale of intoxicating liquor shall be made to or in guest rooms of hotels or motels, unless: 
(1)  The rules of such hotel provide for the service of meals in guest rooms. 
(2)  The sale of intoxicating liquor is made in the manner on-sale sales are required to be made. 
(3)  Such sale accompanies and is incidental to the regular service of meals to guests therein. 
(4)  The rules of the licensee and the description, location, and number of such guest rooms are fully set out in the application for the intoxicating liquor license. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 690 (5)) 
Sec. 3-76. - Hours and days of sale. 
    No sale of intoxicating liquor shall be made between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday and on Saturday. The sale of on-sale intoxicating liquor on Sundays is allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sunday and 1:00 a.m. on Monday. Establishments serving liquor on Sunday must obtain a special license, pursuant to this Code and Minnesota Statute Section 340A.101, et seq. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 690; Ord. No. 83-12, 11-14-83; Ord. No. 86-7, 10-13-86; Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 7-23-07) 
State Law reference- Days and hours of sale, M.S. § 340A.504. 
Secs. 3-77-3-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL LICENSE 

Sec. 3-91. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, organization, corporation, or club, except wholesalers or manufacturers, to the extent authorized under state law, to directly or indirectly sell, or keep for sale, any intoxicating liquor without first having received a license to do so approved by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 610) 
State Law reference- On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses generally, M.S. § 340A.404. 
Sec. 3-92. - Classification. 
    Intoxicating liquor licenses issued by the city shall be of the following kinds: 
(1)  On-sale liquor license. 
(2)  Special club license. 
(3)  On-sale wine license. 
a.  A licensee who is licensed both to sell wine and non-intoxicating malt liquor, both for consumption on the licensed premises only, may also sell intoxicating malt liquor, for consumption on the premises only, without an additional license therefore, provided such licensee's gross receipts are at least sixty (60) percent attributable to the sale of food. 
(4)  Special Sunday on-sale license. 
(5)  Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or three and two-tenths (3.2) percent malt liquor license for a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture, as permitted by M.S. §340A.24. 
(6)  Brewer off-sale malt liquor license may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee under section 3-92(5) above and otherwise meets the criteria established at M.S. §340A.24. 
(7)  Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license to brewers who manufacture fewer than three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by the brewer. 
(8)  Brewer taproom license may be issued to a brewer that meets the criteria of M.S. §340A.26. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 620(1); Ord. No. 91-10, § 2, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 98-7, 8-31-98; Ord. No. 2017-03 , 5-22-17) 
State Law reference- General liquor licenses, M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1; wine licenses, M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5. 
Sec. 3-93. - Application; investigation; investigation fee, etc. 
(a)  Application for intoxicating liquor licenses shall be in the form prescribed by the council and may contain any information that the council may require. 
(b)  At the time a licensee submits his/her application for renewal of a license, he/she shall state the nature or amount of any contribution he/she has made for campaign or political purposes, the person to whom the contribution was made and the persons or organization for whom intended. 
(c)  All initial intoxicating liquor, wine, brew pub or brewer and special club licenses shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as determined by resolution of the council to cover costs of investigation. 
(d)  Changes in the corporate or association officers of a licensee, corporate charter of a licensee, articles of incorporation of a licensee, by-laws of a licensee or partnership agreement of a licensee shall be submitted to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after such changes are made. Notwithstanding the definition of interest in the case of a corporation, the licensee shall notify the city clerk when a person not in the application acquires an interest which, together with that of his/her spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child exceeds five (5) percent, and shall give all information about such person as required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  At any time an additional investigation is required because of a change in the ownership or control of a corporation or because of an enlargement, alteration, or extension of premises previously licensed, the intoxicating liquor licensee shall pay an additional investigating fee in an amount determined by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 630(1), (2), 680(17), (18), (22); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 2017-03 , 5-22-17) 
State Law reference- License applications and investigation fees, M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 2. 
Sec. 3-94. - License fees. 
(a)  Intoxicating liquor license fees shall be as determined by resolution of the council. When the license is for premises where the building is not ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee for the initial license, shall be the date the building is ready for occupancy. 
(b)  Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing intoxicating liquor licensee and the ownership, control and interest in the license are unchanged, no additional license fee will be required. 
(c)  No part of the fee paid for any license shall be refunded except as authorized by state law or by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 620(2), 680(23), (25)) 
State Law reference- Retail license fees, M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2; refund of license fees, M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5. 
Sec. 3-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-6, adopted March 11, 1990, amended the Code by repealing provisions contained in § 3-95 in their entirety. Said provisions pertained to bond requirements for holders of on-sale liquor licenses and derived from the Code of 1984, Title 5, § 640(5). 
Sec. 3-96. - General eligibility requirements. 
(a)  In addition to all other restrictions imposed by law or ordinance, no intoxicating liquor license shall be granted to, renewed, or held by any person: 
(1)  Who is directly or indirectly interested in more than two (2) establishments in the city to which an intoxicating liquor license has been issued. No person shall own an interest in more than two (2) establishments or businesses for which an intoxicating liquor license has been granted. 
State Law reference- Licenses issued in connection with premises of another, M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 5; limitations on issuance of licenses to one (1) person or place, M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 3. 
(2)  Who, if a corporation, does not have a manager who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license pursuant to the provisions of this title or who, in the judgment of the council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the license. 
(b)  Special club licenses shall be issued only to duly incorporated clubs. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 650(2), 660(F)-(Z); Ord. No. 86-2, 4-14-86; Ord. No. 92-10, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-92) 
State Law reference- General eligibility requirements, M.S. §§ 340A.402, 340A.404. 
Sec. 3-97. - Number of licenses. 
    The council shall issue no more intoxicating liquor licenses than permitted by Minnesota Statutes section 340A.413. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 650(4)) 
Sec. 3-98. - Places ineligible for license. 
    No intoxicating liquor license shall be granted, or renewed for: 
(1)  A premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. 
(2)  Premises that are prohibited from holding a license by state law. 
State Law reference- Location restrictions, M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 4. 
(3)  A motel, hotel, or restaurant that does not have a dining area open to the general public. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 670(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 3-99. - General license conditions. 
    Every intoxicating liquor license shall be granted subject to all the provisions of the city ordinances, resolutions, and state and federal laws. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 680(2)) 
Sec. 3-100. - Term; prorating fee. 
    Intoxicating liquor licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. The fee for a license granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a monthly basis; and each part of a month shall constitute a full month. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 620(3)) 
State Law reference- License expiration, M.S. § 340A.412, subd. 9. 
Sec. 3-101. - Transfer. 
    An intoxicating liquor license shall be issued to the applicant only. The license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or to another place without the approval of the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 650(3)) 
State Law reference- License transfers, etc., M.S. §§ 340A.410, subd. 7, 340A.412, subd. 9. 
Secs. 3-102-3-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal liquor stores, M.S. § 340A.601. 

Sec. 3-116. - Authorized. 
    A municipal liquor store may be operated by the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 710) 
Sec. 3-117. - Merchandise authorized. 
    The municipal liquor store may sell at retail intoxicating liquor, nonalcoholic wine, nonintoxicating malt liquor, tobacco products, ice, soft drinks, beverages for mixing intoxicating liquor, and food for consumption off the premises. The municipal liquor store may also offer recorded or live entertainment and make available coin-operated amusement devices. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.601, subd. 5. 
Sec. 3-118. - Location. 
    The municipal liquor store shall be at such location or locations as the council shall determine and may be either leased or owned by the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 710) 
Secs. 3-119-3-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOTTLE CLUBS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Bottle clubs, M.S. §§ 340A.414, 340A.501, subd. 5. 

Sec. 3-136. - License. 
    It is unlawful for any public establishment to allow the consumption or display of liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing liquor without a license therefor from the city. The annual fee for such license shall be as established by state law. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 1320) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals in parks, §§ 18-47, 18-54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Animal control officer generally. 
    The animal control officer shall maintain the city animal pound and perform other duties imposed on him/her by ordinance. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 380(D); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 4-2. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal control officer or any police officer may take up and impound in the city pound any animal or fowl found running at large in violation of this chapter and shall provide proper sustenance for every animal impounded. 
(b)  Within twenty-four (24) hours after an animal has been impounded pursuant to subsection (a), the animal control officer shall post a notice in three (3) conspicuous places in the city, one (1) of them at the pound, describing the animal and stating that it has been impounded. He/she shall also make a reasonable attempt to give oral or written notice to the owner if the owner is known. 
(c)  No animal impounded shall be released except to a person displaying a receipt from the clerk showing payment of the impounding fee for the sale price. The fee for impounding shall be as determined by the council by resolution. 
(d)  If any impounded animal is not redeemed within six (6) days, the animal control officer shall give an additional three-day posted notice as provided in subsection (b), of the time and place when and where the animal shall be sold. If the poundmaster is unable to sell the animal on the day stated, he/she may sell the animal as soon thereafter as possible without further notice. 
(e)  The clerk shall turn over the proceeds of such sale to the director of finance. The director shall pay the animal control officer the costs of impounding. The balance shall be paid, on order of the council, to the owner of the animal or fowl if claimed within one (1) year from the date of sale; otherwise, it shall be forfeited to the city. 
(f)  No unauthorized person shall break into the pound or release any animal legally placed therein. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 480; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
State Law reference- Notice of impounded animals, M.S. § 346.54. 
Sec. 4-3. - General restrictions on livestock; wild animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall keep any horse, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, llamas, camels, buffalo or similar animal or any animal of a wild nature (does not include small animals often kept as pets such as rabbits or ferrets) in the city, except within the Agricultural Transition Zone. No person shall permit such an animal to be kept on premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him/her except under the regulations and conditions prescribed by this chapter and Fairmont City Code section 26-151. 
(b)  No person shall keep more than a total of five (5) chickens, fowl or poultry, per recorded lot in any zoning district outside of the agricultural transition zone. Roosters are not allowed to be kept in a residential zone. 
(c)  No chicken coop, run or other structure where chickens, fowl or poultry are kept shall be maintained closer than thirty-five (35) feet from any residence, other than the residence occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such chickens, poultry or fowl are kept. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, §§ 410, 420; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96; Ord. No. 2013-01, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 4-4. - Animals at large. 
    No person shall permit any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit, chicken, geese, duck, or turkey of which he/she is the owner, caretaker, or custodian to be at large within the city. Any such animal is deemed to be at large when it is off the premises owned or rented by the owner or his/her agent and not under restraint. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 440; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 4-5. - Diseased animals. 
    Any animal with a contagious disease shall be so confined that it cannot come within fifty (50) feet of any public roadway or any place where animals belonging to or harbored by another person are kept. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 450) 
Sec. 4-6. - Manner of keeping. 
    No person shall keep any dog, cat, or other animal in the city in an unsanitary place or condition or in a manner resulting in objectionable odors or in such a way as to constitute a nuisance or disturbance by reason of barking, howling, fighting, or other noise or in such a way as to permit the animal to annoy, injure, or endanger any person or property. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 460) 
Sec. 4-7. - Care of premises. 
(a)  Every structure and yard in which animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and free of all rodents, vermin, and objectionable odors. The interior walls, ceilings, floors, partitions, and appurtenances of any such structure shall be whitewashed or painted as the health officer shall direct. Upon the complaint of any individual or otherwise, the health officer shall inspect such structure or yard and issue any such order as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Manure shall be removed with sufficient frequency to avoid nuisance from odors or from the breeding of flies, at least once each month, from October 1 to May 1 of each year and once every two (2) weeks at other times. Unless used for fertilizer, manure shall be removed by hauling it beyond the city limits. If used for fertilizer, manure shall be spread upon the ground evenly and turned under at once or as soon as the frost leaves the ground. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 470) 
Secs. 4-8-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOG AND CAT REGULATION AND LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98-9, adopted Oct. 19, 1998, repealed provisions formerly set out as Arts. II and III of this chapter. Former Art. II, §§ 4-21-4-28, pertained to dogs and derived from the 1984 Code, Title 7, §§ 310-380; former Art. III, §§ 4-41-4-44, pertained to cats and derived from Ord. No. 84-9, §§ I-VI, adopted April 9, 1984. Ord. No. 98-9 adopted new provisions as § 4-21; said provisions have been redesignated as a new Art. II, §§ 4-21-4-30, at the discretion of the editor, for indexing and classification purposes. 

Sec. 4-21. - Running at large prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or other person in possession or control, of a dog or cat, to permit such dog or cat to run at large. A dog or cat will not be deemed to be running at large if it is on a leash and under the direct control of an accompanying person. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-22. - License. 
(a)  Required. It is unlawful for any person to keep any dog or cat, older than six (6) months of age, within the city without securing an annual license therefor from the city clerk or other person designated by the city council. The clerk or other designated person shall keep a record of all licenses issued and shall issue a metal tag for each license. 
(b)  Application. Application for a dog or cat license shall be made upon a form supplied by the city. The form will require certification by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the State of Minnesota, that the dog or cat for which application for license is being made, has been inoculated against rabies and distemper and whether the dog or cat has been sterilized. 
(c)  Fee. The annual license fee shall be as determined by the council by resolution. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. The license fee shall be higher for unsterilized dogs or cats than for sterilized dogs or cats. 
(d)  Tag. The owner shall permanently affix the license to the collar of the dog or cat so licensed in such a manner that the tag may be easily seen. The owner shall be responsible for insuring that the tag is always worn by the dog or cat when it is outside of the home. 
(e)  Transferability. Dog and cat licenses are not transferrable. The city clerk or other designated person shall not refund the license fee or any part thereof for any reason. 
(f)  New residents. New residents shall have thirty (30) days to obtain a dog or cat license. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-23. - Impounding and disposition. 
(a)  Right of animal control officer or police officer to impound; notice. Any dog or cat found unlicensed, running at large or otherwise in need of impoundment, may be impounded by the animal control officer or any police officer. Notice of the impounding shall be given to the owner, if the owner is known. If the owner is unknown, the officer shall post a notice of the impoundment at the animal shelter and at city hall. The notice shall describe the dog or cat and state that if the dog or cat is not claimed within five (5) business days of the delivery or posting of the notice, the city will dispose of the impounded animal. Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six (6) months and shall show the following: 
(1)  The description of the animal by species, breed, sex, approximate age, and other distinguishing traits; 
(2)  The location where the animal was seized; 
(3)  The date of the seizure; 
(4)  The name and address of the person from whom any animal three (3) months of age or over was received; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person to whom any animal three (3) months of age or over was transferred. 
(b)  Redemption. Any dog or cat may be redeemed from the animal control officer within the time stated in the notice. If the owner is a resident of the City of Fairmont, redemption shall be made upon producing a current license and paying the impoundment fees and daily boarding charges. If the owner is not a resident of Fairmont, redemption shall be made upon producing proof of the animal having received rabies and distemper vaccinations within the last year and upon the payment of the impoundment fees and daily boarding charges. The impoundment fees and daily boarding fees shall be set by the city council with the recommendation of the animal control officer. 
(c)  Right to sell, transfer, or humanely destroy unclaimed animals. Any dog or cat not redeemed within the time specified above may be sold, transferred to a licensed educational or scientific institution under authority of Minnesota Statutes section 35.71, or humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of in a sanitary manner. Any sums received pursuant to this subsection shall be paid to the owner if said owner makes a claim within one year of the sale and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership. The sums paid to the owner shall be less the impoundment fees and daily boarding charges. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-24. - Nuisances prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner to keep a nuisance dog or cat. For the purposes of this section, a nuisance dog or cat is one which: 
(1)  Habitually barks, cries or howls; 
(2)  At any time has attacked or bitten a person off the owner's premises; 
(3)  At any time has destroyed property or habitually trespasses in a damaging manner on property of a person other than the owner; 
(4)  Is vicious or shows vicious habits or molests pedestrians or recreational conveyances users, or interferes with the driving of automobiles on public streets; 
(5)  Frequents school grounds, public parks or beaches. 
Failure of the owner or custodian of a dog or cat to prevent the dog or cat from committing such a nuisance is a violation of this Code. 
(b)  Barking dogs. It shall constitute a nuisance and be unlawful if any dog barks, whines, howls, bays, cries or makes other noise excessively so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to an individual provided that such noise lasts for a period of more than five (5) minutes continuously or intermittent barking that continues for more than an hour and is plainly audible from a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the premises where the dog is kept. It shall not be a violation of this section if the dog was barking, crying or making other noise due to harassment or injury to the dog or a trespass upon the premises where the dog is located. 
(c)  Seizure of barking dogs noise abatement. Any police officer or animal control officer may enter upon private property and seize any barking dog provided that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or animal control officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the barking; 
(2)  The officer reasonably believes that the barking meets the criteria in section 4-24(b); 
(3)  The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous complaint of a dog barking at this address on a prior date; 
(4)  The officer has made reasonable attempts to contact the owner of the dog(s) or the owner of the property and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored; 
(5)  The seizure will not involve forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass key obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other person authorized to have such a key shall not be considered as a forced entry; 
(6)  No other less intrusive means to stop the barking is available; and 
(7)  Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the owner of the dog is not possible. 
(d)  Disposition of seized barking dog. Any dog seized under the provisions of section 4-24(c) shall be taken to the animal shelter and kept there to be reclaimed by the owner. No impound fees shall be charged unless the circumstances indicate that the owner failed to cooperate with or obstructed an animal control officer's or police officer's attempts to abate the noise through other less intrusive means. The owner shall pay all other required fees. Any dog seized under section 4-24(c) which is unclaimed my be disposed of according to the provisions of section 4-23. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-25. - Owner responsibility for sanitation. 
(a)  Owners of a dog or cat are at all times responsible for the sanitation of their animal, whether on their own property, on the property of others or on public property. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any owner or other person in charge of a dog or cat, to be in a park, upon other public property or private property not owned by said person, and to allow the dog or cat to defecate and then to fail to clean up the defecation immediately. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-26. - Owner responsibility for food, water and shelter. 
    It is unlawful for any owner to fail to provide their dog or cat with sufficient wholesome food and water, clean and sanitary shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and treatment. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-27. - Female dogs or cats in heat. 
    Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other secure enclosure in such manner that it cannot come into contact with another dog or cat except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-28. - Quarantine. 
    Any dog or cat which bites a person shall be quarantined for such time as may be directed by the health officer. During quarantine the dog or cat shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal. At the discretion of the health officer, the quarantine may be on the premises of the owner; however, if the health officer requires other confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for quarantine period to an animal shelter or veterinary hospital to be paid for at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-29. - Abandonment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to abandon any dog or cat within the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 4-30. - Limitation on ownership. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, care for, have custody of or knowingly permit at any time more than three (3) dogs and three (3) cats in or about their residence or any other location under the person's control within the city. A residence or other location, may contain up to three (3) dogs and three (3) cats. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  One litter of pups or kittens under ninety (90) days of age born to a licensed dog or cat; 
(2)  Residents of newly annexed areas, provided that the owners have the animals licensed within ninety (90) days after annexation occurs, and until such time as one or more of the illegal animals dies or for some other reason is not owned or possessed by the resident; 
(3)  A kennel licensed by the Minnesota Board of Animal Health that is located in an appropriately zoned area; 
(4)  A licensed veterinarian, or; 
(5)  A city or humane society owned and operated animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 98-9, 10-19-98) 
Chapter 5 - BOATS AND LAKES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fishing in parks, § 18-52. 
State Law reference- Waters and watercraft safety, M.S. § 361.01 et seq. 

Sec. 5-1. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This chapter does not apply to duly authorized resource management, emergency and enforcement personnel when acting in the performance of their assigned duties. 
(b)  Temporary permits may be issued by the city council upon application. Upon approval, the applicant may be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 660) 
Sec. 5-2. - Enforcement. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, officers of the county sheriff's department may enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 670) 
Sec. 5-3. - Operation of watercraft. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate, dock, or anchor any watercraft as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 86B.005 upon any lake within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any watercraft: 
(1)  At a speed in excess of "slow-no wake" within one hundred (100) feet of any aeration equipment. "Slow-no wake" means operation of watercraft at the slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage and in no case greater than five (5) miles per hour. 
(2)  At a speed greater than "slow-no wake" within one hundred (100) feet of any shoreline. This paragraph shall not apply to watercraft launching or landing a water skier by the most direct route to or from open water. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, §§ 610, 630; Ord. No. 84-12, 6-25-84; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 6-10-02) 
Cross reference- Boating in parks, § 18-51. 
Sec. 5-4. - Inner tubes, air mattresses, etc. 
    No person shall use inflatable devices such as inner tubes, air mattresses, or floats on any body of water more than one hundred (100) feet from the shoreline. This section shall not apply to U.S. Coast Guard approved personal flotation devices or watercraft defined in Minnesota Statutes section 86B.005. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 640; Ord. No. 2002-03, § 1, 6-10-02) 
Sec. 5-5. - Docks. 
    It is unlawful to construct or maintain a dock: 
(1)  From city-owned shoreline without first obtaining permission from the council. 
(2)  Which interferes with navigation. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 650) 
Sec. 5-6. - Vehicle parking. 
    No person shall leave or park an unattended motor vehicle, or trailer, at a public docking area in such a way as to cause inconvenience or distress to others using such facilities. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 680) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; planning and development, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26; docks, § 5-5; community building loan program, § 2-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-16. - Minnesota State Building Code. 
(a)  Application, administration and enforcement. The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota Rule Chapter 1300. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1, when so established by this section. The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the community development department. This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by this municipality to administer the code (Minnesota Statute 16B.65) subdivision 1. 
(b)  Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statutes, 16B-62, subdivision 1. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality in Ordinance No. 2000-4. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with Minnesota Statute 16B.70. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (Minnesota Statute 16B.69) and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1300. 
(d)  Building Code. The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 16B.59 to 16B.75 is hereby adopted as the building code for this municipality. The code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein. 
(1)  The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following chapters of Minnesota Rules: 
a.  1300, Administration of the Minnesota State Building Code; 
b.  1301, Building Official Certification; 
c.  1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals; 
d.  1303, Minnesota Provisions; 
e.  1305, Adoption of the 2006 International Building Code; 
f.  1307, Elevators and Related Devices; 
g.  1309, Adoption of the 2006 International Residential Code; 
h.  1311, Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings; 
i.  1315, Adoption of the 2005 National Electrical Code; 
j.  1325, Solar Energy Systems; 
k.  1330, Fallout Shelters; 
l.  1335, Floodproofing Regulations; 
m.  1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code; 
n.  1346, Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code; 
o.  1350, Manufactured Homes; 
p.  1360, Prefabricated Structures; 
q.  1361, Industrial/Modular Buildings; 
r.  1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks); 
s.  4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; 
t.  7670, 7672, 7674, 7676 and 7678, Minnesota Energy Code 
(2)  This municipality may adopt by reference any or all of the following operational chapters of Minnesota Rules; Chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems (with locally designated options); and Chapter 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200. 
(3)  This municipality may adopt by reference Appendix Chapter J (Grading), of the 2006 International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.14, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 95-9, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 99-2, §§ 1-4, 2-22-99; Ord. No. 2003-05, §§ 1-4, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 2005-02, §§ 1-4, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 2007-05, §§ 1-4, 7-23-07) 
Charter reference- Adoption by reference, § 3.08. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62; state building code, M.S. § 16B.59 et seq. 
Sec. 6-17. - Administration. 
    The building official or his/her designee shall be charged with administration of this article. He/she shall issue building permits, certificates of occupancy and maintain adequate records regarding building construction in the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.14(A), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 6-18. - Enforcement. 
    Upon finding that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, or upon finding a condition which may lead to violation, the building official shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violation or condition, ordering the action necessary to correct such condition or violation. He/she may order discontinuance of illegal work being done, order discontinuance of illegal use of structures and land, and order removal of illegal structures or additions. Further, in order to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of this article, the building official may call upon the city attorney to institute legal proceedings and call upon the chief of police for assistance. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.14(B), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 6-19. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy as defined in the Minnesota State Building Code must be obtained from the building official before a dwelling or lodging house can be used or occupied by a person other than the person who first used or occupied the same as a dwelling or lodging house. 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92-4, adopted March 23, 1992, amended Ch. 9 to read as herein set out in §§ 9-1 and 9-2. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 9, §§ 9-1 and 9-2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1984, Title 2, § 170; Ord. No. 85-2, adopted April 9, 1985. 
Cross reference- Elections generally, § 4.01 et seq.; initiative, referendum and recall, § 5.01 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal elections, M.S. ch. 205. 

Sec. 9-1. - Wards. 
(a)  The limits and boundaries of the First Ward begin at the intersection of Lake Avenue (C.S.A.H. 26) and C.S.A.H. 39; then proceeding east along Lake Avenue to the channel between Lake George and Sisseton Lake; south along the west shoreline of Sisseton Lake and Budd Lake to the west end of Oak Beach Drive; and all properties south of Oak Beach Drive to Lake Street; Lake Street to Albion Avenue; south along Albion Avenue to Hodgman Avenue; east to include the Albion Avenue Frontage Road to East Belle Vue Road; west to Albion Avenue to Hall Street; east along Hall Street to TH #15; south on TH #15 to Lake Aires Road (south city limits); west along the south city limits to C.S.A.H. 39 (west city limits); north along the west city limits to Lake Avenue (C.S.A.H. 26) and the point of beginning. 
(b)  The limits and boundaries of the Second Ward begin at the channel between Lake George and Sisseton Lake; then proceeding south along the west shoreline of Sisseton Lake and Budd Lake to the west end of Oak Beach Drive; and all properties north of Oak Beach Drive to Lake Street; Lake Street to Albion Avenue; south along Albion Avenue to Hodgman Avenue east of the Albion Avenue frontage road to East Bellevue Road, west to Albion Avenue, south to Hall Street; east along Hall Street to TH #15; north along TH #15 to Victoria Street; west along Victoria Street to Prairie Avenue; north on Prairie Avenue to Willow Street; west on Willow Street to Albion Avenue; north on Albion Avenue to Webster Street; west on Webster Street extended to Sisseton Lake; and north along the east shoreline of Sisseton Lake to the point of beginning. 
(c)  The limits and boundaries of the Third Ward begin at the shoreline of Sisseton Lake and Third Street; then proceeding northeast along Third Street to Lake Avenue; southeast one (1) block along Lake Avenue to Third Street; northeast along Third Street to Lincoln; north along Lincoln to Fourth Street; east along Fourth Street to Dewey Street; south on Dewey Street to First Street; east on First Street to State Street (TH 15); south along State Street (TH 15) to Blue Earth Avenue; east along Blue Earth Avenue to the city limits; south along the city limits to Johnson Street extension; west along the extension of Johnson Street and on Johnson Street to TH #15; north on TH #15 to Victoria Street; west on Victoria Street to Prairie Avenue; north one (1) block to Willow Street; west on Willow Street to Albion Avenue; north on Albion Avenue to Webster Street; west on Webster Street extended to Sisseton Lake; and north along the east shoreline of Sisseton Lake to the point of beginning. 
(d)  The limits and boundaries of the Fourth Ward begin at the northwest corner of the city limits; then proceeding east along the north city limits to the northeast corner of the city limits; southerly along the east city limits to Blue Earth Avenue; west along Blue Earth Avenue to State Street (TH 15); north along State Street (TH 15) to First Street; west along First Street to Dewey Street; north on Dewey Street to Fourth Street; west on Fourth Street to Lincoln Street; south along Lincoln Street to Third Street; southwest along Third Street to Lake Avenue; northwest along Lake Avenue to Third Street; southwest along Third Street to Sisseton Lake shoreline; west and north along Sisseton Lake shoreline to the channel at Lake Avenue; west along Lake Avenue and city limits located south of Lake Avenue to the west city limits; and then following the city limits to the northwest corner and the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, 3-23-92; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-12-12) 
Charter reference- Wards, § 1.02. 
Sec. 9-2. - Precincts. 
(a)  The first and second precincts lying within the First Ward are divided by Lair Road from the west city limits east to Albion Avenue. The First Precinct lies north of the dividing line and the Second Precinct lies south of the line. 
(b)  The first and second precincts lying within the Second Ward are divided by Prairie Avenue from Willow Street south to State Street; southwesterly along State Street to Albion Avenue; and southwesterly along Albion Avenue to Lake Street. The First Precinct lies west of the dividing line and the Second Precinct lies east of the line. 
(c)  The first and second precincts lying within the Third Ward are divided by Grant Street from Fourth Street south to Webster Street; west along Webster Street to Hampton Street; and south along Hampton Street to Willow Street; west on Willow Street to Prairie Avenue; and south on Prairie Avenue to Victoria Street. The First Precinct lies west of the dividing line and the Second Precinct lies east of the line. 
(d)  The first and second precincts lying within the Fourth Ward are divided by North Avenue from the north city limits south to Twelfth Street; east along Twelfth Street to Prairie Avenue; and south along Prairie Avenue to Fourth Street. The First Precinct lies west of the dividing line and the Second Precinct lies east of the line. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, 3-23-92; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-12-12) 
State Law reference- Election precincts, M.S. § 204B.14. 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; fires in parks, § 18-44. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention generally, M.S. ch. 299F. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Storage of explosives. 
    It shall be unlawful to store high explosives, as defined by the state bureau of criminal apprehension, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, Ch. 15) 
State Law reference- Permit from fire chief to store explosives, M.S. § 299F.75. 
Sec. 10-2. - Fees for emergency protection fire services. 
(a)  Purposes and intent. This section is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the City of Fairmont, Minnesota to charge for fire service as authorized by Minn. Stat. §§ 366.011, 366.012, and 415.01. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Fire service means any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect equipment, life, or property in an area threatened by fire. It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other services related to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur. 
    Fire service charge means the charge imposed by the city for receiving fire service. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi-trailers. It does not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles, or park trailers. 
    Fire protection contract means a contract between the city and a town or other city for the city to provide fire service. 
    Mutual aid agreement means an agreement between the city and a town or other city for the city's fire department to provide assistance to the fire department of a town or other city. 
(c)  Parties affected. 
(1)  Owners of property within the city who receive fire service. 
(2)  Anyone who receives fire service as a result of a motor vehicle accident or fire within the city. 
(3)  Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city provides fire service pursuant to a fire protection contract. 
(d)  Rates. All parties requesting and receiving fire services will be billed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Billing and collection. 
(1)  Parties requesting and receiving fire services may be billed directly by the city. Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did not request services but a fire or other situation exists which, at the discretion of the fire department personnel in charge requires fire service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties will be billed whether or not the fire service is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of the fire charge not covered by a party's insurance remains a debt of the party receiving the fire service. 
(2)  Parties billed for fire service will have ninety (90) days to pay. If the fire service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent and the city will send a notice of delinquency. 
(3)  If the fire service charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after this notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and reasonable legal means to collect the fire service charge. The party receiving fire service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by the city including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs. 
(4)  If the fire service charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after the notice of delinquency is sent, the city council may also, on or before October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the county auditor of the county in which the recipient of the services owns real property, for collection with property taxes. The county auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all charges collected on behalf of the city. The city must give the property owner notice of its intent to certify the unpaid fire service charge by September 15. 
(5)  False alarms will not be billed as a fire call. 
(f)  Mutual aid agreement. When the city fire department provides fire service to another fire department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be determined by the mutual aid agreement. 
(g)  Application of collections to budget. All collected fire charges will be city funds and used to offset the expenses of the city fire department in providing fire services. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 1-7, 8-11-14) 
Secs. 10-3-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Public safety division, § 2-161 et seq. 

Sec. 10-16. - Generally. 
    The fire department shall be under the control of the council. The size, composition (including, but not limited to, a determination as to permanent and volunteer members), and remuneration, shall all be established by the council, which may be changed from time to time. The council shall also establish written rules and regulations of the department, a copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members. Members of the fire department shall fulfill all job requirements adopted by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 350(1)) 
Sec. 10-17. - Officers. 
    The members of the fire department shall elect their own chief, assistant chief, and other officers subject to the confirmation and approval of the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 350(1)) 
Sec. 10-18. - Chief. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall have general superintendence of the fire department and the custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of said department. He shall see that the same are kept in proper order and that all rules and regulations and all provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relative to a fire department and to the prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly observed. He shall superintend the preservation of all property endangered by fire and shall have control and direction of all persons engaged in preserving such property. 
(b)  In case of the absence or disability of the chief for any cause, the assistant chief shall exercise all the powers, perform all the duties, and be subject to all the responsibilities of the chief. It is the duty of the chief of the fire department on or before July 1 of each year to file a detailed inventory with the city administrator of all property used and maintained for said department, together with its projected needs for the ensuing fiscal year. It is also the duty of the chief of the fire department, on or before the date of the first regular council meeting in each month, to file with the city clerk a report as to all fires occurring during the previous month stating the probable cause thereof and estimated damages. Such reports shall also state the other activities of the department. The chief of the fire department shall also make and file such other reports as may be requested by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 350(1)) 
Chapter 11 - GAMBLING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Gambling prohibited in establishments that serve alcoholic beverages, § 3-73. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE GAMBLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-8, adopted Aug. 27, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 11-21-11-25 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 11-21. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the terms defined in M.S. § 349.12 are incorporated herein by reference and shall be applicable to the provisions contained herein. Local trade area is defined as the geographic limits of Martin County, Minnesota. 
(Ord. No. 90-8, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 99-5, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 11-22. - Gambling prohibited; exception. 
    No person except an organization licensed by the State Charitable Gambling Control Board pursuant to M.S. ch. 349 or an organization permitted under this article shall conduct gambling within the corporate limits of the city. Any person or persons violating this section shall be punishable pursuant to M.S. §§ 609.75-609.762. 
(Ord. No. 90-8, 8-27-90) 
Sec. 11-23. - Adoption of state law. 
    The provisions of M.S. § 349.11 et seq., relating to the licensing and restrictions of gambling, are adopted and made a part of this article as if set out in full herein, with the following restrictions or requirements, as permitted by that statute. 
(Ord. No. 90-8, 8-27-90) 
Sec. 11-24. - Additional restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  Donation required. Any organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city limits must donate at least fifty (50) percent of its lawful purpose expenditures to lawful purposes conducted or located within the local trade area. 
(b)  Reports. A licensed organization shall file with the city clerk copies of all reports which it is required to file with the State Gambling Control Board, and shall do so within seven (7) days of filing the report with the board. Failure to comply with this provision may constitute grounds for disapproval of gambling licenses by the city council. 
(c)  Investigation fee. Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 349.16, subdiv. 4, there is hereby imposed, on organizations applying for or renewing state-issued licenses to conduct lawful gambling, an investigation fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which fee must accompany the application notice filed with the city clerk. Failure to pay this fee shall be cause for the council's disapproval of this application. 
(Ord. No. 90-8, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 99-5, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 11-25. - City permit required; application; fee; compensation; reports; etc. 
    Lawful gambling by organizations not required to obtain a state license pursuant to M.S. ch. 349 may be conducted in the city if an organization has been issued a permit approved by council resolution and upon compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  City permit application. Application for a city gambling permit shall be made to the city clerk upon an application form supplied by the city clerk, together with such additional information as may be required by the clerk. A separate application shall be required for each separate day or occurrence on which the gambling event is to be conducted. Applications must be filed with the city clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the requested date of the gambling event. The application shall be referred to the police chief who shall report to the city council at its next regular meeting following the filing of the application. 
(2)  Permit fees. A permit fee for each proposed gambling event is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(3)  Time and membership requirements for charitable organizations. No organization shall be issued a city permit unless it has been in existence for at least three (3) years and has at least fifteen (15) active members and complies with all other requirements of M.S. ch. 349 and this article. 
(4)  Compensation. No compensation shall be paid to any person, including the manager, in connection with the operation of the permitted lawful gambling, which does not require a state license but is conducted pursuant to a city permit. No person who is not an active member of the permitted organization, or its auxiliary, or the spouse or surviving spouse of an active member, may participate in the organization's operation of such a permitted gambling occurrence. 
(5)  Gambling managers. All operation of gambling devices and in the conduct of raffles pursuant to a city permit shall be under the supervision of a single gambling manager designated by the organization. The gambling manager shall be responsible for gross receipts and profits from gambling devices and raffles and for its conduct and compliance with all laws and rules. The organization may require the gambling manager to provide a fidelity bond in a sum to be set by the organization, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and given in favor of the organization holding the license under this article conditioned on the faithful performance of his or her duties and in compliance with M.S. § 349.20. 
(6)  Reports. The permitted organization shall file with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of each gambling occasion permitted a copy of the reports required to be filed with the State Charitable Gambling Control Board pursuant to M.S. § 349.214, subdiv. 2. 
(Ord. No. 90-8, 8-27-90) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; dog licenses, § 4-22; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, Ch. 19; solid waste collectors, § 22-36 et seq.; businesses in parks, § 18-45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any applicant for any license under this chapter. 
    License means any permit issued by the city to a licensee allowing the transaction of a business regulated by the city, and prohibited without such permit. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on any businesses regulated and licensed under this chapter. 
    Sale, sell or sold means all forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to persons. 
    Wholesale means any sale for purpose of re-sale. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 110) 
Secs. 14-2-14-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-16. - Scope. 
    This article applies to all licenses required by this article. 
Sec. 14-17. - Responsibilities of property owners. 
    No person shall permit any real property owned or controlled by him to be used for any activity or business unless such license has been obtained. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 150(1)) 
Sec. 14-18. - Applications and investigation fees. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made at the office of the city clerk upon forms furnished by the city, which forms must have been adopted by resolution of the council. An application form shall be completely filled out before the application is considered. All applications shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as determined by resolution to cover the cost of investigation. 
(b)  All applications must be subscribed, sworn or affirmed to, and include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Applicant's name, age, and citizenship. 
(2)  Applicant's present address and length of time he has lived at that address. 
(3)  Applicant's occupation and length of time so engaged. 
(4)  Applicant's addresses and occupations for the three (3) years next preceding the date of application. 
(5)  The names and addresses of applicant's employers, if any, for the three (3) years next preceding the date of application. 
(6)  Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense. 
(7)  The type of license and the location of premises for which the application is made. 
(8)  At least four (4) character references if applicant has not resided in the city for two (2) years next preceding the date of application. 
(9)  Such other information as the council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the business for which license application is made. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any license application form. Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on such application form, shall, upon discovery of such falsehood work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this title, or any part hereof. 
(d)  Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated forms as the council may by resolution adopt. Renewal applications shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the existing license. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 120(1)-(4), (6)) 
Sec. 14-19. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The city clerk shall, upon receipt of each completed application for a license investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as he deems necessary. For such investigation the clerk may enlist the aid of the chief of police. The council shall not consider an application before such investigation has been completed. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 120(5)) 
Sec. 14-20. - Action on application, license term, pro ration offers, etc. 
(a)  The council may grant any license application for the period of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be consistent with this article. The council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation. 
(b)  If an application is granted, the mayor and city clerk shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form adopted by resolution of the council and upon payment of the fee specified. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise specified by ordinance, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of one-twelfth of the fee for each calendar month, or part thereof remaining in the then current license year. Licenses shall be valid only at one (1) location and on the premises therein described. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 130(2), 140(3)) 
Sec. 14-21. - Transfer. 
    No license shall be transferable between persons. No license shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this section. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 140(1)) 
Sec. 14-22. - Termination. 
    Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 140(2)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Duplicate licenses. 
    Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the city clerk, without action by the council, upon the licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of the fee as determined by the council for issuance of a duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked "duplicate". 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 140(3)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Revocation. 
    The council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause, revoke any license. In all cases of revocation the council shall give notice to the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for the hearing. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 140(3)) 
Sec. 14-25. - General responsibility of licensees. 
    The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 150(2)) 
Secs. 14-26-14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOBACCO DEALERS 

Sec. 14-41. - Definition. 
    In this article "tobacco" includes tobacco in any form, cigarettes, cigars, and bagged, canned or packaged products. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 110) 
Sec. 14-42. - License. 
    No person shall, directly or indirectly, keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise dispose of any tobacco in any form unless a license therefor shall first be obtained from the city. Separate licenses are required for the sale of tobacco at more than one (1) place of business. The fee for a tobacco license shall be determined by resolution. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 1510-1530) 
State Law reference- Cigarette licenses, M.S. §§ 461.12-461.15. 
Secs. 14-43-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LODGING TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-7, adopted June 11, 1990, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. IV, §§ 14-43-14-58. In order to provide for future expansion of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV, §§ 14-51-14-66 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivations have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in present tense include the future, words in the plural form include the singular and words in the singular include the plural form. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    City means the City of Fairmont. 
    Lodger means the person obtaining lodging from an operator. 
    Lodging means the furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, public/private campground except where such lodging shall be for a continuous period of thirty (30) days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms owned by religious, educational or nonprofit organizations for self-sponsored activities shall not constitute "lodging" for purposes of this program. 
    Operator is defined to be the person who is the proprietor of the lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other combination of individuals. Whenever the term "person" is used in any provision of this article prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a corporation, association or partnership shall mean the officers or partners thereof, as the case may be. 
    Rent means the total consideration valued in money charged for the lodging, whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge itself. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-52. - Imposition of tax. 
    Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 469.190 there is hereby a tax imposed on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any person. The lodging tax program shall commence on July 1, 1990. A tax of three (3) percent shall be imposed on the effective date of this article. The tax collected by the operator shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this program to collect from a lodger. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-53. - Collections. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this program at the time the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of payment from the operator. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-54. - Exceptions and exemptions. 
(a)  Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions of federal law or international treaty. 
(b)  Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the city. All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-55. - Advertising no tax. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-56. - Payment and returns. 
    The taxes imposed by the program shall be paid monthly by the operator to the city not later than twenty (20) days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator shall submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the city may require. The return shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return. 
(2)  The total amount of exception/exemptions. 
(3)  The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period. 
(4)  The signature of the person filing the return or that of his agent duly authorized in writing. 
(5)  The period covered by the return. 
(6)  The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax. 
    The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this program previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such consideration which became uncollectible. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-57. - Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands. 
    The city shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within ten (10) days after determination of such refund. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-58. - Refunds. 
    Any person may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for a refund shall be considered unless filed within one (1) year after such tax was paid, or within one (1) year from the filing of the return, whichever period is the longer. The city shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this program from the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the city to the claimant. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-59. - Failure to file a return. 
(a)  If any operator required by this program to file a return shall fail to do so within the time prescribed or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file such return or corrected return within five (5) days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the city shall make a return or corrected return for such person from such knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such return) shall be paid upon within five (5) days of the receipt of the written notice and demand for such payment. Any such return or assessment made by the city shall be prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding with respect thereto. 
(b)  If any portion of a tax imposed by this program, including penalties thereon, is not paid within thirty (30) days after it is required to be paid, the city may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties and the cost and disbursements of any action. 
(c)  Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator one (1) thirty-day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by this article provided that interest during such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-60. - Administration. 
    The city clerk shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of the taxes imposed by this article. The city clerk shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required by this article and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them upon application; but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-61. - Examination of records. 
    The city may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this program. Every such operator is directed and required to give to the city the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-62. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this program, or shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this article after written demand for such payment or who shall refuse to permit the city to examine the books, records and papers under its control, or who shall willfully make an incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-63. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any tax imposed by this article is not paid within the time herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the amount remaining unpaid. 
(b)  In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time prescribed by this article, unless it is shown that such failure is not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the ten (10) percent specific penalty provided in subdivision (a) above, ten (10) percent of the failure is not for more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which failure continues, not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00), a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax. 
(c)  If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment required by this article, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of any tax (less amounts paid on the basis of such false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which such return related. The penalty imposed by this subdivision shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by this article. 
(d)  All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-64. - Use of proceeds. 
(a)  Ninety-five (95) percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this program shall be used in accordance with Minnesota Statutes Section 469.190 as the same may be amended from time to time to fund a local convention/tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist/convention center. The city may retain a maximum of five (5) percent for administrative costs. 
(b)  The city, by and through an agreement entitled "Agreement Between the City of Fairmont and the Fairmont Convention and Visitor's Bureau" (hereinafter referred to as the "agreement") hereby permits the Fairmont Convention and Visitor's Bureau (hereinafter referred to as CVB) to be funded by the tax set forth herein and pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 469.190. The "agreement" sets forth the purpose and duties of the CVB. 
(c)  Violation of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or ninety (90) days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 91-6, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 14-65. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the city under this article may file a petition for review of such notice, order or determination detailing the operator's reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the lodging subject to the order, notice or determination. 
(b)  The petition for review shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the petition the city clerk or his/her designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five (5) days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  The mediator for such shall be mutually selected by both parties from a list provided by the Minnesota Bureau of Mediation Services. The cost of such shall be split equally by both parties. 
(e)  At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at petitioner's own expense. 
(f)  Any disputes shall be conducted in accordance with principles and rules of the American Arbitration Association. 
(g)  The hearing examiner conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this article and the evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify the notice, order or determination made by the city. 
(h)  Any decision rendered by the hearing examiner pursuant to this subdivision may be appealed to the city council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the council agenda as soon as practicable. The council shall then review the findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they were correct. The council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the hearing examiner upon the same standards as set forth in subdivision (f) above. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
Sec. 14-66. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be effective on and after its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, 6-11-90) 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 14-67. - Taxicab license. 
    No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, upon the public streets or public places of the city any taxicab for which a license has not been first obtained from the city. 
(a)  Fee. The license fee for each vehicle shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. Provided, that if a licensed vehicle is disabled through mechanical failure or other needed repairs, the license may be temporarily transferred to another vehicle for a seven-day period upon approval of the city. If a license is temporarily suspended for a violation of this section a reinstatement fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per license shall be imposed and paid before the license is reinstated. 
(b)  Display and coverage. All licenses shall be issued for specific vehicles, except as otherwise herein provided. License tags or cards shall be conspicuously posted in each vehicle and visible from within or without the same. 
(c)  Insurance required. Before a taxicab license is issued by the council, and at all effective times during such license period, the licensee shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for two (2) or more persons injured in any one (1) accident, as well as five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) property damage insurance. Such insurance shall cover all passengers carried by the insured licensee or operator and shall be for public taxicab purposes. All such policies shall contain a clause obligating the insurer to give fourteen (14) days written notice to the city clerk and the insured before cancellation and a memorandum of such insurance shall be furnished to the city before a license is issued. 
(d)  Number of licenses permitted. The council may issue as many taxicab licenses as it deems appropriate. All license holders and taxicab operators shall have valid driver's licenses. 
(e)  Rates. Each applicant shall file with the city clerk before a taxicab license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to be charged by him or her during the license period for which application is made. Such schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab in full view of passengers riding therein. 
(f)  Mechanical condition. Before issuing any taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the council a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab vehicle is in good mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers and that it is in neat and clean condition. Such similar certificates may be required from time to time during the license period. 
(g)  Any taxicab license issued under this article shall be immediately suspended by the city whenever during the term of said license the owner or operator of said taxicab shall fail to keep in full force and effect such insurance as required in subsection (c) above in the full amount required. If the insurance is allowed to lapse, is canceled, or is otherwise not in effect for a continuous period of sixty (60) days or more, the taxicab license shall be revoked. 
(h)  The city council may revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew a taxicab license upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Any act, omission, or condition causing the licensee to not have a valid driver's license or the licensee allows an unlicensed person to operate a taxicab. 
(2)  If any licensee or operator for a licensee is convicted of violating a traffic law which is classified as a misdemeanor or greater violation, while operating a taxicab. 
(3)  The licensee allows the insurance on the taxicab(s) to lapse or not be in effect for any reason three (3) or more times within one (1) license year. 
(Ord. No. 92-5, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 2000-3, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 2012-06, 6-11-12) 
Chapter 15 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES 

Sec. 15-1. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person fifteen (15) years of age or younger to be or loiter upon the streets or public places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, or between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday. It is unlawful for any person aged sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) to be or loiter upon the streets or public places after 12:00 midnight, except that this hour is extended to 1:00 a.m. on weekends. This subsection curfew shall not apply to any students who are lawfully attending, going to or returning from school, church, or community-sponsored athletic, musical, or social activities or events. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any parents, guardians, or other person having the legal care or custody of any minor person under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow or permit such person to be or loiter upon the streets or public places after the hours designated in subsection (a) unless such minor is accompanied by a person of lawful age who is in charge of such minor person. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person operating, or in charge of, any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment or other place of business, to allow or permit any minor person to be or loiter in such place after the applicable hours designated in subsection (a) unless such minor is accompanied by a person of lawful age who is in charge of such minor person. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, §§ 510-540; Ord. No. 96-12, 10-14-96) 
Sec. 15-2. - Noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts are unlawful: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street, public place, or private property within the city except as a danger warning. 
(2)  The creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound. 
(3)  The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(4)  The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity. 
(5)  The use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust. 
(6)  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held for any reason. 
(7)  The use, operation, or permitting the playing, use, or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time at a louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. 
(8)  The use, operation, or permitting the playing, use, or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(9)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing upon the public streets, at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(10)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(11)  The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. Mufflers of the type commonly known as "Hollywood Mufflers" shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, Ch. 13) 
Cross reference- Noise in parks, § 18-46; noise by peddlers, etc. § 19-5. 
Sec. 15-3. - Obstruction of board of health or health officer. 
    It is unlawful for any person to oppose or obstruct a member of the board of health or any health officer or physician charged with the enforcement of health laws, in performing any legal duty, or obstruct or hinder the entry of such health officer upon premises or into buildings or other places where contagion, infection, filth, or other source or cause of preventable disease exists or is reasonably suspected to exist. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 340) 
Sec. 15-4. - Parades, demonstrations, etc. 
    No person shall participate in or conduct a public assembly, parade or other demonstration of a city or public right-of-way without a permit issued by the city administrator or his/her designee. Such a permit will be issued if the public safety will not be endangered thereby. 
(Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 15-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, adopted November 19, 2007, repealed § 15-5, which pertained to adoption of open burning rules and derived from Ord. No. 89-9, 6-26-89. 
Sec. 15-6. - Hunting prohibited in city limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without written permission from the city administrator to kill, trap, hunt, pursue, or in any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed any species of wild life within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 93-16, 10-11-93) 
Chapter 16 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Vehicles in parks, §§ 18-55, 18-56. 
State Law reference- Highway traffic regulations, M.S. ch. 169; powers of local authorities generally, M.S. § 169.04. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    The regulatory provisions and definitions in Minnesota Statutes chapter 169 are adopted as a traffic ordinance of the city regulating the use of highways, streets, and alleys within the city and are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as completely as if set out in full herein. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 110) 
Charter reference- Adoption by reference, § 3.08. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62. 
Sec. 16-2. - Unreasonable acceleration of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an unnecessary exhibition of speed on any public or private way, road, or parking lot within the corporate limits of the city. Prima facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be fish-tailing, the unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires or the unreasonable throwing of gravel by the tires of the vehicle. With respect to two-or three-wheeled motorized vehicles, in addition to the above-listed items of prima facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed, the unnecessary removal of the front tire with ground or road contact by the operator of the vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 120) 
Sec. 16-3. - Vehicle operation in parking lots. 
(a)  In this section "designated parking lot" means any parking lot open to the public that has been posted with regulatory signs at each entrance thereto indicating that the parking lot is subject to the provisions of this Code relating to parking lots. 
(b)  No person shall commit the following acts in a properly designated parking lot: 
(1)  Fail to comply with applicable provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 169. 
(2)  Fail to observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all others posted for the control of motor vehicles. 
(3)  Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(4)  Drive any vehicle on any area of a parking lot except as has been specifically designated by appropriate markings for travel. 
(5)  Drive any vehicle in violation of section 16-2. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 130) 
Sec. 16-4. - Load limits. 
    The chief of police, by authority of the council, may impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or desirable. Such limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. No person shall operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the limitations so posted. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, Ch. 11) 
State Law reference- Load limits, M.S. § 169.87. 
Sec. 16-5. - Truck routes. 
(a)  In this section "thru traffic" means traffic originating without the city and with a destination without the city, as distinguished from "local traffic" which means traffic either originating or having a destination within the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a tractor, agricultural implement, truck other than a pick-up of 3/4 ton capacity, as thru traffic upon any street except those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck routes. 
(c)  Subsection (b) does not apply to: 
(1)  Trucks having a destination or origin on a street other than a truck route for the conduct of business provided that such operator shall take the shortest possible route to or from the truck route. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Trucks used or operated by the city, public utilities, or contractors while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of streets or utilities. 
(4)  Trucks on an established detour. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 1910-1930) 
State Law reference- Truck routes, M.S. § 169.87. 
Sec. 16-6. - Operation of motorized golf carts. 
(a)  Permit Required: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized golf cart on any public roadway within the city limits unless he has obtained a permit as required hereby. A permit shall be issued upon filing of the appropriate application with the city clerk, together with evidence of insurance complying with Minnesota Statutes, section 65B.48, subd. 5. In addition, upon the request of the city clerk, the applicant shall submit a certificate signed by a physician stating that the applicant is capable of safely operating a motorized golf cart upon the public roadways. The application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart upon designated public roadways shall be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by the city clerk. 
(2)  Permits may be granted for a period not to exceed one (1) year, and may be annually renewed. A permit may be revoked at any time upon sufficient evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart on the designated roadways. 
(3)  Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
(4)  Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem provided for in Minnesota Statutes, section 169.522, when operated upon the designated roadways. 
(5)  Permits shall not be issued to persons who are not sixteen (16) years of age or older at the time of application for the permit. 
(b)  Operation of Motorized Golf Carts Permitted Only Upon Designated Roadway: 
(1)  Upon obtaining a permit, a person shall be allowed to drive or operate a motorized golf cart upon the following designated public roadways: 
(i)  An area surrounding Interlaken Golf Course as indicated on the attached map which is incorporated herein as if set out fully. 
(ii)  A portion of 10th Street beginning at the abandoned Chicago Northwestern Railroad track then proceeding in an easterly direction to State Street; 
(iii)  A portion of Fairview Avenue beginning at 10th Street and proceeding in a northerly direction to its dead end. 
(iv)  A portion of the public roadway from 1317 North Park to 12th Street and then west on 12th Street to the 1100 block of North North Avenue. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a motorized golf cart, with or without a permit, upon any other public road, street or highway within the city limits. 
(c)  Application of Traffic Laws: Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 169 except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts and except as otherwise specifically provided in Minnesota Statutes section 169.045, subd. 7. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, §§ I-III, 8-14-89; Ord. No. 89-12, 9-11-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 89-11, adopted Aug. 14, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ I-III as § 16-6 was at the discretion of the editor. The map referred to in subsection (b)(1)(i) is not printed in this Code. 
Secs. 16-7-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking at docks, § 5-6. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, M.S. § 169.04(1); stopping, standing and parking, M.S. § 169.32 et seq. 

Sec. 16-21. - Impoundment. 
    When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or municipally owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such officer may require the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or municipally owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such officer may impound such unlawfully parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof and remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of safety; provided that if any charge is placed against such vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or both, by any person called upon to assist therewith, the same shall be paid prior to removal from the place of storage or safekeeping. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, Ch. 16) 
Sec. 16-22. - Special permission for on-street parking. 
    The council may, in its discretion, grant special permission whereby on-street parking may be temporarily or permanently prohibited or restricted for private reasons and purposes at such places, on such terms and for such compensation as the council may deem just and equitable. In establishing the amount of such compensation to be paid to the city, the council shall consider the amount of space, location thereof. Upon complaint of any aggrieved person of any specific special permission so granted, the council shall at its next regular meeting after receipt of such complaint call a hearing thereon. The hearing shall be held ten (10) days after notice in writing to applicant and complainant and after published notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. After such hearing the council shall by resolution decide whether to terminate, continue, or re-define the terms of such permission and such decision shall be final and binding on all persons directly or indirectly interested therein, except that the council may on its own motion reconsider the same. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 1710) 
Sec. 16-23. - Parking restrictions in municipal lots. 
    In municipally owned parking lots, the council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking; provided that such limitations and restrictions are indicated in such lots by signs or meters. It is unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipally owned parking lot contrary to the restrictions or limitations indicated by signs or meters. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, Ch. 15) 
Sec. 16-24. - Parking on left-hand side of one-way roadways. 
    The parking of vehicles with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb is permitted on one-way roadways. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 1250) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, M.S. § 169.35, subd. 3. 
Sec. 16-25. - Angle parking. 
    Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb markings or signs, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately forty-five (45) to sixty (60) degrees with the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street; provided that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furtherest in the direction of one-way traffic. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 1260) 
State Law reference- Parallel parking, M.S. § 169.35, subd. 1. 
Sec. 16-26. - Stopping or parking in violation of police order. 
    It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 1240) 
Sec. 16-27. - Overnight parking. 
    No vehicle shall be stopped, parked, or left standing upon any street for a continuous period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 1280(A), 2010) 
Sec. 16-28. - Parking during snow removal. 
(a)  A snow emergency shall be declared automatically upon the falling of two (2) or more inches of snow within the city. The city council, city administrator, public works director or director of public safety shall have the authority to declare a snow emergency at any other time that they determine that weather conditions require a snow emergency declaration. 
(b)  On all non-snow emergency routes, any motor vehicle left parked in one (1) place for more than twenty-four (24) hours during the snow emergency will be considered to be in violation of a snow emergency regulation and subject to citation and impoundment. The fine for such violation shall be set by city council resolution from time to time. 
(c)  Parking shall be prohibited on all snow emergency routes for twenty-four (24) hours after the imposition of a snow emergency, or until the snow emergency route has been cleared of snow from curb to curb, whichever event occurs first. Motor vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be considered to be in violation of a snow emergency regulation and subject to a citation and impoundment. The fine for such violation shall be set by city council resolution from time to time. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 13-10; Ord. No. 88-5, §§ 1-4, 2-9-88; Ord. No. 89-20, §§ 3-6, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 90-16, § 2, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 96-16, 12-16-96) 
Editor's note- Sections 1-4 of Ord. No. 88-5, adopted Feb. 9, 1988, nonamendatory of the Code, dealt with the same subject matter as that addressed by this section. Subsequently, § 1 of Ord. No. 89-20, adopted Dec. 11, 1989, repealed § 16-28; and § 2 repealed Ord. No. 88-5. The editor has included §§ 3-6 of Ord. No. 89-20 as a new § 16-28. 
State Law reference- Towing authorized, M.S. § 169.041. 
Sec. 16-29. - Limited time parking zones. 
    The chief of police may, when authorized by the council, designate certain streets, blocks, or portions of streets or blocks, as five-minute, ten-minute, fifteen-minute, thirty-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-hour, or eight-hour limited time parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be established whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any such limited time parking zone between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday for a longer period than is specified on the posted sign giving notice of designation of such zone. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 1280(B), 2020) 
Sec. 16-30. - Fire lanes. 
    It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device on any private road or driveway, one-way roadway, or laned highway, whether on public or private property, when any of said roads, driveways, or roadways, or highways have been marked with an official traffic-control device marked "NO PARKING-FIRE LANE." 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 1210) 
Sec. 16-31. - Parking of mobile homes. 
    Except where signs are erected designating the place as a campsite, it is unlawful for any person to leave or park a house trailer on or within the limits of any street or right-of-way, for more than six (6) consecutive hours. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 1230) 
Sec. 16-32. - Parking of semi-trailers, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, municipally owned parking lot, or other public property. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park a semi-trailer, whether or not attached to a truck-tractor, within an area zoned as a residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to park a commercial vehicle of more than one-half ton capacity between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday within any metered parking space, except that parking of such vehicle for a period of not more than thirty (30) minutes is permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property for loading or unloading when such access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so restricted. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 1410-1430) 
Sec. 16-33. - Downtown Plaza parking restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on Downtown Plaza between Blue Earth Avenue and 4th Street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 1st through March 31st. 
(Ord. No. 99-14, 12-13-99) 
Secs. 16-34-16-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BICYCLES, PLAY VEHICLES, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycles, M.S. § 169.222. 

Sec. 16-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or rear wheels. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.01, subd. 51. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of the vehicle. 
    Human-powered vehicle means every vehicle designed to be moved solely by human power. 
    License plate means a tag, plate, seal, or other device which can be securely attached to a bicycle and is used upon registration of the bicycle. 
    Recreational conveyances means a nonmotorized, mechanical vehicle or device to transport a rider or riders, which is not necessitated by physical disability of the rider and includes, but is not limited to, roller skates, skateboards, roller blades, scooters and coasters. "Recreational conveyance" as used in section 16-61 does not include bicycles. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 910; Ord. No. 90-11, 10-22-90; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-26-95) 
Sec. 16-47. - Bicycle patrol officers. 
(a)  The chief of police may appoint one (1) or more persons to serve as bicycle patrol officers. 
(b)  Bicycle patrol officers have the same powers as any police officer to regulate the operation of bicycles in the city and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 960) 
Sec. 16-48. - Inspections. 
    Any police officer or bicycle patrol officer may, at any time upon reasonable cause to believe that a bicycle is unsafe or not equipped as required by law, or that its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, require the person riding the bicycle to stop and submit the bicycle to an inspection and such test with reference thereto as may be appropriate. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 940) 
Sec. 16-49. - License. 
(a)  In this section "bicycle" means every device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is over fourteen (14) inches in diameter, or any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or rear wheels, or a unicycle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 168C.02, subd. 2. 
(b)  No person who resides within the city shall use or ride a bicycle on any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or other public property within the city unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided in Minnesota Statutes chapter 168C. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 910, 920) 
Sec. 16-50. - Traffic laws apply. 
    Every person operating a bicycle shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle by Minnesota Statutes chapter 169, except in respect to those provisions in Minnesota Statutes chapter 169 relating expressly to bicycles and in respect to those provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 169 which by their nature cannot reasonably be applied to bicycles. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(A)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 1. 
Sec. 16-51. - Bicycle equipment. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle at nighttime unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with a lamp which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector of a type approved by the state department of public safety which is visible from all distances from one hundred (100) feet to six hundred (600) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. No person may operate a bicycle at any time when there is not sufficient light to render persons and vehicles on the highway clearly discernible at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from six hundred (600) feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. 
    The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each side of each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and with a minimum of twenty (20) square inches of reflective material on each side of the bicycle or its operator. Any bicycle equipped with side reflectors as required by regulations for new bicycles prescribed by the United States consumer product safety commission shall be considered to meet the requirements for side reflectorization contained in this section. 
(b)  No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(c)  No person shall operate upon a highway any bicycle equipped with handlebars so raised that the operator must elevate his hands above the level of his shoulders in order to grasp the normal steering grip area. 
(d)  No person shall operate upon a highway any bicycle which is of such a size as to prevent the operator from stopping the bicycle, supporting it with at least one (1) foot on the highway surface and restarting in a safe manner. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 930) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 6. 
Sec. 16-52. - Bicycle operation in certain locations prohibited. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle upon and along the sidewalks on either side of the public streets in the following locations: 
    Park Street between Blue Earth Avenue and Fourth Street. 
    Downtown Plaza between Webster Avenue and Fifth Street. 
    North Main Street between Blue Earth Avenue and Fourth Street. 
    First, Second, Third, or Fourth Streets between Park Street and Main Street. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(E)(2)) 
Sec. 16-53. - Manner of riding bicycles on roadways, sidewalks, etc. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under any of the following situations: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions, including fixed or moving objects, vehicles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or narrow width lanes, that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast and shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane. 
(c)  A person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal when necessary before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. A person lawfully operating a bicycle on a sidewalk, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(C)(E)(1)(K)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 4. 
Sec. 16-54. - Carrying passengers on bicycles. 
    No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one (1) time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except: 
(1)  On a baby seat attached to the bicycle, provided that the baby seat is equipped with a harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against the child's feet hitting the spokes of the wheel, or 
(2)  In a seat attached to the bicycle operator. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(J)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 2. 
Sec. 16-55. - Bicycle turn and stop signals. 
    No person shall turn a bicycle from a direct course or move right or left upon a highway unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety after giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided below: 
(1)  An arm signal to turn right or left shall be given continuously during the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the bicycle before turning, unless the arm is needed to control the bicycle, and shall be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting to turn. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 8. 
(2)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a bicycle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear unless there is a good and sufficient reason for not being able to do so. 
(3)  The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device. 
(4)  When the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the rider shall indicate his intention to start, stop, or turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the bicycle in the following manner and these signals shall indicate as follows: 
a.  Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally. 
b.  Right turn, hand and arm extended upward except that the bicyclist may extend the right hand and arm horizontally to the right side of the bicycle. 
c.  Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(F)) 
Sec. 16-56. - Operation of bicycles at crosswalks. 
    No person shall ride between the parallel lines of a properly marked crosswalk while crossing a street between two (2) sidewalks. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(G)) 
Sec. 16-57. - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  A bicycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the curb or edge of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed. 
(b)  A bicycle may be parked on the roadway abreast of another bicycle or bicycles near the side of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed. 
(c)  A person shall not park a bicycle on a roadway in such a manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle. 
(d)  Bicycles may not be parked on public sidewalks in the areas described in section 16-52, except in racks designed for parking bicycles. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(H)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 9(b). 
Sec. 16-58. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, toboggan, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any street car or vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(B)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 3. 
Sec. 16-59. - Bicycles carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the handle bars or from properly operating the brakes of the bicycle. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(C)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 5. 
Sec. 16-60. - Bicycle racing. 
    Bicycle racing is prohibited unless performed in a racing event which has been approved by the city council or an otherwise approved association or club. No person shall operate a bicycle with more than one (1) person thereon unless the same is equipped with two (2) seats and the bicycle is suitably designed to transport two (2) people. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 950(I)) 
State Law reference- Bicycle races, M.S. § 169.222, subd. 10. 
Sec. 16-61. - Operation of a recreational conveyance. 
(a)  No person shall ride a recreational conveyance upon and/or along the sidewalks, streets, parks and parking lots in the following locations: 
(1)  Park Street between Blue Earth Avenue and Fourth Street; 
(2)  Downtown Plaza between Webster Avenue and Fifth Street; 
(3)  Main Street between Webster Avenue and Fourth Street; 
(4)  First, Second, Third or Fourth Streets between Park Street and Main Street; 
(5)  Blue Earth Avenue between Park Street to Third Street on Lake Avenue; and, 
(6)  First and Second Streets from Lake Avenue to Main Street. 
(b)  Persons riding a recreational conveyance upon a public street shall proceed in the direction of the normal flow of automobile traffic. Persons riding a recreational conveyance shall proceed in single file and as close to the curb as is practicable considering any parked motor vehicles or other obstructions along the sides of the streets. Persons riding a recreation conveyance upon a public street shall obey all intersection control devices, including but not limited to, stop signs, yield signs and semaphore lights, and shall obey all posted speed limits. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to ride a recreational conveyance in a reckless or unsafe manner on a public sidewalk or a public street. No person shall ride or propel a recreational conveyance in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in any manner which does not exhibit due care for the safety of other persons. 
(d)  A person operating a recreational conveyance upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal when necessary before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. A person lawfully operating a recreational conveyance on a sidewalk, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. 
(e)  No ramps or jumps of a temporary or permanent nature shall be constructed on public property or upon the public right-of-way by private individuals. 
(f)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. Whenever a law enforcement officer observes a violation of this section, said observation shall be sufficient probable cause to support the seizure of the recreational conveyance as evidence of the violation and said evidence shall be held until the disposition of the charge of violating this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, 10-22-90) 
Secs. 16-62-16-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOWMOBILES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, M.S. § 84.81 et seq.; local snowmobile regulations, M.S. § 84.84, subd. 3. 

Sec. 16-76. - Operation on roadway or alley generally. 
(a)  Operation of a snowmobile upon a roadway or alley is permitted only as follows: 
(1)  From the owner's residence or place of business or place the snowmobile is generally stored, in a direct route to and from a place of destination, provided such place of destination is a place that such snowmobile may be lawfully operated. 
(2)  In an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway or alley renders travel by automobile impractical. 
(3)  The snowmobile must be operated on the far right hand portion of the lane used by traffic traveling in the same direction of travel. It shall be unlawful for two snowmobiles to travel side by side on any city street or alley in the City of Fairmont. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 1(d). 
(b)  No snowmobile shall be operated at any time within the right-of-way of any interstate or freeway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 1(a). 
(c)  Except as previously set forth in this section no snowmobile shall be operated upon a roadway or alley except to make a direct crossing only as follows: 
(1)  The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety (90) degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing. 
(2)  The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main-traveled way of the highway. 
(3)  The driver shall yield the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard. 
(4)  In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such highway with another public street. 
(5)  The crossing shall be made between one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 1(b)(1)-(5). 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1270; Ord. No. 98-10, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 16-77. - Operation on certain property. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon private property without written permission of the owner or person entitled to give permission. It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on any golf course, playground or any property posted "No Snowmobile" or "No Trespassing". 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1210; Ord. No. 98-10, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-28-10) 
Sec. 16-78. - Hours of operation. 
    It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile within the city from 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. of each day, except in an emergency as defined in section 16-76(a)(2). 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1220; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-28-10) 
Sec. 16-79. - Operation on sidewalks and boulevards. 
    It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on a sidewalk or boulevard, except that a direct crossing may be made in the same manner as provided for direct crossing of a city street. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1230; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-28-10) 
Sec. 16-80. - Manner of operation on roadway. 
(a)  It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, alley, right of way, or any other area inside the city limits, except as provided in section 16-80(b), at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(b)  It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon public waters (lakes, streams, creeks) at a rate of speed in excess of fifty (50) miles per hour. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1240; Ord. No. 98-10, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 16-81. - Speed limit. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surrounding circumstances. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1250(A)(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 2(a). 
Sec. 16-82. - Careless or negligent operation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1250(A)(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 2(b). 
Sec. 16-83. - Operation while under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile while under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1250(A)(3); Ord. No. 98-10, 10-19-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 2(c). 
Sec. 16-84. - Equipment. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile: 
(1)  Without a lighted headlight and taillight when required for safety. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 2(d). 
(2)  That is not equipped at all times with a muffler in good working order which blends the exhaust noise into the over-all snowmobile noise and is in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound. 
State Law reference- Mufflers, M.S. § 84.871. 
(b)  No snowmobile shall be operated upon a roadway unless it is equipped with at least one (1) headlamp, one (1) taillamp, each of minimum candlepower as prescribed by state regulation, reflector material of a minimum area of sixteen (16) square inches mounted on each side forward of the handlebars, and with brakes, each of which shall conform to standards prescribed by state regulation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 1(c). 
(c)  Any sled, trailer, or other device being towed by a snowmobile must be equipped with reflective materials as required by rules and regulations of the State of Minnesota. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 1(f). 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1250(A)(4), (A)(6), (B), (C)) 
Sec. 16-85. - Damaging vegetation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys growing stock. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1250(A)(5)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.87, subd. 2(e). 
Sec. 16-86. - Minimum age of operators. 
    A person fourteen (14) years of age or older, but less than eighteen (18) years of age, may make a direct crossing of a street while operating a snowmobile only if he/she has in his/her possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate. No person under the age of fourteen (14) years shall operate a snowmobile on any public land or water unless accompanied by his/her parent, legal guardian, or another person eighteen (18) years of age or older on the same or an accompanying snowmobile, or on a device towed by the same or an accompanying snowmobile. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 1260; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 84.872. 
Sec. 16-87. - Adult liability for behavior of youthful operator. 
    It is unlawful for any person over the age of eighteen (18) who is the owner or in lawful control of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated by a person under the age of eighteen (18) in any manner that violates this article or any state law regulating snowmobiles. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 16-88. - Seizure of snowmobiles. 
    Whenever a law enforcement officer observes a violation of this article or state law, said observation shall be sufficient probable cause to seize the snowmobile as evidence of the violation. The snowmobile may be held by law enforcement until disposition of the charge. 
(Ord. No. 98-10, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 16-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 

Sec. 16-90. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All terrain vehicle (ATV) means a motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6) tires, that is limited in engine displacement of less than eight hundred (800) cubic centimeters and total dry weight of less than nine hundred (900) pounds. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 16-91. - State laws incorporated. 
    All provisions of M.S. Ch. 169 and M.S. §§ 84.922 through 84.929, and all provisions of the City Code regulating vehicular traffic, shall apply to the operation of all-terrain vehicles, hereinafter referred to as ATV's upon the streets of the City of Fairmont, with the except of those relating to required equipment or those which by their nature have no application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 16-92. - General operation. 
(a)  [Permit required.] It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate an ATV on any public roadway within the city limits unless he has obtained a permit as required herein. A permit shall be issued to persons sixteen (16) years of age or older, upon filing of the appropriate application with the city clerk, together with evidence of insurance complying with M.S. § 65B.48. A fee as set shall accompany the application for a permit to operate an ATV upon designated public roadways from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  [Annual permits.] Permits may be granted annually and may be renewed annually. A permit may be revoked at any time upon sufficient evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate an ATV upon the designated public roadways. 
(c)  [Time of operation.] ATVs may only be operated on designated roadways from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. They shall not be operated when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke or fog or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
(d)  Operation on roadways and public waterways. ATVs may be operated on roadways and public waterways only as herein specified. It is unlawful to operate an ATV upon roadways or public waterways as follows: 
(1)  At a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(2)  Other than in single file on a roadway. 
(3)  Carelessly or recklessly. 
(4)  In a manner that damages public road rights-of-way. 
(5)  In a manner that violates either noise control or chapter 17, nuisances. 
(6)  The ATV may be on the public roadways only to be driven from the place of storage directly to a public water way or a place where it may be legally operated outside of the city limits. 
(e)  Private property. It is unlawful to operate an ATV on private property without the permission or consent of the owner or occupant. 
(f)  Minimum age of operator. It is unlawful for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to operate an ATV on any public street in the City of Fairmont. 
(g)  Sidewalks and boulevards. It is unlawful to operate an ATV on a sidewalk or boulevard, except that an operator may cross a sidewalk, boulevard or other right-of-way to obtain access to a street or alley if such crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety (90) degrees to the direction of the sidewalk, boulevard or right-of-way. The ATV must yield to all pedestrian or vehicular traffic, which constitutes an immediate hazard. 
(h)  Dates of operation. It is unlawful to operate an ATV within the city limits of the City of Fairmont between the dates of March 16th and November 14th. 
(i)  Equipment. It is unlawful to operate an ATV unless it is equipped with the following: 
(1)  At least one (1) headlight and one (1) tail light. 
(2)  Headlights and taillights lighted at all times. 
(j)  Prohibitions on owner. It is unlawful for the owner of an ATV to permit it to be operated contrary to this article. 
(k)  Operation prohibited. Operation of ATVs is prohibited on certain roads: 
(1)  Trunk Highway 15. 
(2)  Blue Earth Avenue. 
(3)  Downtown business district described as: Park Street between Blue Earth Avenue and Fourth Street. 
Downtown Plaza between Webster Avenue and Fourth Street. 
First, Second, Third or Fourth Streets between Park Street and Main Street. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 16-93. - Penalty. 
    The City of Fairmont has the right to revoke riding privileges of any individual on an ATV within the city limits, as needed, by discretion of the chief of police, based on number of complaints received, and statutory or ordinance violations. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a maximum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, 1-10-05) 
Chapter 17 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference- Nuisance abatement, M.S. §§ 429.021, subd. 1(8), 429.101. 

Sec. 17-1. - Junk. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park or store any unlicensed, unregistered or inoperable vehicle, parts of motor vehicles or machinery, inoperable lawn equipment, construction materials not currently being used for a construction project, household furnishings or appliances originally intended for use within the interior of a building, broken or disabled bicycles or recreational conveyances, empty glass, metal or plastic containers, broken or obviously discarded tools, toys or electronics, or other similar items or materials on private or public property, unless housed within a lawfully erected building or in a zone wherein junkyards are a permitted use. Any violation of this section is a nuisance. Parking one (1) such vehicle on a private driveway is not a nuisance or a violation of this section, unless the vehicle has been parked longer than three (3) months. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, Ch. 11; Ord. No. 93-2, 4-12-93; Ord. No. 2008-07, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 17-2. - Weeds or grass. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, or agent of any lot or parcel of land in the city to allow any weeds or grass growing upon any such lot or parcel of land to grow to greater height than six (6) inches or to allow such weeds or grass to grow to seed. 
(b)  If any such owner, occupant, or agent fails to comply with subsection (a), after being given notice by the weed inspector or city clerk, within the time specified in the notice, the city shall cause such weeds or grass to be cut and the expense thus incurred shall be a lien on the property. The council shall certify to the county auditor a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the city. Such amount, together with interest shall be entered as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, §§ 810, 820) 
Cross reference- Weeds and grass on parkways, etc., § 23-38. 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Snowmobiles, § 16-76 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-236 et seq. 

Sec. 18-16. - Established. 
    There is established a park board. 
Sec. 18-17. - Members. 
    The park board shall consist of six (6) members. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 710) 
Sec. 18-18. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the park board shall be on a regular basis, and at such times as may be deemed necessary, provided adequate notice is furnished. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 720) 
Sec. 18-19. - Functions. 
    The park board shall: 
(1)  Provide recommendations to the council regarding the planning, development, funding, and operation of parks and recreational facilities within the city. 
(2)  Receive guidelines and assignments from the city council for study and/or review of park and recreational needs and plans. 
(3)  Conduct studies using appropriate resources. If expenditure of funds is necessary for such studies, the board must obtain prior approval from the council. 
(4)  Develop rules and regulations to govern the use of city parks and recreational facilities for review by the council. 
(5)  Maintain liaison with the city administrator and directors of the community development and community service divisions, to provide guidance on park board matters in the planning stages or policy development review. 
(6)  Provide reports and plans to the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 730) 
Secs. 18-20-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the person appointed by the city administrator to serve as chief administration officer of the park system. 
    Drugs means any substance defined as a controlled substance by Minnesota Statutes chapter 152 or federal law or regulation. 
    Domestic animal means a dog, cat or horse. 
    Fairmont parks means the organization or system of parks in the city. 
    Food wagon shall be defined as any vehicle, mobile stand or device parked on public property used for the purpose of selling food and/or drink ready to be consumed. 
    Intoxicating liquor means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt beverages, containing in excess of three and two-tenths (3.2) percent of alcohol by weight. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 14. 
    Motorized recreation vehicle means any self-propelled off-the-road, or all terrain conveyance including but not limited to a snowmobile, mini bike, amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, dune buggy or four-wheel drive. 
    Nonintoxicating malt liquor means malt liquor that contains not less than one-half of one (.5) percent alcohol by volume nor more than three and two-tenths (3.2) percent alcohol by weight. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 19. 
    Park means any land or water area and all facilities thereon established as part of the Fairmont parks. 
    Park visitor means any person within a park. 
    Primitive camping means overnight camping using primitive means (no campers or RVs) for not more than three (3) days for recreation purposes. 
    Special event camping means limited camping to coincide with an approved special event, i.e. softball tournament, disc golf tournament, etc. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 14. 
    Vehicle means any motorized, propelled, animal drawn, or human powered conveyance. 
    Weapon means any device from which shots or projectiles of any kind can be discharged by means of an explosive gun, compressed air or otherwise propelled, including but not limited to fire arms, bow and arrows, slings and spring guns. 
    Wild life means all living creatures, not human, wild by nature endowed by sensation and power or voluntary motion, including quadrapeds, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustations and mollusks. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to secure the quiet, orderly and suitable use of public parks, trail systems and public access to lakes established by the city council and to further the safety, health, comfort and welfare of all persons in the use thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-33. - Waiver. 
    Any provision of this article may be waived at the discretion and direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-34. - Exemption. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent employees or agents of the park system from performing their assigned duties. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-35. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city council or director may issue administrative rules and regulations. Such rules must be approved by the council or park board. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use any city-owned or maintained parks, playgrounds, or recreational areas in any manner contrary to, or inconsistent with, rules and regulations adopted by the council and sign-posted at the entrance thereto, or sign-posted upon specific facilities to which such rules and regulations relate. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, Ch. 9(D); Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-36. - Revocation of permits or reservations. 
    The director shall have the authority to revoke for good cause any permit or reservation issued by him. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-37. - Liability of city. 
    The city shall not be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by a park visitor. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-38. - Closing parks. 
    Any park or portion thereof may be declared closed to the public by the city council or the director at any time and for any interval of time or to certain uses, as the city council or director finds reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-39. - Obscene language, indecent conduct, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use threatening, abusive, insulting, obscene or indecent language or to act in an indecent manner, or to do any act which constitutes a breach of the public peace in a park. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-40. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Have in possession or bring into a park any nonintoxicating malt liquor or intoxicating liquor in kegs or barrels without written permission of the director. 
(2)  Consume any alcoholic beverage in a park between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-41. - Disturbing park visitors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, harass or interfere with any park visitor or a park visitor's property. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-42. - Litter control. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Deposit, scatter, drop or abandon in a park any bottles, cans, broken glass, sewage, waste or other material, except in receptacles provided for such purpose. Household garbage is not to be deposited in any park receptacle. 
(2)  Enter a park with glass beverage bottles or glass beverage containers. 
(3)  Throw, discharge or place on or upon any lake, stream, creek, pond or other body of water in or adjacent to a park, or any tributary, stream, sanitary or storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters any substance, liquid or gas. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-43. - Excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig trenches or make other excavations in a park. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-44. - Fires and fire prevention. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Start a fire in a park, except a small fire for culinary purposes in a designated area, or fail to fully extinguish such a fire. 
(2)  Drop, throw or otherwise leave unattended in a park, lighted matches, burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, paper or other combustible material. 
(3)  Have any open fires at Winnebago Sports Complex and Jeffrey Kot Soccer Fields. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-45. - Business activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, solicit, or carry on any business or commercial enterprise or serve in a park unless during a special event and authorized to do so by the city administrator in writing. 
(1)  Food wagons. 
a.  Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a food wagon without a permit from the city. Operations meeting the definition of a food wagon and operating under a valid food wagon permit do not need a solicitor's license as required chapter 19-16 of the city Code. 
b.  Permit issuance fee and display. Permits, include number, location and dates for which issued, shall be plainly visible on the outside of the food wagon. Permits will be issued on a per event basis for the duration of the event. An application on the form prescribed by the city shall be completed by the applicant and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by ordinance. 
c.  Indemnification. Before a food wagon permit is issued by the city, the permitee shall execute and deliver to the city clerk, on a form prescribed by the city, an indemnification agreement holding the city harmless for any personal injury or property damage resulting from the operation of the food wagon. 
d.  Restrictions. 
1.  Food wagons shall be allowed only at approved locations within the city and shall not travel from point to point around the city. 
2.  No food wagon shall be allowed to dispense food on public right-of-way. 
e.  Regulations. 
1.  No food shall be sold except directly from the food wagon. 
2.  Radios and other audio devices shall be permitted only inside the food wagon. No music or noise shall be permitted that is audible thirty (30) feet from the food wagon. No amplification device shall be permitted on the exterior of any food wagon. 
3.  Food wagon sales shall be permitted only between the hours 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
4.  Food wagon owners shall provide appropriate number of trash receptacles and remove all trash around their food wagons at the end of each business day. 
5.  All food wagons shall be kept in good repair and order. 
6.  Must follow all applicable department of health regulations. 
7.  There shall be no drainage of liquids allowed from the food wagon onto public property or public sewers. 
8.  No permit shall be issued to any food wagon until proof of all appropriate and necessary licensure by the State of Minnesota and/or Martin County is provided. 
9.  Food wagons shall provide their own utilities; they cannot connect to City water, sewer or electricity. 
10.  No city staff or city equipment will be provided to any food wagon. All food wagons should provide their own seating and staffing. 
f.  Forfeiture and revocation. A food wagon license may be revoked or forfeited for violation of any of the provisions of this section or any other violation of the city Code or other applicable laws and regulations. Food wagon licenses are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-46. - Noise control. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Use loudspeakers or other amplifying systems in a park except with written permission from the director. 
(2)  Operate sound producing radios or tape players at a level loud enough to disturb other park users. 
(3)  Create any unnecessary noise between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that may disturb neighbors to the park or park users. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-85; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Cross reference- Noise generally, § 15-3. 
Sec. 18-47. - Protection of natural resources and wildlife. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Injure, destroy, or remove any tree, flower, shrub, plant, rock, soil, and mineral in a park, including dead or fallen trees. 
(2)  Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed any species of wildlife within a park except that fishing may be permitted in designated areas. 
(3)  Bring a dog, cat, or other domestic animal into a park unless under the control of the owner or attendant and such custodian shall have the responsibility of cleaning up any feces of any animal and shall dispose of such in a sanitary manner. "Under control" shall mean appropriately leashed and tended. An exception to the leash requirement will be allowed only when a handler is working a retriever dog within fifty (50) feet of a boat launching area or within the city's designated dog park. 
(4)  Bring or permit any domestic animal to enter a beach area, nature center area, picnic area, park building or skating rink. 
(5)  Permit a domestic animal to disturb, harass or interfere with any park visitor or park visitor's property. 
(6)  Release within a park any plant, chemical or other agent potentially harmful to the vegetation or wildlife or the park. 
(7)  Remove any animal, living or dead, from a park and any animal so removed or taken contrary to the provisions of any city ordinance or law of the state shall be considered contraband and subject to seizure and confiscation. 
(8)  Set, lay, prepare or have in his possession any trap, snare, artificial light, net, bird line, or any contrivance whatever, for the purpose of catching, taking, injuring, or killing any bird or animal in any park. 
(9)  Feed any wild animals, including birds, except pursuant to a city approved program. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 93-15, 10-25-93; Ord. No. 96-5, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 2004-07, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-48. - Weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Shoot any weapon in to a park from beyond the boundaries of the park; 
(2)  Possess any weapon within a park. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-49. - Camping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any Fairmont park except: 
(1)  The designated primitive camping area at Cedar Creek Park. 
(2)  With a special event camping permit approved by the city administrator in designated RV camping area in Cedar Creek Park. 
(3)  With a special event camping permit approved by the city administrator in designated RV or Tent camping areas in Winnebago Avenue Sports Complex. 
    In any case, camping stays are limited to three (3) days at a time; no more than six (6) days per month. These locations shall not be permitted as a temporary residence. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-50. - Swimming and beach areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Wade or swim within a park except at beaches designated for the purpose, and then only between sunrise and sunset, or such hours as may be designated by the director. Park visitors swim or wade at their own risk. 
(2)  Take bottles or glass of any kind, except eyeglasses into a designated beach area. 
(3)  Use air mattresses, innertubes or other inflatable devices except in designated beach areas. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-51. - Boating. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Launch or land any boat, yacht, canoe, raft or other watercraft upon any water, lagoon, lake, pond or slough within a park except at locations and times designated for that purpose. 
(2)  Leave unattended any boat or watercraft except in areas designated for that purpose. 
(3)  Operate any watercraft in a designated swimming area or other prohibited area. 
(4)  Operate any watercraft in a park in violation of Minnesota Statutes chapter 361. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Cross reference- Boats and lakes, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 18-52. - Fishing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Leave any ice fishing shelter in any park for more than five (5) days past the end of game fishing season. 
(2)  Leave debris, garbage, etc., around winter fishing shelters in a park or on the ice. 
(3)  Deposit fish remains in a park in other than specified containers. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Cross reference- Boats and lakes, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 18-53. - Horseback riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or bring an untrailered horse into any park without permission of the public works director, with the exception of Cedar Creek Park. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86; Ord. No. 2016-02 , 3-28-16) 
Sec. 18-54. - Meetings, speeches, demonstrations and parades. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct public meetings, assemblies, entertainment, parades or demonstrations within a park without first obtaining a written permit from the city, and then only in the area designated in the permit. Such a permit will be issued if the public safety will not be endangered thereby. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Sec. 18-55. - Vehicles generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Operate any vehicle within a park except upon designated roadways and parking areas. 
(2)  Operate a vehicle in a park at a speed in excess of posted speed limits. 
(3)  Park or leave standing a vehicle within a park except at a designated parking area. 
(4)  Operate a vehicle in a park which emits excessive or unusual noise, noxious fumes, dense smoke or other polluting matter. 
(5)  Operate a vehicle in a reckless or careless manner in a park. 
(6)  Wash, polish, grease, change oil or repair any vehicle in a park. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 18-56. - Motorized recreation vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized recreation vehicle within a park except in or on designated roadways and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 86-6, 8-25-86) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 16. 
Secs. 18-57-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREES 

Sec. 18-61. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(1), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-62. - Tree board-Established. 
    There is hereby created a tree board for the city. The tree board will be one and the same as the park board. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(2), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-63. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the board to develop a written policy for the care, preservation, pruning, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Once the policy is approved by the city council, the council may direct the board to review and/or update the policy as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(3), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-64. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, remove trees, plants and shrubs within the city right-of-ways and public grounds as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city may remove or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, other public improvements or other trees. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(4), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-65. - Private tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to enter private property, inspect, and declare trees or shrubs or parts thereof a public nuisance. A public nuisance may include trees, branches or shrubs that are diseased, infected, dead or dying, obstructing utility installations or traffic signs, impeding free passage of pedestrians or vehicles or in any other manner posing a threat to public safety. 
(b)  Upon declaration of a public nuisance, the city will notify the owners of such tree shrubs or parts thereof in writing. Removal or correction shall be done by said owners at their own expense within sixty (60) days of notice. In the event of failure to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to follow the order of the notice and charge the cost to the owners by property tax notice. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(5), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-66. - Permitted planting on public property. 
(a)  No person shall trim, cut, or remove any part of a tree on public property or right-of-way without first procuring a permit from the city. No person shall plant a tree or trees on the city right-of-way or other public property without first procuring a permit from the city. In either case, the authority of the permit shall not be exceeded. 
(b)  A permit required by subsection (a) above may be applied for at city hall. The tree board's designated agent will review the permit and return the permit form to the applicant indicating approval or disapproval of the request and noting suggestions for completion or reasons for denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(6), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-67. - Interference with city tree care. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board's agent or city crews, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any public trees or shrubs as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(7), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-68. - Damage to public trees. 
    The tree board's agent shall place value on public trees damaged by accident or intention. The cost of repair or replacement of a damaged public tree, shrub or plant shall be borne by the party causing the damage or destruction. The city shall use as a reference "A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens" as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(8), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-69. - Arborish bond. 
    The city must have in its possession a copy of insurance coverage of anyone contracted to work on public trees. Liability insurance of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damage resulting from such contracted work on public trees. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(9), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-70. - Review by city council. 
    Any person may appeal any order or ruling of the tree board or its agents to the city council for a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(10), 12-10-90) 
Sec. 18-71. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) and/or ninety (90) days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 90-15, § 2(11), 12-10-90) 
Chapter 19 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Hawkers, peddlers and transient merchants, M.S. ch. 329; authority to license and regulate transient merchants, M.S. §§ 329.15, 436.02; authority to license and regulate hawkers and peddlers, M.S. § 329.06; exemption from licensing of farm or garden products grown by seller, Minn. Const. Art. XIII, § 7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares, or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sale and delivering articles to purchasers. "Peddler" does not include vendors of milk, bakery products, groceries, or ice who distribute their products to regular customers on established routes. 
    Sale, sell or sold means all forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to persons. 
    Solicitor means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether or not he is collecting advance payment on such orders. "Solicitor" includes any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or other place within the city for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. "Solicitor" includes any person or organization who solicits in its name, money, donations of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind, or sells or distributes any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged, or solicits from persons other than members of such organizations upon the street, in office or business buildings, by house to house canvass or in public places for a charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose. 
    Transient merchant means any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any boxcar alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. "Transient merchant" does not include any person who, while occupying a temporary location, does not sell from stock but, exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only; provided that the person so engaged is not relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer. 
    Wholesale means any sale for purpose of resale. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 110) 
Sec. 19-2. - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any sale under court order. 
(2)  Any bona fide auction sale of real estate or an isolated sale of personal property used by the owner in maintaining his own household. 
(3)  Newsboys. 
(4)  A sale at wholesale to a retail dealer in the article sold. 
(5)  The sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the same. 
State Law reference- Exemption from licensing of farm or garden products grown by seller. Minn. Const. Art. XIII. § 7. 
(6)  Sales of admissions by local school students. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 870) 
Sec. 19-3. - City records. 
    The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this chapter and the city clerk shall maintain a record for each permit issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 830(3), 840(5)) 
Sec. 19-4. - Use of streets. 
    No permittee under this chapter shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any permittee be allowed a stationary location thereon. No permittee shall be allowed to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such street. The judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, is conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 840(3)) 
Sec. 19-5. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
    No permittee under this chapter, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use a sound amplifying device upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which the permittee proposes to sell. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 840(2)) 
Cross reference- Noise generally, § 15-3. 
Secs. 19-6-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses generally, § 14-16 et seq. 

Sec. 19-16. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant to engage in any such business within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor. Each peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall obtain a permit; group permits are permitted. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 810) 
Sec. 19-17. - Application. 
(a)  Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit and the local address of the applicant if any. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and if the applicant will be involved in solicitations, the purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom. 
(4)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the sales or solicitations. 
(5)  The period during which the sales or solicitations shall occur. 
(6)  In the event solicitation is involved, a full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance other than a traffic violation, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(8)  The last municipalities, not to exceed three (3), where the applicant carried on business or solicitations immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which such business or solicitations were conducted in those municipalities. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee as determined by resolution of the council shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 820) 
Sec. 19-18. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this article, the application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this section within seventy-two (72) hours after it has been filed by the applicant with the clerk. 
(b)  If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or if sufficient information cannot be obtained regarding the applicant's character or business responsibility, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return the application to the city clerk who shall submit the same to the council for approval or disapproval. In the event the council approves the application, the city clerk shall issue a permit containing the signature of the city clerk. 
(d)  Within five (5) days after receiving notification by registered mail that an application for a permit has been denied, the applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the application before the city clerk, together with written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the city clerk based his denial of the application. Upon filing of such a request, the city clerk shall fix a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof. The hearing shall be held within five (5) days after the request is filed and shall be held before the council. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall render a written report either granting or denying the application for a permit. In this report the city council shall state the facts upon which the decision is based. This report shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and a copy shall be served by registered mail upon the applicant and all parties to the hearing. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 830, 850(1)) 
Sec. 19-19. - Contents. 
    A permit issued pursuant to this article shall show the name and address of the permittee, the kinds of goods to be sold thereunder, or the solicitations which shall be permitted, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the same shall be operative. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 830(3)) 
Sec. 19-20. - Term. 
    Annual permits issued pursuant to this article expire on December 31 of the year for which issued. Other permits shall expire at 12:00 midnight on the date specified in the permit. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 810) 
Sec. 19-21. - Use by others. 
    No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 830(3)) 
Sec. 19-22. - Display. 
    All transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors shall at all times when so engaged, carry their permit on their person. Permittees shall exhibit their permits at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 840(1), (4)) 
Sec. 19-23. - Revocation. 
(a)  Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the council after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for the permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor; 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of a hearing on the revocation of a permit shall be given by the city clerk in writing, specifically setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last local address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(c)  No permittee whose permit has been revoked shall make further application until at least six (6) months have elapsed since the last previous revocation. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 850(2), 860) 
Chapter 20 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Building and building regulations, Ch. 6; docks, § 5-5; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26; commercial building loan program, § 2-200. 
State Law reference- Planning generally, M.S. § 462.351 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissioners generally, § 2-236 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local planning agencies, M.S. § 462.354, subd. 1. 

Sec. 20-26. - Established. 
    There is established a planning commission. 
Sec. 20-27. - Members. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of six (6) members and one (1) nonvoting council liaison. All voting members shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve a three-year term, with no more than one (1) term expiring each year. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
(b)  Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The community development director or his/her agent shall serve as an ex-officio nonvoting member of the commission. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 810; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 20-28. - Officers and meetings. 
    Three (3) members of the planning commission constitute a quorum, and all action by the commission requires the affirmative vote of a quorum. The commission shall elect from its voting members a chairman and vice chairman. The community development director or his/her agent shall provide secretarial and staff services to the commission. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 820; Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 20-29. - Functions. 
    The planning commission shall: 
(1)  Serve as an advisory body to city council in matters regarding the issuance of conditional use permits, amendments to the zoning ordinance and the zoning map, and the platting and subdivision of land. 
(2)  Serve as an advisory body to the city council in matters of directing the future physical development and redevelopment of the city. The commission shall, upon request of the city council, make studies, investigations regarding matters affecting community development, zoning, platting and public improvements. 
(3)  Periodically review and revise the comprehensive plan, and make recommendations to the city council relating thereto. 
(4)  Recommend to the city council proposed regulations regarding zoning, use of land and structures, placement of structures on properties and other regulations related to public health, welfare, safety and convenience. 
(5)  Perform those duties imposed by Minnesota Statutes chapter 562, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, 830) 
Chapter 21 - POLICE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public safety division, § 2-161 et seq.; officers and employees generally, § 2-41 et seq. 
State Law reference- Police and salaried firefighters relief association, M.S. ch. 423A; law enforcement generally, M.S. ch. 436. 

Sec. 21-16. - Generally. 
(a)  The head of the police department shall be known as the chief of police who shall be appointed by the city administrator with the advice of the police civil service commission. The salary of the chief of police, and the number and salaries of additional members and employees of the police department shall be determined by the council by resolution which may be changed from time to time. Additional members of the police department shall be appointed by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the police civil service commission. The mayor shall have, without the approval of the council, authority to appoint additional members of the police department for temporary duty when, in his judgement, an emergency exists for the preservation of life or property. The chief of police and all members of the police department shall have the powers and authority of police officers generally and they shall perform such duties as are required by them by the council or by law. 
(b)  Police officers shall also fulfill all job requirements as related to the police department as adopted by the city administrator and police civil service commission. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 350(2); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 21-17. - Chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall have general superintendence of the police department and custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of the police department. It is the duty of the chief of police on or before July 1 of each year to file a detailed inventory with the city administrator and the city clerk of all property used or maintained for said department and to submit to the city administrator the needs for ensuing fiscal year. It is also the duty of the chief of police, on or before the day of the first regular council meeting in each month, to file with the city administrator and the city clerk a report as to all arrests made by, and other activities of his/her department during the previous month. The chief of police shall also make and file such other reports as may be required by the city administrator, police civil service commission, or the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 2, § 350(2); Ord. No. 96-6, 6-6-96) 
Sec. 21-18. - Civil service. 
    The provisions of Minnesota Statutes chapter 419 are adopted by reference as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 930) 
Charter reference- Adoption by reference, § 3.08. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, M.S. § 471.62. 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 25; litter in parks, § 18-42. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving, and consumption of food. 
    Open burning means burning any matter whereby the resultant combustion products are admitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through an adequate stack, duct, or chimney. 
    Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings, and market and industrial solid waste, and including sewage treatment wastes which are in dry form. 
    Refuse collection service means a private operation engaged in solid waste collection and solid waste transportation. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, including ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, toxic and hazardous wastes, and other discarded solid materials, except animal waste used as fertilizer, including solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. "Solid waste" does not include earthen fill, boulders, rocks and other materials normally handled in construction operations, solids, or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste, water effluents, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, or other common water pollutants. 
    Solid waste storage means the holding of solid waste near the point of operation. 
    Toxic and hazardous wastes means waste materials including, but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological wastes, radioactive materials, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful chemicals and wastes which require special handling and must be disposed of in a manner to conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 210) 
Sec. 22-17. - Compliance with state and city requirements. 
    All solid wastes shall be stored, collected, transferred, transported, utilized, processed and disposed of, or reclaimed in a manner consistent with the requirements of this article and the requirements of the state pollution control agency. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 220) 
Sec. 22-18. - Storage. 
(a)  The owner and occupant of any premises, business establishment, or industry shall be responsible for the satisfactory storage of all solid waste accumulated at that premises, business establishment or industry. 
(b)  Garbage and similar putrescible waste shall be stored in one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Durable, rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, water-tight, rodent-proof, and easily cleanable containers, with close-fitting, fly-tight covers having adequate handles or bales to facilitate handling. 
(2)  Other types of containers acceptable to the city and conforming to the intent of this article. 
(c)  Refuse shall be stored in durable containers or as otherwise provided in this article. Where garbage and similar putrescible wastes are stored in combination with non-putrescible refuse, containers for the storage of the mixture shall meet the requirements for garbage containers. 
(d)  Toxic or hazardous wastes shall be stored in the proper containers which are adequately labeled in a safe location and in compliance with the regulations of federal, state, and the city governments and their regulatory agencies. 
(e)  All containers for the storage of solid waste shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the creation of a nuisance or menace to public health. Containers which are broken or otherwise fail to meet requirements in this regulation shall be replaced with acceptable containers. 
(f)  Solid waste objects or materials too large or otherwise unsuitable for storage containers shall be stored in a pollution and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with the regulations of federal, state and the city government and their regulatory agencies. 
(g)  The owner and occupant of any premises, business establishment, or industry shall not allow the accumulation or storage of solid waste on said premises for a period longer than two (2) weeks, nor permit the disposal of any solid waste except in accordance with this article and any ordinance regulating solid waste disposal adopted by the county board of commissioners. 
(h)  A single family residence shall not be permitted to have a refuse or garbage container or dumpster of a size greater than two cubic yards on the premises for more than twenty-one (21) days. Refuse or garbage containers that are larger than ninety-six (96) gallons and up to two cubic yards in size must be stored in a garage, shed or enclosure in the side or rear yards of the dwelling. Refuse or garbage containers that are ninety-six (96) gallons or less in size are not required to be screened or enclosed but must be located so that they are not visible from the street or front yard of the dwelling. No dumpsters or garbage or refuse containers shall be allowed in the front yard except on the night before and through the day of garbage or refuse pick up dumpsters used for construction or remodeling purposes are exempted from this section but must be removed within twenty-one (21) days of placement. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 230; Ord. No. 2008-06, 9-8-08) 
Sec. 22-19. - Collection and transportation. 
(a)  The owner and occupant of any premises, business establishment or industry and/or the refuse collection service shall be responsible for the satisfactory collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at a premises, business establishment, or industry to a solid waste disposal site or facility, for which a permit has been issued by the state pollution control agency unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage and other putrescible wastes or refuse containing such materials, shall be covered, leak-proof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(c)  Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered when necessary to prevent blowing of materials. Where spillage does occur, the materials shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.S. § 169.81, subd. 5. 
(d)  Vehicles and containers used for the collection and transportation of toxic or hazardous wastes shall be durable, enclosed, and leak-proof and shall be constructed, loaded, moved, and unloaded in a safe manner and in compliance with the regulations of federal, state, and the city governments and their regulatory agencies. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 240) 
Sec. 22-20. - Open burning. 
    Open burning of solid wastes is prohibited in the city except as hereinafter set forth. The open burning of dry leaves shall be permitted within the city with a permit issued by the city fire warden between September 15 and December 1, subject to the following: 
(1)  Burning shall be limited to dried leaves only, and burning shall be conducted in such a manner to minimize pollution, hazards, and nuisances associated with open burning. 
(2)  Burning leaves shall not be permitted upon any public property or public right-of-way. 
(3)  Burning shall be permitted only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(4)  An adult shall be in constant attendance during the burning of any leaves. 
(5)  The burning of leaves shall not be permitted at a distance closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any structure or combustible materials. 
(6)  Any residue materials shall be removed after the fire has been extinguished so as to prevent any resident from entering the store or sewer systems of the city or from entering any lakes or stream. 
(7)  Adequate fire protective measures must be taken such as: 
a.  Fire extinguisher available on site, or; 
b.  Pail of water available on site, or; 
c.  Connected garden hose stretched to site. 
(8)  No burning of leaves shall take place during an air pollution alert, warning or emergency declared by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
(9)  Smoke and ash shall not be allowed to blow or drift toward any occupied structure within fifty (50) feet of the fire. 
(Code 1984, Title 7, § 250; Ord. No. 95-6, 1-23-95) 
State Law reference- Open burning of dried leaves, M.S. § 116.082. 
Sec. 22-21. - Dumping in streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any street or any other public place any solid waste including nails, dirt, glass, tin cans, metal scraps, garbage, shreds or rubbish, grass clippings, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 730) 
State Law reference- Littering prohibited, M.S. § 609.68. 
Secs. 22-22-22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTORS 

Sec. 22-36. - Definitions. 
    In this article "refuse" or "solid waste" means all forms of organic or inorganic waste commonly referred to as garbage, trash, or rubbish from residences, yards, lots or commercial establishments, not removed therefrom through the sewage system and in water suspension. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 110) 
Sec. 22-37. - License and bond. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting and transporting solid waste without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. The annual license fee for a solid waste hauler's license shall be determined by resolution of the council from time to time, with the license restricted to those vehicles stated in the license document. Any such license may be revoked by the council for a violation of any applicable ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted by the council and applicable to all licensees. 
(b)  Before a solid waste hauler's license is issued the applicant shall file with the city clerk a corporate security bond in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), approved by the city attorney and conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully and conscientiously provide the refuse collection service as specified in his application and in accordance with this section, and the license issued pursuant thereto, and conditioned further that the licensee shall abide by all provisions of city ordinances and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the council, the state pollution control agency, and the board of health. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, §§ 1010-1040; Ord. No. 89-19, § 2, 12-11-89) 
Cross reference- Licenses generally, § 14-16 et seq. 
Sec. 22-38. - Rules and regulations. 
    The council may establish, and amend, rules and regulations relating to the collection, transporting, storage, and disposal of solid waste, and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, Title 5, § 1030) 
Sec. 22-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 22-39, requiring council approval of rates charged by licensed solid waste haulers, derived from Code 1984, title 5, § 1050, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 89-19, adopted Dec. 11, 1989. 
Secs. 22-40, 22-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FREESTANDING FURNACES 

Sec. 22-42. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Freestanding furnace. A furnace or burner designed and intended and/or used for the burning of wood or other sources, which is freestanding and is located outside of the structure for which it is intended to provide heat. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-24-08) 
Sec. 22-43. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is recognized and found that smoke is hazardous to an individual's health and may affect the health of the general public when they are involuntarily exposed to the presence of wood smoke. 
(b)  It is recognized that freestanding furnaces are designated and intended to be a primary heat source and therefore burn, and emit smoke, on a continual basis. A distinction is drawn between freestanding furnaces and indoor wood stoves and fireplaces that, by nature, provide supplemental heat and are generally used on a less frequent basis. 
(c)  This article is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, comfort, and the general welfare of the people of the City of Fairmont. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-24-08) 
Sec. 22-44. - Requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall install a freestanding furnace on property within the city without first having obtained a permit from the building inspection department and paying the established fees and charges. 
(b)  Prohibited fuels. The only fuel permitted to be burned is untreated fuel. Wood may not be treated, processed, stained, finished or painted. Specifically prohibited woods include plywood, particle board and similar products. Other fuels, such as corn, shall not contain any additives, treatments or chemicals. No petroleum products or processed materials of any kind may be burned. 
(c)  Approvals. Any freestanding furnace shall be listed as stated in the Minnesota State Building Code and also be EPA certified. 
(d)  Property line setbacks. A freestanding furnace must be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 
(e)  Structure setback. A freestanding furnace must be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any principal or accessory structure. 
(f)  Chimney stack height. A freestanding furnace shall have a chimney height that extends at least fifteen (15) feet above ground level unless the furnace is within five hundred (500) feet of a dwelling unit or accessory structure located on adjacent property, in which case the chimney terminus shall extend above ground level to a height at least equal to that of the height of the adjacent dwelling unit or accessory structure. 
(g)  Dates of use. A freestanding furnace shall not be used between May 1 and October 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-24-08) 
Sec. 22-45. - Nonconforming use. 
(a)  Continuation of nonconforming uses. The lawful use of any freestanding furnace existing at the time of the effective date of this article may be continued, although such use may not conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Extension or enlargements. No preexisting, nonconforming freestanding furnace shall hereafter be extended, enlarged, expanded or replaced. 
(c)  Abandonment and discontinuance. Any preexisting, nonconforming freestanding furnace which is abandoned or not used for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall not be permitted to be reestablished as a nonconforming use, cannot be used, and must be immediately removed by the property owner from the subject premises. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-24-08) 
Section 22-46. - Enforcement. 
    Any person committing a violation of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-24-08) 
Chapter 23 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Vacating public grounds or streets. 
(a)  No public grounds or streets shall be vacated except after a public hearing upon a resolution of the council passed by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote or upon the petition of any of the abutting property owner(s) of such public grounds or streets residing within the city, and completion of the procedure hereinafter specified, and in Minnesota Statutes Section 440.135. Such petition shall set forth the reasons for such desired vacation, accompanied by a plat of such public grounds or streets proposed to be vacated, and such petition shall be verified by the oath of any of the abutting property owners. If in the discretion of the council, it is expedient that the matter be proceeded with, it may order the petition filed for record with the city clerk, order a hearing on such petition and fix the time and place of such hearing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall post notice of such hearing and publish notice in the city's legal newspaper at least two (2) weeks prior to the hearing. Newspaper publication must be once a week for two (2) weeks. In addition, written notice of the hearing must be mailed to each property owner affected by the proposed vacation at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Such notice shall state in brief the object of such hearing, the time, place and purpose thereof and the fact that the council, shall hear the testimony and examine the evidence of the parties interested. 
(c)  The council, after the public hearing on the property owner(s) petition, may by resolution passed by a simple majority of a quorum declare such public grounds or streets vacated, or deny such petition. The resolution, if granting the petition, shall be certified by the city clerk and shall be filed for record and duly recorded in the office of the registrar of deeds of the county. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 610-630; Ord. No. 92-6, 5-11-92; Ord. No. 2018-13 , 6-11-18) 
Charter reference- Vacating streets, § 12.06. 
Sec. 23-2. - Obstructions. 
    No person shall place or deposit any fence or other obstruction upon any street without: 
(1)  First having obtained a written permit to do so from the council and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(2)  Taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 710) 
Sec. 23-3. - Ice and snow. 
(a)  All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting private property within twenty-four (24) hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited. 
(b)  The city may cause to be removed from all public sidewalks, beginning twenty-four (24) hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow and ice which may be discovered thereon. The city shall keep a record of the cost of such removal and the private property adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed. 
(c)  The city clerk shall, upon direction of the council, and on receipt of the information provided for in the preceding subsection, extend the cost of such removal of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks which were cleared. Such special assessment shall, at the time of certifying taxes to the county auditor, be certified for collection as other special assessments are certified and collected. 
(d)  The city clerk shall, in the alternative, upon direction of the council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in subsection (b) hereof, the cost of such clearing and the costs and disbursements of a civil action therefor. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 210-240) 
Charter reference- Special assessments for snow removal, § 8.02. 
State Law reference- Special assessments for snow removal, M.S. §§ 429.101, 429.111. 
Sec. 23-4. - Fires. 
    It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a roadway. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 720) 
Sec. 23-5. - Curb cuts for angle parking. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, any curb from its position abutting upon the roadway to another position without first making written application to the council and obtaining a permit therefor. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant, and abutting landowner if other than applicant, shall enter into a written agreement with the city agreeing to pay all costs of constructing and maintaining such setback area in at least as good condition as the abutting roadway, and further agreeing to demolish and remove such setback and reconstruct the area as was at the expense of the landowner, his heirs or assigns if the area ever, in the council's opinion, becomes a public hazard. Such agreement shall be recorded in the office of the registrar of deeds, and shall run with the adjoining land. 
(b)  Angle parking only signs shall be purchased from the city and erected and maintained at the expense of the adjoining landowner in all such setback areas now in use or hereafter constructed. It is unlawful for any person to park other than at an angle in such setback areas, as such angle parking is herein described and allowed. Such setback parking areas shall be kept open for public parking and the abutting landowner shall at no time acquire any special interest or control of or in such areas. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 1810-1830) 
Secs. 23-6-23-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, ETC. 

Sec. 23-21. - Generally. 
    Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or re-construct any roadway surfacing, sidewalk, or curb and gutter in accordance with this article if advance payment is made therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the council are completed in advance. Such work may also be done with or without petition by the methods set forth in Minnesota Statutes chapter 429 as amended. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 410) 
Charter reference- Public improvements and special assessments, § 8.01 et seq. 
Sec. 23-22. - Permit. 
    No sidewalk, curb and gutter or roadway surfacing shall be constructed in any street or other public property in this city without first having obtained a permit in writing from the council. Application for such permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of work, and the length of time required to complete the same; provided that no permit shall be required for any such improvement ordered installed by the council. All such applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and, as to roadway and curb and gutter improvements, plans and specifications consistent with the provisions of the title and good engineering practices shall also accompany the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person or property of another caused by such work. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 420) 
Sec. 23-23. - Sewer and water main service lateral installation. 
(a)  No petition for the improvement of a street shall be considered by the council if such petition contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base, or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been made therein, including stubbing the same to the curb, if the area along such street will be served by such utilities installed in the street. 
(b)  No sewer system shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously with construction of mains. 
(c)  The council may waive the requirements of this section if it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon such notice and hearing as the council may deem necessary or proper. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 1010-1030) 
Sec. 23-24. - Specifications. 
    All sidewalks and curb and gutter constructed in or upon any street or other public property shall be constructed according to the specifications established by the city engineer or the city council. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 430) 
Secs. 23-25-23-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 1990, amended the Code by deleting provisions contained in Art. III, §§ 23-36 and 23-37 in their entirety. Said provisions pertained to the authority of the city in regards to shrubs and trees in the public domain and derived from the Code of 1984, Title 6, §§ 310, 320, 330. 

Secs. 23-36-23-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Excavations in parks, § 18-43. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-51. - Restoration, etc. 
(a)  All temporary and permanent repairs to excavated areas in streets or other public property, including filling, compacting, and resurfacing shall be made, or contracted for by the city in a manner prescribed by the city engineer, and an accurate account of costs thereof shall be kept. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days following the completion of such permanent repairs, the city engineer shall determine actual costs of repairs, including cost of investigation, and prepare and furnish to such permit holder an itemized statement thereof and claim additional payment from, or make refund to, the permit holder, as the cost may be. 
(c)  In lieu of above provisions relating to cost and cost adjustment for street openings, the city may charge on the basis of surface square feet removed, excavated cubic feet, or a combination of surface square feet and excavated cubic feet, on an established unit price uniformly charged. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, §§ 550-570) 
Secs. 23-52-23-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 23-66. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, except a city employee acting within the course and scope of his employment or a contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract with the city, to make any excavation, opening or tunnel in, over, across, or upon a street or other public property without having first obtained a written permit to do so from the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 510) 
Sec. 23-67. - Application. 
    An application for a permit to make a street excavation shall describe with reasonable particularity the name and address of the applicant, the place, purpose and size of the excavation, and such other information as may be necessary or desirable to facilitate the investigation hereinafter provided for. Such an application shall be filed with the city administrator. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 520) 
Sec. 23-68. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for the permit required by this article the city administrator shall cause such investigation to be made as may be necessary to determine estimated cost of repair, such as filling, compacting, resurfacing, and replacement, and the conditions as to the time of commencement of work, manner of procedure and time limitation upon such excavation. The foregoing estimated costs shall include permanent and temporary repairs due to weather or other conditions, and the cost of such investigation shall be included in such estimate. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 530) 
Sec. 23-69. - Issuance. 
    The city administrator shall issue such permit after: 
(1)  Completion of the required investigation. 
(2)  Payment by the applicant in advance of all estimated costs. 
(3)  Agreement by the applicant to the conditions of time and manner of doing the work. 
(4)  Agreement by the applicant to pay all actual cost of repairs over and above the estimate, including cost of the investigation. 
(Code 1984, Title 6, § 540) 
Chapter 24 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; planning and development, Ch. 20; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, M.S. § 462.358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section: 
    Alley means a public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets or a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of a subdivision and/or bodies of water. 
    Boulevard means that portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curb line. 
    Building setback means the minimum horizontal distance from the street right-of-way as prescribed in section 26-1. 
    Comprehensive plan means a compilation of material, statements, goals, standards and maps adopted by the planning commission and city council, used by the commission in making recommendations for guiding the orderly development of the private and public sectors of the city. 
    Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
    Final plat means a drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision containing all information and detail required by state law and by this chapter to be presented to the planning commission and city council for approval and which, if approved, may be duly filed with the county recorder. 
    Lot means a parcel, piece, or portion of land designated by metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditor's plat, or other means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease, or separation thereof. 
    Lot-butt means a lot located at the end of a block excluding the two (2) corner lots. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
    Major subdivision means the combination or division of parcels or lots that meet at least one (1) of the following definitions: 
(1)  A division of unplatted land for future development of residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
(2)  A resubdivision of adjoining lots of record which in total exceed one (1) acre in size. 
(3)  Development which includes the opening, widening, or extension of any private street or public right-of-way in a platted area or as part of a subdivision of unplatted land. 
    Minimum subdivision design standards means the principles, specifications and standards for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating, among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plan. 
    Minor subdivision means a combination or division of parcels of land or lots that meet at least one (1) of the following definitions: 
(1)  A combination or division of lots of record in which the resultant parcels meet the minimum zoning district requirements for buildable sites as defined in chapter 26 and do not involve the creation or vacation of private streets or public right-of-ways. 
(2)  A division of a parcel of land or lots between adjoining property owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites as defined by chapter 26, or create a lot or parcel that does not conform with minimum zoning requirements. 
    Owner means any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
    Pedestrian way means the right-of-way across or within a block, for use by pedestrian traffic whether designated as a pedestrian way, crosswalk, or however otherwise designated. 
    Preliminary plat means a drawing officially marked indicating the salient features and proposed layout of a subdivision, as specified in article II, division 2, part B. 
    Protective covenant means a contract entered into between private parties and constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide protection against undesirable aspects of development which would impair values. 
    Sketch plan means a sketch from a proposed subdivision showing information specified in section 24-67. 
    Streets and roads, etc.: 
(1)  Street means a public right-of-way which affords the primary means of access to abutting properties. 
(2)  Collector street means a street which serves or is designed to serve as a trafficway for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major street. 
(3)  Cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one (1) vehicular outlet and a turn-around at the other end. 
(4)  Major street or thoroughfare means a street which serves heavy flows of traffic and provides a primary route between traffic-generating areas. 
(5)  Minor street means a street intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties. 
(6)  Service street means a marginal access street which is generally parallel and adjacent to a major street and provides secondary access to abutting property. 
(7)  Half-street means a street designed to provide access to only one (1) side of the right-of-way. 
(8)  Private street means a way for vehicular traffic which is not owned and maintained by the city. 
    Street width means the width of the right-of-way measured at right angles to the center of the street. 
    Subdivider means any person who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof either for himself or another. 
    Subdivision means the division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, blocks and/or sites, with or without streets that is less than the minimum standards listed in section 24-6. This term includes resubdivision. 
    Surveyor means a person duly registered as a land surveyor by the state. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(5), (7)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-2. - Purpose. 
    Land subdivision provides the foundation for community development. Once land has been divided into streets, blocks, lots and open spaces, the pattern of development is set. Piecemeal or disjointed planning of such subdivisions, without correlation to the comprehensive plan, will create a patchwork of plats, poor traffic circulation and expensive utility costs. In order that new subdivisions will contribute toward an attractive and orderly community environment, adequate and cost-efficient municipal services and efficient movement of traffic, all subdivisions hereafter platted within the jurisdiction of the city shall in all respects fully comply with this chapter. This chapter is adopted by the city pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 462.358. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(1), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The rules and regulations herein governing plats and subdivisions of land shall apply within the city's corporate limits and to unincorporated land located within two (2) miles of its corporate limits to the extent allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(2), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-4. - Application. 
    Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be prepared and presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. This chapter shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel into two (2) or more lots, tracts or other divisions of land for the purpose of sale or development; including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(3), 6-30-86) 
State Law reference- Platting requirements, M.S. § 462.358, subd. 3a. 
Sec. 24-5. - Variances. 
(a)  Planned unit development. When a planned unit development is submitted which is to be developed in accordance with the requirements of chapter 26 and a binding development plan, variances may be granted from the specific requirements of this chapter. The plan shall not be in conflict with the major street plan, and shall, in the opinion of the city council, provide adequate public open space and be a desirable community development. Areas in planned unit developments under individual ownership are subject to final platting, including condominiums as regulated by state law. 
(b)  Other variances. In addition to subsection (a): 
(1)  The council may grant a variance upon receiving a report from the planning commission in any particular case where the subdivider can show that by reason of exceptional topography or other physical conditions that strict compliance with these regulations could cause an exceptional and undue hardship on the enjoyment of a substantial property right; provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public welfare and without impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the planning commission and the council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. Any variance or modification thus granted shall be recorded in resolution form and entered in the minutes of the council setting forth the reasons which justified the action. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(14), 6-30-86) 
State Law reference- Variances, M.S. § 462.358, subd. 6. 
Sec. 24-6. - Lot area and width. 
(a)  No conveyance of land in which the land conveyed is described by metes and bounds, or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat made after September 1, 1969, shall be made or recorded if the parcel described in the conveyance does not meet the following minimum standards: 
Land Use (zoning) Minimum Required 
Area (acres) Minimum Required 
Width (feet) Agricultural or residential 20 500 Commercial or industrial  5 300  
(b)  Individual lots of record recorded prior to June 30, 1986, or agreements to convey such smaller parcels entered into prior to such date and recorded in the office of the county recorder within one (1) year after such date, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(4), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-7. - Land surveys. 
    Land surveys prepared by a registered land surveyor in order to comply with requirements of this chapter shall be filed with the office of the city engineer. No fee shall be charged for the filing of surveys. 
Secs. 24-8-24-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPROVAL PROCEDURES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Subdivision review procedures, M.S. § 462.358, subd. 3b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-51. - Compliance. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land, as regulated by this chapter, is proposed to be made, and before any contract for sale of, or any offer to sell any lots in such subdivision or any part thereof is made, and before any permit for the creation of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider or his duly authorized agent, shall apply in writing for approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the applicable procedures in this article for minor and major subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(6), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-52. - Minor subdivision procedures. 
(a)  Whenever a minor subdivision is proposed, the subdivider may request approval of the subdivision without preparing a plat subject to the requirements of this chapter. The following shall apply: 
(1)  The subdivider shall complete an application provided by the city planner. The subdivider shall provide the following information in order to complete the application: 
a.  A legal description of the proposed subdivision. 
b.  A land survey (81/2" × 14") minimum of the proposed subdivision with a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet minimum. The survey should indicate any easements, street right-of-ways or location of existing utilities. 
c.  A computation of the square footage or acreage of the proposed subdivision. 
d.  A certified document from the county auditor stating that all assessments on the proposed subdivision would be divided proportionately on the subdivided or resubdivided parcels. 
Items a., b. and c. shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(2)  The city planner shall have ten (10) working days from the date that the application and all required information are submitted. The city planner shall review the proposed minor subdivision for conformity to existing subdivisions, platting and zoning regulations. 
(3)  Within ten (10) working days after submission of all required materials the city planner shall approve or disapprove the proposed subdivision. If the city planner disapproves the application the reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the staff decision to the planning commission at their next regular meeting. If the city planner approves the application, staff shall indicate that the proposed subdivision meets the minimum requirements of chapter 26. 
(4)  After receiving written approval from the administrator, the applicant may then proceed with the recording process. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(7)(B), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 24-53-24-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS 
Part A. - General Provisions 

Sec. 24-66. - Scope. 
    This division applies to major subdivisions. 
Sec. 24-67. - Preliminary sketch plan and review. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for subdividing or resubdividing land, the subdivider or his agent shall submit a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to the office of city planner for review. The city planner may recommend review of the sketch plan by the planning commission. 
(b)  Once staff review is completed, the subdivider shall meet and consult with the city planner on necessary design considerations and items of importance regarding the sketch plan. Following such informal review and consultation, the subdivider may file a formal application for a preliminary plat utilizing considerations determined in the sketch plan review. 
(c)  The following information is required for a sketch plan: 
(1)  The location of the proposed subdivision in relation to adjoining tracts of land, adjacent subdivisions and the existing street pattern. 
(2)  All existing structures and significant natural and physical features of the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  The proposed pattern of lots, street layout, recreation areas, drainage and connection to storm sewers. 
(4)  Location of utilities and proposed utility easements. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(9), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 24-68-24-75. - Reserved. 
Part B. - Preliminary Plat 

Sec. 24-76. - Generally. 
    Within six (6) months after consideration of a sketch plan, the subdivider shall file with the city planner an application for a preliminary plat. Failure to act within the above time limit shall invalidate an approved sketch plan and require that it be resubmitted. The subdivider shall provide six (6) copies of the preliminary plat, including one (1) copy (pictorial part) reduced to eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-77. - Required information. 
    Preliminary plat shall be prepared by a surveyor and contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of proposed plat, name and address of the owners, registered engineer or surveyor, and owners of the adjacent property. 
(2)  Legal description of the property to be platted and small scale sketch showing location as described. 
(3)  Date, approximate north point, and graphic scale (not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch). 
(4)  Acreage of land to be subdivided. 
(5)  Zoning classification of land to be subdivided and all adjacent lands. 
(6)  Contours at an interval of two (2) feet. If natural contours are to be changed more than two (2) feet a grading plan should be submitted showing approximate final elevations. 
(7)  Boundary lines of area to be subdivided, their bearings and distances. 
(8)  Existing and proposed easements and their locations, widths and distances. 
(9)  Streets on and adjacent to the tract and their names, widths, proposed approximate grades and proposed relative ground elevations at the intersections of all streets and every one hundred (100) feet along such streets and at the corners or extremities of the plat, and other dimensions as may be required. Elevations shall be to city datum or if unavailable a bench mark for the plat shall be shown. 
(10)  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract showing proposed connections to existing utility systems. Rear easements for utility poles and wires shall be provided wherever possible. Data to be provided includes type of utility; location of manholes, catch basins, hydrants, etc.; approximate depth of pipes, size of pipe and direction of flow. 
(11)  Lot lines, lot numbers, lot dimensions and square footage of each lot. 
(12)  Sites and their acreages, if any to be reserved or dedicated for parks, recreation areas, open spaces, schools or other public uses. 
(13)  Minimum building setback lines. 
(14)  Location of railroads, streams, natural and proposed drainage courses, permanent buildings, natural features, and other information. 
(15)  Other reasonable information, such as percolation and other soil tests, if so requested by the city planner or planning commission. 
(16)  Description of any proposed deed restrictions. 
(17)  An informational statement as to the general plan of improvement, drainage, and development. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-78. - Procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, the city planner shall submit copies to the city engineering department, public utility companies, and the state department of transportation and the county engineering department if state and county right-of-ways are within or adjacent to the proposed plat for review and comment. 
(b)  Upon completion of review, the city planner shall set a date for a public hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed not less than five (5) days before the date of hearing to all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed plat. Identification of such property owners shall be determined by the city clerk from records made available to the public. 
(c)  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, to gather input from all persons interested in the preliminary plat. The planning commission shall study the practicability of the preliminary plat taking into consideration the requirements of the comprehensive plan, the official zoning map and this chapter. 
(d)  The planning commission shall make its recommendation on the preliminary plat to the city council within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, except in cases where the applicant requests additional time to amend the plat. If a plat is recommended for disapproval, reasons for disapproval must be stated in writing and be a part of the official record. 
(e)  The city council shall act on the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days of the date on which it received the planning commission's recommendation. If a preliminary plat is denied, reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and become a part of the official record. 
(f)  Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat. The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat based thereon is submitted within one (1) year from the date of such approval. One (1) extension of time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, may be applied for by the subdivider and granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-79. - Subdivision of portion of larger tract. 
    Whenever part of a tract is proposed to be subdivided, and it is intended to subdivide additional parts of the tract in the future, a sketch plan for the entire tract portraying required information and proposed platting for the entire tract shall be submitted to the office of the city planner. This sketch plan will be reviewed by the planning commission when they consider the preliminary plat for the first part of the tract. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-80. - Exceptions for certain subdivisions. 
    In the case of a subdivision of small size and minor importance, situated in a locality where conditions are well defined, the city planner may exempt the subdivider from complying with some of the requirements stipulated in this part pertaining to preparation of the preliminary plat. 
Secs. 24-81-24-90. - Reserved. 
Part C. - Final Plat 

Sec. 24-91. - Generally. 
    Within one (1) year of preliminary plat approval, the subdivider shall file the final plat for proposed subdivision. The final plat will have incorporated all changes or modifications approved for the preliminary plat and in all other aspects shall conform with the preliminary plat. The subdivider shall furnish five (5) copies of the final plat, including one (1) copy reduced to eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches. The final plat shall be prepared and filed in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(11)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-92. - Required information. 
(a)  The final plat shall include the following information or any other information as required by state law: 
(1)  Data required by state law to fully describe the land to be platted including accurate dimensions, angles, bearings to describe boundaries, streets, easements, areas reserved for public purpose and other important features (drawn not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch). 
(2)  Name and right-of-way width of each street. 
(3)  Block and lot numbers, lot dimensions and square footage. 
(4)  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
(5)  Location of rivers, streams, creeks, lakes and wetlands as required by state law. 
(6)  Names and location of adjoining subdivisions, streets, right-of-ways, and any other sites for public use. 
(7)  Certifications on the plats that are required by state law. 
(8)  Dedication of streets, easements, public areas and right-of-ways. 
(b)  The subdivider shall submit the following when filing the final plat unless exempted by the city planner: 
(1)  Certification that the subdivider has complied with one (1) of the following alternatives: 
a.  Has installed and constructed basic improvements in the proposed subdivision in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Executed an agreement with the city council regarding the installation and construction of basic improvements in the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Cross-sections, profiles and grades of streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks showing locations of in-street utilities; drawn to standard scales and elevations and prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(3)  Drainage and grading plan showing approximate final elevations at two-foot intervals. 
(4)  Protective covenant documents. 
(5)  Letters of approval of highway access points and service roads from the commissioner of highways and county engineer. 
(6)  Title opinion by an attorney indicating ownership of the subdivision when public easements or right-of-ways are dedicated to the city. 
(7)  Tax certification showing that all taxes and assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(11)(A), (B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-93. - Procedure. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit three (3) paper print copies of the final plat and one (1) copy of all required materials to the city planner. The city planner shall submit one (1) copy of the final plat and required materials to the city engineer. The city engineer will check said plat as to computations, monuments, etc., and that all required improvements have been properly completed or that the financial guarantee listed in the improvement agreement is sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements. He shall certify approval of the agreement or improvements before planning commission consideration. 
(b)  The planning commission shall consider the final plat within sixty (60) days of its submittal by the city planner. A plat shall not be recommended for approval unless it: 
(1)  Conforms to the preliminary plat. 
(2)  Conforms to design standards set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Conforms to the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Is in accordance with all requirements and laws of the state. 
If a plat is recommended for disapproval, reasons for disapproval must be stated in writing and become a part of the official record. 
(c)  The planning commission shall then forward the plat together with its recommendations to the council for final action. It is the intent of this section that a paper copy of the final plat go to the city staff and the planning commission for review and to the council for action. When the paper print of the final plat has been approved by the council, the subdivider shall then submit one (1) mylar reproducible copy for city records and other required copies to be made with the approval of the city certified thereon, and distributed according to state law. 
(d)  Upon approval of the final plat the subdivider shall record it with the county recorder within ninety (90) days in the manner specified by state law. Otherwise the approval shall become void unless a request for extension has been made in writing and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(11)(C), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 24-94-24-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS, ETC. 

Sec. 24-151. - Scope. 
    This article constitutes minimum required improvements for major subdivisions. 
Sec. 24-152. - Agreements, financial guarantees, etc. 
(a)  Before a final plat is approved by the city council, the owner and subdivider shall be required to execute and submit to the city council an agreement, which shall be binding on the owner's heirs, personal representatives and assigns, that no private construction is to be made on the plat, or file any application for building permits for such construction until all improvements as may be required by the city have been made or arranged for pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to the making of the required improvements, the owner or subdivider shall be required by the city to deposit with the city clerk an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the city's estimated cost of such improvements, either in an escrow deposit or an indemnity bond, with sureties satisfactory to the city, conditioned upon the payment of all construction costs incurred in making of such improvements and all expense incurred by the city for engineering and legal fees and other expense in connection with the making of such improvements. 
(c)  All of the improvements required in this chapter shall be constructed only after the plans and specifications thereof have been approved by the city. No areas platted after date of this chapter outside the city, or properties subdivided by metes and bounds descriptions after adoption of this chapter will be accepted for annexation unless it shall substantially conform or can be made to substantially conform to the minimum standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-153. - Land subject to poor drainage. 
    The right is reserved to disapprove any subdivision which is subject to poor drainage. However, if the subdivider provides a drainage plan designed by a registered engineer and agrees to make necessary improvements that will make the area safe for development, the subdivision may be approved. Such approval, however, is contingent on approval by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(E), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-154. - Community assets. 
    In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for natural features such as trees, varying topography, water courses and wetlands; for sites which have historical significance; and for similar assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and community. The planning commission may prepare a list of all such features within its area of subdivision jurisdiction which it deems worthy of preservation. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(F), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-155. - Monuments and stakes. 
    All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, street intersection corners, and points of tangency shall be marked with survey monuments consisting of minimum five-eighths-inch-diameter steel pipes or rods locatable by magnetic equipment twenty-four (24) inches in length. Inscribed on the monument or cap, in accordance with state law, shall be the registration number of the land surveyor making the survey. All U.S., state, county and other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position or transferred to appropriate locations. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(10)(G), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-156. - Public sites and open spaces. 
    In all new major subdivisions, land shall be dedicated or a fee paid in lieu of dedication for the purpose of providing public open space. Any land dedication shall be in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, easements, or other public ways. The planning commission shall, in its review of the proposed subdivision, decide whether land dedication or fee payment is necessary. Such decisions shall be based on the size of the proposed subdivision, distance from community parks and the comprehensive plan. Formulas for land dedication or fee payment shall be as follows: 
(1)  Seven (7) percent of gross land area in the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Fee equivalent to ten (10) percent of land value prior to its subdivision (the market value shall be determined by utilization of assessment records and formulas). 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(13), 6-30-86) 
State Law reference- Land dedications and fees in lieu thereof, M.S. § 462.358, subd. 2b. 
Secs. 24-157-24-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-200. - Scope. 
    This article applies to subdivisions. 
Sec. 24-201. - Conformity with comprehensive plan. 
    Each proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-202. - Alleys. 
(a)  Locational requirements. Either a public or private alley shall be provided in a block where commercially zoned property abuts a major or local thoroughfare. New alleys in residential areas other than those zoned for multiple-family use shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Widths. All alley rights-of-way and pavement widths shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
Classification Right-of-Way 
(feet) Pavement 
(feet) Industrial or commercial 24 20 Residential (multifamily) 20 16  
(c)  Grades. All center line gradients shall be at least 0.5 percent and shall not exceed eight (8) percent. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(G), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-203. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Location. Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all major thoroughfares as designated on the comprehensive plan upon which buildable lots front and may be required by the council upon recommendation of the planning commission along one (1) or both sides of other rights-of-way. The sidewalks shall not be located less than one (1) foot from the property line, nor be adjacent to the curb except as determined in commercial areas. 
(b)  Widths. All sidewalk widths shall conform to the following minimum standards. 
Classification Width (feet) Single-family zone 5 Multiple family zone and public building sites 5 Central business district 10  Industrial zone 5  
(c)  Grades. Sidewalks shall slope .02 feet per foot away from the property line and the profile grade shall conform to street grades. 
(d)  Pedestrian ways. In blocks over nine hundred (900) feet long, pedestrian crosswalks through the blocks, and at least ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the council in locations deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(I), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-204. - Utilities. 
(a)  Water supply. Extensions of the public water supply system shall be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot. Service connections shall be stubbed to the property line and all necessary fire hydrants shall be provided. The design of said extension shall be in accordance with the standards of the city, and the state department of health. 
(b)  Sewage disposal. Extensions of the public sanitary sewer system shall be designed so as to provide sewer service to each lot. The design of said extensions shall be in accordance with the standards of the city, and state pollution control agency. 
(c)  Drainage. A complete and adequate drainage system for the subdivision shall be designed by a registered engineer, and shall include a storm sewer system or a system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, and catch basins, or both systems. Such system or systems shall be designed in conformity with all applicable standards of the city and so as to meet with their approval. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(J), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-205. - Easements. 
(a)  Utilities. Easements at least twelve (12) feet wide, centered on rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be dedicated to the public by appropriate language in the owner's certificate. They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block, and at deflection points easements for pole-line anchors shall be provided where necessary. Easements shall be provided along property lines from utility easements on rear lot lines to right-of-ways so as to provide for a street light interval not to exceed five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  Drainage. Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any water course or drainage channel, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for storm water runoff and installation and maintenance of storm sewers, and they shall be dedicated to the city by appropriate language in the owner's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 17.13(12)(K), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 21-206. - Blocks. 
(a)  Factors governing dimensions. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lot required in the area by the zoning provisions and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
(b)  Length. Block length shall not exceed one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet. 
(c)  Arrangements. A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a railroad or major thoroughfare where it may have a single tier of lots with frontage on one (1) side. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(L), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 21-207. - Lots. 
(a)  Location. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated street or a roadway that has received approval as a private street. 
(b)  Size. The lot dimensions in subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum dimensions required to secure the minimum lot area specified in chapter 26. 
(c)  Butt lots. Butt lots shall be platted at least five (5) feet wider than the average width of interior lots in the block. 
(d)  Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines unless a variance to this rule will give a better street or lot plan. 
(e)  Watercourses. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width, as required to assure house sites that are not subject to flooding. 
(f)  Through lots. Through lots with double frontage will not be allowed. 
(g)  Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(h)  Lots along thoroughfares. Except in those cases where there are extenuating circumstances, residential lots shall not front on major thoroughfares. Residential lots contiguous to railroad right-of-way shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(M), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 24-208-24-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 24-226. - Street plan. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and to these regulations, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to run-off of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas. Subdivisions which block the planned extension of existing streets shall not be approved. 
(c)  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-227. - Street design. 
(a)  Street improvements. All streets shall be graded full design width and improved by surfacing with concrete or bituminous; and provided with concrete curb and gutter. Such grading and improvement shall be approved as to design and specifications by the city engineer. 
(b)  Street widths. Streets shall have the following minimum dimensions. 
Classification Right-of-way 
(feet) Major thoroughfares 
  or as determined by county or state (whichever is greater) 100  Major streets 80 Collector streets 66 Minor streets 66 Marginal access streets 50  
In no case will lesser right-of-way widths be permitted, if such deviation is solely for the purpose of conforming to minimum lot dimensions or setbacks. In no case shall walk or other side utility easements be substituted for any portion of required, dedicated street right-of-way. 
    All roadway widths shall be approved by the city engineer and be designed to Minnesota state aid requirements if applicable. Greater right-of-way or roadway widths may be required depending upon anticipated traffic volumes, planned function of the street and character of planned abutting land use. 
(c)  Deflections. The horizontal alignment of all streets (based upon finished pavement section) shall conform to the current requirements of the Minnesota Department of Transportation (Mn/DOT) Road Design Manual for the following conditions: 
Classification Design Speed 
(MPH) Minimum Radius 
(feet) Marginal access road 20  90 Minor streets 25 175 Collector streets 25 175 Major streets 30 275 Major thoroughfares 40 600  
Higher design speeds may be imposed by the city for certain high volume major routes and on municipal state aid routes and the developer shall be advised of such special speed requirements by the city engineer and shall conform to the same. Lesser radii may be permitted on major routes by the proper and pre-approved use of super elevation conforming to Mn/DOT standards. Variations in minimum radii may be allowed by the city engineer for special and unusual conditions resulting from pre-existing alignment connections. 
    Horizontal curves shall be used to smooth deflections at the right-of-way line on all plat block deflections exceeding ten (10) degrees or where failure to use a horizontal curve would reduce the distance between right-of-way (at the point of deflection) and back of finished curb by more than three (3) feet. Where possible right-of-way curves shall be concentric to finished street alignment. In no case, however, shall a spiral curve be used as a right-of-way or plat, block or lot boundary, unless the spiral curve is part of the record boundary. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-228. - Street grades. 
(a)  Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain, and shall not be less than one half of one (0.5) percent nor more than five (5) percent for thoroughfares or major streets, seven (7) percent for collector streets, eight (8) percent for minor streets in residential zones, eight (8) percent for minor streets in residential zones, and eight (8) percent for access streets. In any case, a relief grade of no more than three (3) percent shall be provided within fifty (50) feet of an intersection. Variation in these requirements may be permitted by the city engineer for special and unusual conditions resulting from pre existing grade connections or where resulting excessive subdivision earthwork would destroy the natural character of the land or cause excessive erosion. 
(b)  A vertical curve shall be used to join any street grade changes. The vertical curve selected shall provide a comfortable ride at the design speed, itemized in section 24-22, subsection (c). For all major streets and thoroughfares and municipal state aid routes, the vertical alignment and curves shall conform to the standards of the Mn/DOT Road Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-229. - Marginal access streets. 
    Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major thoroughfare or a railroad right-of-way, the council may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. Such marginal access streets shall be located at a distance from the major thoroughfare or railroad right-of-way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(1), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-230. - Half streets. 
    Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this chapter; and except where the council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there is a half street adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(2), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-231. - Street jogs. 
    Street jogs shall have a centerline off-set of one hundred fifty (150) feet or more when applied to minor streets or marginal access streets; in all other cases they shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(3), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-232. - Minor streets. 
    Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(4), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-233. - Cul-de-sacs. 
    Maximum length cul-de-sac streets shall be five hundred (500) feet measured along the centerline from the intersection of origin to end of right-of-way. When a subdivision is adjacent to a tract planned for future subdivision and street extensions, temporary cul-de-sacs may be planned and provided until said future subdivision and street dedication occurs. In no case shall such temporary cul-de-sacs exceed the requirements of this chapter. Easements for temporary cul-de-sacs shall be included on the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-234. - Reserve strips. 
    Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(6), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-235. - Private streets. 
    Private streets are prohibited except as part of a minor subdivision or in limited application as part of a planned unit development. Such streets shall be designed in accordance with requirements of this chapter and shall have restrictive covenants and maintenance agreements between abutting landowners. Proper easements shall be provided for utilities. In no case shall the city be liable for maintenance of private streets. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(7), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-236. - Hardship to owners of adjoining property avoided. 
    The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(E)(8), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-237. - Street names. 
    Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street, in which event it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street so in alignment. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(F), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 24-238. - Intersections. 
(a)  Angle of intersection. The angle formed by the intersecting of streets shall not be less than seventy (70) degrees with ninety-degree intersections preferred. 
(b)  Size of intersection. Intersections of more than four (4) corners shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Corner radii. Constructed roadways of street intersections at the curb shall be rounded by a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet. Such roadways of alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than ten (10) feet. Corners at the entrance to the turn-around portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.13(12)(H), 6-30-86) 
Chapter 25 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal utilities, § 11.01 et seq. 
Cross reference- Public utilities division, § 2-181 et seq.; solid wastes, Ch. 22; sewer and water main service lateral installation as part of street improvements, § 23-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms used for the general function of a household and permanently equipped with a sink and cooking facilities, occupying space specifically designed for them, such as a kitchen, kitchenette, or a pullman kitchen. 
    Approved electric space heating installation means an electric heating installation that provides more than fifty (50) percent of the total heat input to the building in which it is installed. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Business and industrial use means the use of premises, or a portion thereof, for a purpose other than residential. 
    Closed rate means a rate established for existing customers effective January 1, 1972, and not applicable to new customers. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic and inorganic matter in a sample of waste water, expressed in parts per million (ppm) by weight that can be oxidized by a strong chemical oxidizing agent. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods. 
    Condensate means condensed steam when such steam was generated by the city and delivered to a consumer in the municipal steam heat system. 
    Commercial electric heat and refrigeration means service for heating, cooking, service to small motors for refrigeration, where the connected heating load is two (2) kilowatts or more, but not applicable to lighting or service to motors over two (2) horsepower individual capacity or to any type of air-conditioning equipment; provided, that if a minimum of fifteen (15) kilowatts of connected electric space heating equipment is used then air-conditioning units of not more than two (2) horsepower each can be used on this rate; and provided that this term is applicable only where there is a ninety-five (95) percent power factor, or greater. 
    Controlled water heating means electrical service furnished for heating water in a noninductive automatic storage type electric water heater for commercial or residential use, the same being furnished through a separate meter, two hundred and forty-volt, sixty-cycle, service. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and waste water. 
    Commercial light means single-phase one hundred and twenty volt or one hundred twenty-one hundred forty (120-140) volt, sixty-cycle, single-phase service on which small motors not in excess of two (2) horsepower individual capacity may be served. 
    Commercial power means commercial or industrial service, single-phase or three-phase, sixty-cycle, one hundred twenty volt, or one hundred twenty-one hundred forty (120-140) volt, metered at secondary voltage for motors of one (1) horsepower individual capacity or larger, and welders of both inductive and rotary types. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    General service means electrical service available to any commercial customer for single- or three-phase electric service supplied through one (1) meter. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Large general service means service to provide all power and lighting requirements through one (1) set of meters and at one (1) delivery point, with additional transformers not located at the point of delivery and special voltage transformers for lighting and other purposes to be owned and maintained by the customer, such services to be at the standard secondary voltage, single-or three-phase, or at the primary voltage designated by the public utilities commission as the service voltage available in the area and for the size of the load to be served. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    NPDES permit means the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit held by the city. This permit establishes limits on quality and quantity of discharges from the city waste water plant and is issued by the state and federal government in accordance with the provisions of the federal water pollution control act as amended. 
    Optional rate-commercial light and power means any commercial or industrial service, single-or three-phase, sixty-cycle, metered at secondary voltage on one (1) meter, and used with one hundred twenty-two hundred eight (120-208) volt wye systems but can be used for four (4) wire delta systems, where this type of service is available. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
    Residential service or residential use means furnishing a municipal utility to premises, all or a portion of which, are used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family and two-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or apartment houses, unless each apartment is metered separately. 
    Sanitary waste water means a sewer which carries waste water, and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying waste water. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, waste water, or industrial waste which is in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes waste water and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, waste water or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Utilities means municipal electric energy, water, steam heat and waste water services, or any two (2) or more such services. 
    Utility means any one (1) of the municipal electric energy, water, steam heat, or waste water services. 
    Waste water or sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    Waste water system or sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of waste water. 
    Waste water treatment plant or sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating waste water. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 110) 
Sec. 25-2. - Chapter constitutes contract. 
    This chapter shall constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of municipal utilities services, and every consumer shall be deemed to assent to the same. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 120) 
Sec. 25-3. - City ownership. 
    Ownership of all municipal utilities plants and appurtenances shall remain in the city and no person shall own any part or portion thereof. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 130) 
Sec. 25-4. - Unauthorized connections. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with municipal utilities without first having applied for and received permission from the public utilities commission to make the same. It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from the public utilities commission. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 140(1), (2)) 
Sec. 25-5. - Right to enter private property. 
    The city has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all times reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, or inspecting or repairing meters or the utility system. The city may enter in and upon premises of a consumer found to be in violation of this chapter in order to disconnect utilities to which such violated rule or regulation relates. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, §§ 140(3), 170) 
Secs. 25-6-25-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Public utilities commission, M.S. § 6.03. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., § 2-236 et seq. 

Sec. 25-199. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the public utilities commission shall be monthly, and at such times as may be deemed necessary, providing adequate notice is furnished. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1020) 
Sec. 25-200. - Functions. 
    The public utilities commission shall: 
(1)  Recommend candidates to the council for appointment as the director of public utilities from those recruited, by the city administrator. 
(2)  Delegate the day-to-day operation of the utilities to the public utilities division. 
(3)  Develop policies, procedures, and plans to serve as guidelines to the public utilities division, in the performance of its tasks and roles. 
(4)  Formulate policies, procedures, and plans consistent with the over-all goals and objectives of the city as determined by the council. 
(5)  Recommend to the council reasonable rates and charges, pursuant to section 11.02 of the charter, for the commodities and services furnished. It shall recommend to the council, the time and manner in which payments for all such services shall be made and manner in which the commodity or service shall be measured. It shall recommend to the council such other regulations as may be necessary and recommend penalties for violations of such regulations. It shall recommend to the council the rates and charges for commodities and services furnished to the city for public use. 
(6)  Recommend to the council all agreements and contracts. 
(7)  Approve purchases of materials, supplies, and equipment used in the operation and maintenance of the public utilities division, where such items have received prior approval through budgetary process, subject to the following: 
a.  Items or amounts not included in the approved public utilities' budget must be approved by the council. 
b.  The commission must comply with uniform purchasing procedures when competitive bids are required. 
c.  Follow the same guidelines for purchasing as other city departments as set forth by this Code. 
Cross reference- Purchasing procedures, § 2-196. 
(8)  Determine the need for an amount of revenue bonds which may be required for necessary improvements or extensions of the public utility systems under its jurisdiction, and recommend issuance thereof to the council. 
(9)  Make recommendations to the city administrator, director of finance and the director of public utilities regarding the preparation of the public utilities budget, review draft submissions, and give final approval prior to presentation to the council for its approval. The budget shall be submitted to the council at the first regular meeting in December of each year, and it shall contain an itemized statement of the estimated revenues and proposed disbursements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total sum of proposed disbursements shall be less than the total estimated revenue by a safe margin. After the budget has been submitted to the council, the commission shall have no power to increase or alter the disbursement totals of the individual utilities beyond the estimated revenue, unless the actual receipt shall exceed such estimates, and then not beyond such receipts, and in no event shall such change in the budget become effective until after ten (10) days' notice given to the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1030, (1)-(8), (10); Ord. No. 84-6, 2-27-84) 
Sec. 25-201. - Limitation on expenditures and indebtedness. 
(a)  The public utilities commission shall not spend any funds or incur any indebtedness beyond the amounts specified in the budget. 
(b)  Disbursements shall be made only upon regular vouchers and signed by those authorized to do so by this Code. The check shall indicate the fund which shall be used for the disbursement. The director of finance shall issue no checks upon public utility funds except as previously stated. No check shall be issued until there is money to the credit of the fund from which it is to be paid, sufficient to pay the same, together with all then outstanding orders against and encumbrances upon such fund. Any check for the payment of money violating any provision of this subsection shall be void, and any officer of the city who violates a provision of this subsection shall be personally responsible for the amount of the payment, if payment is made contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1030(12), (15)) 
Sec. 25-202. - Reports. 
    The public utilities commission shall make quarterly reports of operations to the council showing such detail as may be required by the council. The commission shall make an annual report to the council on its entire operations for the preceding fiscal year. The report shall be as complete in detail as the quarterly reports and as required by the council. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1030(13), (14)) 
Sec. 25-203. - Purchase and resale of utilities. 
    In lieu of providing local production of electricity, gas, water, and other utilities, the public utilities commission may recommend to the council, pursuant to section 11.03 of the charter, the purchase of these commodities and re-sell them to local consumers. 
(Code 1984, Title 3, § 1030(16)) 
Secs. 25-204-25-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USER RATES; BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities rates, M.S. § 11.02. 

Sec. 25-300. - Generally. 
    All municipal utilities shall be provided to consumers under the applicable rates applied to the amount of such utilities used or consumed. All meters shall be read by the city monthly and a utility bill sent to each consumer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 160) 
Sec. 25-301. - Discount for prompt payment. 
    Utility bills shall be charged so that net bills paid before the twenty-fifth day of the month in which they are due will be discounted at a rate determined by resolution of the council from time to time. If payment is not made within such time, said bill shall be delinquent and the discount shall be forfeited by the customer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 160(1)) 
Sec. 25-302. - Penalty for late payment; discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
    A penalty of ten (10) percent thereof shall be added to, and become part of, all delinquent utility bills. If any such bill is not paid in full within the time period established by resolution, the municipal utilities may, at the option of the city, be suspended to the consumer whose bill is delinquent. If service is suspended due to delinquency it shall not be restored at that location until a re-connection charge in the amount determined by resolution of the council has been paid for each utility re-connected. Such charge is in addition to the amounts owed for service and penalties. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, §§ 140(4), 160(2)) 
Sec. 25-303. - Other collection remedies. 
    Service charges for municipal utilities shall be a charge against the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises served, and against any or all of them. Any claim for unpaid charges which has been properly billed to the occupant but remains delinquent may be collected in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, or in the discretion of the city, may be certified to the county auditor with the taxes against such property and collected as a special assessment thereon. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 160(3)) 
Secs. 25-304-25-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRIC UTILITY 

Sec. 25-400. - Compliance with ordinances. 
    Each electrical installation connected to the city's electrical distribution system must meet the requirements for the applicable ordinances governing electrical work in the city before connection is made. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 210(1)) 
Secs. 25-401-25-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STEAM HEAT UTILITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Discontinuance of steam heat systems, M.S. § 451.09. 

Sec. 25-501. - Service applications. 
    All persons desiring to be furnished steam heat by the city shall first make application in writing to the public utilities division describing the premises to be served, estimating the amount of heat needed to serve such premises, and agreeing to pay expenses involved in connection with the installation of mains, piping, meters, and other necessary equipment in such amounts as shall be determined by the public utilities commission. The public utilities commission shall act on each application. No connection shall be made with mains or city steam heating equipment until the public utilities commission has approved such application. No person or consumer shall make any additions or changes in presently existing equipment without first reporting the proposed changes or additions to the public utilities division and making a written application for a permit to change or enlarge such equipment. All proposed changes shall be approved by the public utilities commission before any permit or consent shall be issued for such changes. The public utilities commission reserves the right to grant or deny any application for any service, changes or additions. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 310(1)) 
Sec. 25-502. - Tampering with system. 
    No person not specifically authorized by the city shall open, clean, repair, or do any work of any kind on any steam heat meters. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 310(2)) 
Secs. 25-503-25-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER UTILITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal water systems authorized, M.S. § 444.075. 

Sec. 25-601. - Service connections and service pipes. 
    The kind and size of all connections with water mains shall be as specified by the city. Water service pipes shall be laid at least six (6) feet in depth and protected from frost. Such pipes must be at all times free of leaks. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 510(2)) 
Sec. 25-602. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department or another person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is unlawful for any person so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use. 
(b)  Regular municipal water consumers, may connect the street mains with hydrants, large pipes and hose couplings, for use in the case of fire only and free of charge for such use, but at their own installation expense. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 520) 
Sec. 25-603. - Water use restrictions. 
    The city council has determined that in certain drought conditions it may become necessary for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of the citizens to conserve the water supply of the city by imposing a water use restriction on all residential, commercial and industrial customers. 
(1)  All water use restriction shall be imposed by adoption of a resolution at any regular or special meeting of the city council. The resolution shall set forth the duration of the water use restriction and whether the restriction shall be partial or absolute. If the restriction is partial, the resolution will state whether it applies to lawns, boulevards, gardens, new sold, new tree saplings, the days or schedule when activities will be permitted and any other restrictions or regulations that the city council deems reasonable and appropriate. The restrictions shall become effective immediately upon the adoption and publication of the resolution. The restrictions shall remain in effect until the city council removes them by resolution. 
(2)  The following lake levels may trigger city council action to implement the state restrictions: 
a.  Lake water level of 1149.25 feet -Request voluntary conservation of water use by all customers; prohibit outdoor watering between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
b.  Lake water level of 1148.25 feet -Require even/odd outdoor watering schedules (even numbered addresses water on even numbered days and odd numbered addresses water on odd numbered days); prohibit the use of automatic sprinkler systems on a daily basis. 
c.  Lake water level of 1147.25 feet -Outdoor watering will be limited to every five (5) days. Neighborhood watering schedules will be used during this period. The city will publish the neighborhood watering schedules in the official paper for the city, will announce hem on the local radio and have the schedule at City Hall and on the City of Fairmont web site. Washing of vehicles would be banned (except for car wash businesses). The use of automatic sprinkler systems on a daily basis would be prohibited. 
d.  Lake water level of 1146.50 feet -Prohibit all outdoor watering with the following exceptions: recently established lawns which may be watered daily for up to one (1) month after installation from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. and entities engaged in the business of growing or selling plants of any kind; prohibit the filling of swimming pools; prohibit the washing of vehicles (except for car wash businesses). 
(3)  The resolution imposing the water use restriction shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city and conspicuously posted in four places throughout the city, including City Hall. Any deficiencies in this notice requirement shall invalidate the ban. 
(4)  A violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor. A first offense will result in a warning ticket or warning letter. A ticket issued to or warning letter mailed to the occupant of the property or the individual responsible for the water billing at the violating property shall satisfy the warning notice requirement of this section. Each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate violation. A second violation will result in a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine and a third or subsequent violation will result in one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. A third violation may result in disconnection of water service at the street until the resident agrees to comply with the water restrictions. A reconnection fee will be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, 11-8-04) 
Secs. 25-604-25-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal sewage disposal systems authorized, M.S. § 444.075. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-700. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article will be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) shall be guilty of misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned on the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 460) 
Sec. 25-701. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer with the city, shall at his own expense install suitable toilet facilities therein, and connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line, and that sufficient capacity is available in all down stream facilities (such as lift stations, pipes, a treatment plant, and etc.). 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 410) 
Sec. 25-702. - Inspection by city. 
(a)  Authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. City inspectors shall have no authority to inquire into processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a), duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or occupant of same and shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, samplings, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 450) 
Secs. 25-703-25-800. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WASTE WATER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 25-801. - When required. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 25-70, subsection (d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private waste water disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 420(1)) 
Sec. 25-802. - Permit. 
(a)  Before commencement of construction of a private waste water disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the public utilities division. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city. The applicant shall supplement the form with any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the public utilities division. A permit and inspection fee in the amount established by resolution of the council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(b)  A permit for a private waste water disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the public utilities division. The public utilities division shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event the applicant shall notify the public utilities division when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the public utilities division. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 420(2), (3)) 
Sec. 25-803. - Compliance with state standards and general standards. 
    The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private waste water disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private waste water disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than five (5) acres. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 420(4)) 
Sec. 25-804. - Connection to public sewer. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to the property served by a private waste disposal system, as provided in section 25-701, subsection (d), a direct connection shall be made to the public waste water system, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private waste water disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 420(5)) 
Sec. 25-805. - Operation and maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 420(6)) 
Sec. 25-806. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 420(7)) 
Secs. 25-807-25-820. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 25-821. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or openings into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public utilities division. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service, and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the public utilities division. A permit and inspection fee in the amount established by council resolution shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(1), (2)) 
Sec. 25-822. - Connection fees, costs and liabilities. 
(a)  A waste water system connection fee is established. No connection shall be made with the waste water system without first having obtained permission, as otherwise provided herein, and also making payment of the following connection fees: 
(1)  If applicable, a residential and commercial waste water service connection fee. Such fee shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(2)  If applicable, an industrial waste water service connection fee. The fee shall be determined by the council after hearing all facts and must be reasonable considering the volume and type of waste to be discharged into the waste water system. 
(b)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)(A), (B)) 
Sec. 25-823. - Separate and independent building sewers. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)(C)) 
Sec. 25-824. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public utilities division, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)) 
Sec. 25-825. - Building sewer slope, elevation, etc. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)(E), (F)) 
Sec. 25-826. - Connections of downspouts, etc. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)(G)) 
Sec. 25-827. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)(I)) 
Sec. 25-828. - Connection to public sewer. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director of public utilities when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director of public utilities or his representative. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 430(3)(H)) 
Secs. 25-829-25-840. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 25-841. - Surface water, drainage, etc. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director of public utilities. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director of public utilities, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(1), (2)) 
Sec. 25-842. - Prohibited discharges into public sewers. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, result in a violation of state or federal water quality standards or create any hazard in the sewage treatment plant of the receiving waters. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having pH lower than five and one-half (51/2) or higher than nine and one-half (91/2) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any waste waters that would directly or indirectly result in a violation of the city's NPDES permit. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(3)) 
Sec. 25-843. - Certain discharges into public sewers limited and regulated. 
(a)  The following substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal system to the concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The director of public utilities may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in its opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming the opinion as to acceptability, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the sewage treatment process employed, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the sewage treatment plant, NPDES permit requirements, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or waste waters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the director of public utilities are as follows: 
(1)  Any waste water having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any waste water containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Any water or waste containing animal fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per liter or containing substances which may demulsify, solidify, or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises, or consumption elsewhere when served by caterers. 
(5)  Waste water containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the waste water treatment or reduction by the waste water treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment facilities effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(6)  Any waste water which, alone or by interaction with other waste water in the public sewer system, releases obnoxious gases, forms suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or creates a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established by the city engineer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waste water containing unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
(9)  Any waste water containing or causing excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
(10)  Any waste water having biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or chemical oxygen demand (COD) in excess of one thousand (1,000) parts per million and chlorine (cl 2 ) demand in excess of twenty-five (25) parts per million. 
(11)  Any waste water having a volume of flow in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per day or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(12)  Any waste water containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity either singularly or following interaction with any other substance, to injure or interfere with any waste water treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the waste water treatment facilities. 
(13)  Any waste water containing phenols greater than five (5) parts per million. 
(14)  Any waste water containing cyanide (CN) greater than one (1) part per million. 
(15)  Any waste water containing iron greater than ten (10) parts per million. 
(16)  Any waste water containing trivalent chromium greater than ten (10) parts per million. 
(17)  Any waste water containing greater than one (1) part per million individually or five (5) parts per million collectively of silver, hexavalent chromium, copper, nickel, cadmium, zinc and tin. 
(b)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, and which in the judgment of the director of public utilities, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
If the director of public utilities permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(5)) 
Sec. 25-844. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of public utilities, they are for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director of public utilities and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(6)) 
Sec. 25-845. - Preliminary treatment expense. 
    Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(7)) 
Sec. 25-846. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the director of public utilities, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(8)) 
Sec. 25-847. - Measurements and tests. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, published by the American Public Health Association, and 40 CFR-Part 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Test Pollutants," and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(9)) 
Sec. 25-848. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1984, Title 4, § 440(10)) 
Secs. 25-849-25-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-7, adopted July 13, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1-8 as Ch. 25, Art. VIII, §§ 25-900-25-907, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 25-900. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a public utility which shall be known as the Storm Water Drainage Utility in and for the City of Fairmont. The storm water drainage utility shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to the City Charter, City Code, and applicable statutes. The revenues therefrom shall be derived subject to the provisions of this article and chapter 444, Minnesota Statutes. The storm water drainage utility shall be administered by the public utilities director under the administration of the public utilities commission. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 25-901. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the definitions as hereinafter stated with respect to the construction and interpretation of this article. 
    Administrative costs: Administrative costs as associated with acquiring and maintaining the necessary contour maps which define the watershed in and for the city. Also included shall be periodic studies which shall determine the adequacy and condition of the storm water drainage system. 
    Construction: Improvements to the storm water system in areas not previously served with lateral and trunk lines. 
    Developed land: Land which has been platted. Undeveloped land is any land which has not been platted. 
    Maintenance: Includes direct and indirect costs as well as equipment costs for repairs and cleaning. Cleaning includes catch basin cleaning, jetting, thawing pipes and any other operation which assures a dependable drainage system. It shall also include the administrative costs. 
    Reconstruction: The improvements made to the storm water drainage system in areas previously served with lateral and trunk lines. 
    Residential equivalent factor (REF): One (1) REF is defined as the ratio of the average volume of runoff generated by one (1) acre of a given land use to the average volume of runoff generated by one (1) acre of typical single-family residential land during a standard one-year rainfall event. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 2, 7-13-87) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 25-902. - Storm water drainage fees. 
    Storm water drainage fees for each land parcel shall be determined by multiplying the REF's relating thereto for the parcel's land use by the acreage thereof and multiplying the resulting product by the storm water drainage rate. The REF value for each land use is as follows: 
Classification Land Uses REF 1 Cemeteries/golf courses ..... 0.25 2 Parks and airports ..... 0.75 3 Single-family and duplex ..... 1.00 4 Public and private schools hospitals, clinic, community centers, etc. ..... 1.25 5 Multiple-family residential churches, mobile home parks ..... 2.50 6 Commercial industrial ..... 5.00  
For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage fees, all developed one-family and duplex parcels shall be considered to have an average of one-fourth acre. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 3, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 25-903. - Exemptions. 
    The following land uses are exempt from storm water drainage fees: 
Public rights-of-way are exempt from the storm water drainage fees. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 4, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 25-904. - Deferred storm water drainage fees. 
    Undeveloped land shall be included in financing construction projects, but all costs relating thereto shall be deferred until the land becomes developed land as defined in section 25-901. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 5, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 25-905. - Payment of fees. 
    The city council shall establish policy relating to the payments of fees and penalties relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 6, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 25-906. - Recalculation of fees. 
    If a property owner or person responsible for paying the storm water drainage fee questions the correctness of an invoice for such charge, such person may have the determination of the charge recomputed by written request to the city engineer, made within twelve (12) months of mailing of the invoice by the city. The property owner may appeal the decision of the city engine to the city council by filing notice of such appeal with the city clerk within sixty (60) days of the city engineer's determination. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 7, 7-13-87) 
Sec. 25-907. - Certification of past-due fees on taxes. 
    Any past-due storm water drainage fees in excess of ninety (90) days past due on October 1 of any year may be certified to the county auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the following year pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075, subdivision 3. In addition the city shall also have the right to bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid fees. 
(Ord. No. 87-7, § 8, 7-13-87) 
Secs. 25-908-25-999. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-11 , adopted March 12, 2018, amended Art. IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IX, §§ 25-1000-25-1002, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-06, adopted July 26, 2010. 

Sec. 25-1000. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article establishes standards and requirements for stormwater conveyance, treatment and discharge within the City of Fairmont; erosion and sediment control measures to be taken during the development of and alterations to lands within the City of Fairmont; and regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the City of Fairmont municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety and general welfare, property and the environment, and administer and implement stormwater best management practices (BMPs) as required by federal (United States Environmental Protection Agency) and state (Minnesota Pollution Control Agency) law. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
1.  To promote the awareness and importance of water quality within the city, specifically protecting and enhancing the quality of the Fairmont chain of lakes. 
2.  To maintain compliance with the City of Fairmont's Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program (SWPPP). 
3.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants and prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the City of Fairmont's MS4. 
4.  To regulate land disturbing activity, installation, operations, maintenance and replacement of the stormwater system, and protect and prevent the discharge of sediment into public and/or private lands, public infrastructure, wetlands and waters of the state. 
5.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to comply with this article. 
(c)  This article shall apply to all water entering the stormwater system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless exempted by the City of Fairmont. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Sec. 25-1001. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms as used in this article, shall have the meanings designated. 
    Applicant . Any person or group that applies for a permit to allow land disturbing activities. Applicant also means that person's agents, employees, and others acting under this person's or group's direction. The term "applicant" also refers to the permit holder or holders and the permit holder's agents, employees, and others acting under this person's or group's direction. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Erosion and sediment control and water quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing and minimizing degradation of waters of the state, including avoidance of impacts, prohibitions of practices, general housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, operating and maintenance procedures, and other applicable management practices. 
    Builder, commercial. Any building contractor engaging in work other than work performed under a license from the State of Minnesota as a residential building contractor, remodeler or specialty contractor in the business of contracting or offering to contract to improve residential real estate, all terms as defined by Minnesota Statute. 
    Builder, residential . Any building contractor engaging in work performed under a license from the State of Minnesota as a residential building contractor, remodeler or specialty contractor in the business of contracting or offering to contract to improve residential real estate, as defined by Minnesota Statute. 
    Building construction. The construction of any principle building or accessory structure or modification of a parcel of land or platted lot. 
    City. The City of Fairmont, the Fairmont City Council. 
    Common plan of development. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on different schedules, but under one (1) proposed plan. One (1) plan is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical demarcation indicating that land disturbing activities may occur. 
    Developer. Any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision engaged in a land disturbance activity. 
    Director. The City of Fairmont Director of Public Works/City Engineer or authorized designee. 
    Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for public purposes of constructing and maintaining utilities and transportation ways including, but not limited to, utility lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
    Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and all soils must be stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy (70) percent of the expected final growth density over the entire pervious surface area, or other equivalent means necessary to prevent soil failure under erosive conditions and: 
(a)  All drainage ditches, constructed to drain water from the site after construction is complete, must be stabilized to exclude erosion; 
(b)  All temporary synthetic and structural erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs (such as silt fence) must be removed. BMPs designed to decompose on site (such as some compost logs) may be left in place; 
(c)  The permittee must clean out all sediment from conveyances and from temporary sedimentation basins that are to be used as permanent water quality management basins. Sediment must be stabilized to prevent it from being washed back into the basin and/or into conveyances or drainage ways discharging off-site or to surface waters. The cleanout of permanent basins must be sufficient to return the basin to design capacity; and 
(d)  The permanent stormwater management system is constructed, meets all of the required design parameters, and is functioning as designed. 
    Green infrastructure. A wide array of practices at multiple scales that manage wet weather and that maintains or restores natural hydrology by infiltrating, evapotranspiration, or harvesting and using stormwater. On a regional scale, green infrastructure is the preservation or restoration of natural landscape features, such as forests, floodplains and wetlands, coupled with policies such as infill and redevelopment that reduce the overall imperviousness in a watershed. On a local scale, green infrastructure consists of the site and neighborhood-specific practices such as bioretention, trees, green roofs, permeable pavements and cisterns. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, substance, waste or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connections. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the stormwater system including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the stormwater system and any connections to the stormwater system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether they had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by the county or city; or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the stormwater system that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
    Illicit discharge. Any direct, indirect or accidental non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater system, except as exempted in this article. 
    Impaired water. Waters identified as impaired by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and approved by the USEPA, pursuant to section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 303(d)). 
    Impervious surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to the development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel, concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads. 
    Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Stormwater Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    Land development (develop). The process whereby improvement to a single lot or to an entire site, occurs in one (1) continuous process or in more than one (1) distinct phase, including but not limited to the following activities: site grading; installation of utilities; construction of public streets; construction or grading of drainage ways; other grading or filling of any area within the site; grading of building pad areas; utility hookups; construction of buildings; parking lots; driveways; storage areas; private streets; and any other construction or land disturbing activity within the subject property site. 
    Land disturbing activity. Any activity that results in a change or alteration in the existing ground cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topographs. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, excavating, grading, clearing, filling, stockpiling, hauling, construction, reconstruction and borrow pits. Routine vegetation management, and mill and overlay/resurfacing activities that do not alter the soil material beneath the pavement base, are not considered land disturbance. 
    Land disturbance permit (LDP). A permit issued by the city for the control of pollutants, erosion, sediment and design of post construction stormwater management facilities during land disturbing activities. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels or storm drains) owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and not used for collecting or conveying wastewater, that discharges to waters of the United States. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by the USEPA (or by a state under authority delegated by the USEPA) that authorizes discharge to waters of the United States. 
    New development. All construction activity that is not defined as redevelopment. 
    Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Notice of termination (NOT). A notice given to the city declaring that the site will no longer be discharging stormwater associated with construction activity and all final stabilization of the site has been completed as outlined in the permittee's SWPPP. 
    Owner(s). A natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or quasi- public corporation, private corporation, or a combination of, with a legal or equitable interest in the parcel of record. 
    Parcel of record. A tract, plot, lot, and/or portion of subdivision or other parcel of land, intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, possession or for building development. 
    Permittee. A land disturbance permit holder. 
    Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution, including but not limited to paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non- hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; wastewater, coliform bacteria and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pre-project. The existing condition of the site before project begins. 
    Preliminary plat. A drawing of the entire subdivision meeting all requirements of the city's land development code. 
    Premises. Any building, lot, parcel or portion of land whether undeveloped or developed, adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Public waters. Waterbasins and watercourses that meet the criteria set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005 subd.15. 
    Receiving water. Any lake, river, stream or wetland that receives stormwater discharges from an MS4. 
    Redevelopment. Any construction activity where, prior to the start of construction, the areas to be disturbed have fifteen (15) percent or more of impervious surface(s). 
    Reduce. Means reduce to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) unless otherwise defined in the context in which it is used. 
    Saturated soil. The highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is in a reduced chemical state because of soil voids being filled with water, saturated soil is evidenced by the presence of the redoximorphic features or other information. 
    Sediment. Soil particle exposed to movement. 
    Stormwater. Rainwater runoff, snowmelt and subsurface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management plan. A document that describes the best management practices (BMPs) and activities to be implemented to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan developed to identify the sources of pollution that affect the quality of stormwater discharges from a site and to describe and ensure the implementation of practices to prevent or reduce pollutants in stormwater discharge. 
    Stormwater structures. Any structure used to capture, convey and/or treat stormwater runoff including but not limited to catch basins, manholes, sumps, storm drain, outfalls, inlets, outlets, ponds and infiltration/filtration treatment areas. 
    Structural stormwater BMPs. Stationary and permanent BMPs designed, constructed and operated to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater. 
    Water quality standards. Provisions contained in Minn. R. 7050 and 7052. 
    Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, private or public, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (Minn. Stat. 115.01, § subd. 22.) 
    Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions which is discharged into or permitted to enter the city's wastewater treatment system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Sec. 25-1002. - Illicit discharge detection and elimination. 
(a)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's MS4, any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants. 
(b)  Stormwater discharge exemptions. If not causing a public safety or nuisance, or water quality violation, the following shall not be considered prohibited discharges: 
(1)  Discharges from landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space sump pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, water main flushing and street wash water. Discharges associated with dye testing; verbal approval prior to testing is required. 
(2)  Discharges or flow from firefighting and other discharges specified by the City as necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the USEPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater system. 
a.  Illicit connections. The following are prohibited under this article: 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormwater system is prohibited. 
2.  This prohibition includes, without limitation, previous illicit connections regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
3.  It is a violation of this article to connect a line conveying non-stormwater to the city's MS4 or allow these connections to continue. 
4.  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or upon approval, to the city's wastewater treatment system. 
5.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in record drawings, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property within twenty-one (21) days upon receipt of written notice from the city requiring that the location be disclosed. Documentation shall be provided to the city including location of drain or conveyance, drain or conveyance identification as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and the outfall location or point of entry into the city storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other point of discharge. 
b.  Illicit discharges. All users shall provide adequate protective procedures and BMPs to prevent discharges of any non-stormwater discharge to the city's MS4. 
1.  Discharges of prohibited waste shall be reported to the director by the persons responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the premises where the discharge occurred, immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the discharge. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for expense, loss or damage to the stormwater system, or any fines imposed on the city under any state or federal law. The responsible person shall take immediate action as is reasonably possible to minimize or abate the prohibited discharge. The responsible person shall send; detailed written notification describing the illicit discharge to the director within seven (7) days of knowledge of the discharge. The letter shall include the following information: 
i.  The time and location of the discharge; 
ii.  Description of the discharged waste, including estimate of pollutant concentrations; 
iii.  Time period and volume of discharge; 
iv.  Actions taken to correct or control the discharge; and 
v.  A schedule of corrective measures to prevent further discharges. 
2.  Stormwater inspections. The city may conduct tests as necessary to enforce this article, and authorized city employees may enter any property for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations to enforce this article. Entry shall be made during operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise. 
3.  Requirement of best management practices. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit and/or land disturbance permit shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. The city will adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the stormwater system or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation or facility shall provide, at the owner's expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other wastes into the stormwater system or watercourses through the use of the BMPs. Any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at their expense, additional BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4. 
4.  Industrial or land disturbing activity discharges. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Written proof of compliance may be required prior to discharge to the city's MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Sec. 25-1003. - Erosion and sediment control/land disturbance permit. 
(a)  Land disturbing activities. All land use activities are subject to this article. 
(b)  Land disturbance permit requirements . The following are required to obtain a land disturbance permit (LDP): 
(1)  All new single family home lots. 
(2)  Land disturbing activities that disturb land of greater than or equal to five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(3)  Any disturbance located in tier A of the city shoreland district. (Shoreland management ordinances apply). 
(c)  Residential, commercial, multifamily and industrial sites: All persons planning a land disturbing activity, meeting the land disturbance requirements of this article, on an existing parcel of record (building site) shall obtain a LDP, from the city prior to obtaining a building permit. A building permit will not be issued without an approved building site LDP. 
(d)  Subdivision development: A subdivision owner/developer/agent planning a land disturbing activity, including but not limited to mass grading, site development, roadway and utility installation on an existing parcel of record as shown on the preliminary plat, shall obtain a LDP from the city if meeting the land disturbance requirements of this article. If work will be performed in project phases as specified in the city approved construction plans (each phase needs its own permit). A subdivision owner/developer/agent may have multiple phase permits open for the master plan site. The LDP will not be issued without approved final construction plans and specifications relevant to final plat phasing. Prior to site work or building construction, each parcel of record (building site) must have its own LDP obtained by the owner or applicant as described in the land disturbance permit requirements. 
(e)  Roadway and utility installation construction plans: All persons wishing to start a land disturbance project on an existing lot of record for the purposes of the construction of any roadway or utilities, shall submit a land disturbance permit application to the city at the time of the roadway and utility plan if the project meets the requirements of this article. Each parcel of record within a subdivision must obtain a separate LDP. 
(f)  Other permits: The LDP does not replace, eliminate or satisfy the need for any other permits required by any other public or private entity. 
(g)  Land disturbing exemptions. The following activities are exempt from land disturbance requirements: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
(2)  Nursery, home gardening and agricultural operations that are confined to private property. 
(h)  Land disturbance permit exemptions. The following activities do not require a LDP but are subject to the conditions of this article: 
(1)  Maintenance work by city employees. 
(2)  Federal, state, county, and other projects where the city does not have regulatory authority. 
(3)  Land disturbing activity disturbing land less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and not located in tier A of shoreland management district. 
(i)  Land disturbance permit. Prior to any land disturbing activities, the owner or applicant shall be required to obtain a land disturbance permit (LDP). 
(1)  The LDP application shall be submitted to the city. 
(2)  All single family residential land disturbance permits shall be processed within seven (7) calendar days from receipt of a completed application. All other permits shall be processed within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of a completed application. 
(3)  The City of Fairmont shall do one (1) of the following in writing: 
a.  Approve the permit application; 
b.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this article, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
d.  Failure of the city to act on an original or revised land disturbance permit application within seven (7) calendar days for permits under five thousand (5,000) square feet and thirty (30) calendar days for all other permits upon receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the city, or the city notifies the applicant of errors and/or omissions in the application requiring corrective action on the part of the applicant. Once the LDP is approved, permit coverage will be issued to the permittee. 
(j)  Land disturbance permit submittals. The application for a LDP shall include the following: 
(1)  One (1) full set of site plans and a copy of the SWPPP, or portion of the SWPPP that applies to the site, prepared for the MPCA if not included in the full set of site plans. 
a.  The city reserves the right to approve the SWPPP subject to conditions deemed necessary to meet the purpose of this article and the MPCA requirements. City approval of a SWPPP does not mean approval by the MPCA, and MPCA approval of a SWPPP does not mean city approval. At a minimum, all conditions of the MPCA NPDES construction permit MN R100001 must be met; in some cases, the city may apply stricter standards or require temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures in addition to those required by other public or private entities. 
(2)  If a SWPPP is not required by the MPCA, the following must accompany the LDP application: 
a.  Site information. 
1.  Delineation of the subject property and the location of existing and proposed buildings, structures and impervious surfaces; 
2.  Description of the construction or land disturbing activity to be performed on the property and proposed project schedule; 
3.  Identification of all public waters located on and within thirty (30) feet of the subject property's boundaries and identify if a water body is intended to be used for water quality treatment. Identification by use of best available maps from the city, DNR or county will be sufficient; 
4.  Identification of all wetland or agricultural buffer zones; 
5.  Topographical data, if required, including existing (dashed) and proposed (solid) contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet, except that contour lines shall be no more than one hundred (100) feet apart; 
6.  The location and size of all existing overhead and underground utility lines and services on or adjacent to the property. 
b.  Erosion and sedimentation control. 
1.  Delineation of all areas to be graded or excavated, and the limits of land disturbing activities; 
2.  Identification of measures to be utilized to control erosion and sedimentation within and from the subject property during the project activity as required herein; 
3.  Identification of all permanent erosion control measures and a completion schedule. 
4.  Identification of the location of dirt or soil storage or stock pile areas to be utilized; 
5.  Identification of all measures to be utilized to protect neighboring property, water bodies, and wetland buffer zones; and 
6.  Identification, use and maintenance plan of BMPs for temporary erosion and sedimentation control as recommended by the MPCA including but not limited to: 
i.  Perimeter erosion control devices, including but not limited to silt fence, sediment logs, mulch, etc.; 
ii.  Stockpile protection; 
iii.  Phased grading; 
iv.  Temporary seeding, mulching, and disc anchoring (with seed and mulch type), erosion control blanketing, (Temporary cover is required for areas in which no land disturbance has occurred for seven (7) calendar days); 
v.  Storm drain inlet protection devices; 
vi.  Appropriately protected construction entrance; 
vii.  Removal of all debris, dirt and soil from impervious ground surfaces, including abutting public or private roadways and sidewalks, in connection with the subject property (street sweeping); 
viii.  Sediment basins and flow diversions; and 
ix.  Any other erosion and sedimentation control device as deemed necessary by the city. 
c.  Final Stabilization BMPs. 
1.  Identification of BMPs used to meet final stabilization requirements including landscaping, seeding and stabilization BMPs. 
d.  Dewatering BMPs. 
1.  Identify BMPs so that turbid or sediment-laden waters are treated with appropriate BMPs such that the discharge water does not cause a nuisance condition to receiving waters or adversely affect downstream properties; and 
2.  Discharge points identified and adequately protected from erosion and scour. 
e.  Management of solid and hazardous wastes. 
1.  Identification of BMPs for the storage, handling, and disposal of construction products, materials, and wastes per MPCA requirements; 
2.  Identification of BMPs for the fueling and maintenance of equipment and vehicles; 
3.  Identification of BMPs for spill prevention and response; and 
4.  Identification of BMPs for the management and containment of concrete and other washout wastes. 
f.  Drainage and grading. 
1.  Plan submittals shall be developed in accordance with the permanent stormwater design checklist shown in Appendix A. (one-half (0.5) acre and over sites only or if requested by SWPPP reviewer for sites under one-half (0.5) acre) 
2.  Identification of proposed contour grading at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet (one-half (0.5) acres and over sites only or if requested by SWPPP reviewer for sites under one-half (0.5) acre); 
3.  The estimated time required to complete the work, the amount of material to be moved and/or removed from the site; 
4.  A map showing the stages or limits of grading together with the existing or proposed finished elevations based on sea level readings; 
5.  Identification of proposed building bench elevations and direction of flow of surface water within each lot; 
6.  Methods of controlling dust; 
7.  Submission of preliminary plans or program for water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and flood control (one-half (0.5) acre and over sites only or if requested by SWPPP reviewer for sites under one-half (0.5) acre); 
8.  Soil borings, if required by the city engineer; and 
9.  Drainage, grading, and land use shall be designed such that water runoff cannot cause flooding (drainage in excess of the natural drainage anticipated by the city stormwater management plan) or erosion on adjacent property. Runoff shall be properly drained via overland drainage ways or channeled into the stormwater system, watercourse, ponding area or other suitable facility approved by the city. 
(3)  For all projects that include structural stormwater BMPs the permittee shall include the name of the responsible party for post construction maintenance along with a detailed maintenance plan. A permanent public easement and recorded maintenance agreement is required for all structural BMPs as part of the LDP permit process per section 25-1004(f)(6). 
(4)  Hydrologic calculations for volume runoff, velocities, and peak flow rates by watershed as defined by section 25-1004(f)(1) 
(k)  Land disturbance activity standards. All land disturbing activities must comply with the approved SWPPP and/or appropriate BMPs as referenced in the erosion and sediment control section of this article until the land disturbance permit is terminated or the project reaches final stabilization. Each non-compliant BMP (e.g. perimeter controls, inlet protections, concrete washout) shall be considered a separate violation of this article. 
(l)  Duration of coverage by land disturbance permit. A LDP shall remain effective until one (1) of the following occurs: 
(1)  Final stabilization. Final stabilization is achieved, a notice of termination (NOT) has been filed with the city, all termination of coverage requirements are met and the city has issued the NOT; or 
(2)  Time requirement reached. The LDP becomes void if work does not begin within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit approval or is suspended at any time for over one hundred eighty (180) days. Extensions may be granted upon requests received at least fifteen (15) days prior to permit becoming void. If a permit becomes void, the permit application process will begin anew; or 
(3)  Change of coverage. For stormwater discharges from construction projects where the owner changes prior to issuing NOT (e.g. a homebuilder sells a house and lot to the final homebuyer or the entire site changes ownership): 
a.  The original/current applicant shall provide a copy of the notice of termination/permit modification form and fact sheet to the new applicant. 
b.  The original/current applicant shall provide the SWPPP, or equivalent plan, to the new applicant that specifically addresses the remaining construction activity. If the SWPPP or equivalent plan is not relevant, or the new applicant wants to use a new plan, this must be submitted with the notice of termination/permit modification form. 
c.  The new and current applicants shall work together to submit one (1) completed and signed permit modification form to the city within seven (7) calendar days of assuming operational control of the site, commencing work on their portion of the site, or of the legal transfer, sale, or closing on the property. No new fees will be required. 
d.  The change of coverage becomes effective five (5) calendar days from receipt of the completed form unless the permittee is contacted by the city during the five (5) day period and notified of an incomplete form. The permit modification portion of the NOT/permit modification form acts as the permit application for the new applicant and a NOT for the current applicant only for the portion of the site which was sold. 
e.  Late submittals of either LDP transfers will not be rejected, however, the city reserves the right to pursue enforcement actions for any unpermitted discharges or permit noncompliance for the new registered party that has assumed control of the site. 
f.  For stormwater discharges from construction activities where the applicant changes, the new applicant can implement the original SWPPP created for the project or develop and implement a new SWPPP. 
g.  The new permittee shall ensure either directly or through coordination with the old permittee that their SWPPP meets all terms and conditions of this article and that their activities do not render ineffective another party's erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs. 
(m)  Termination of LDP coverage. A permittee wishing to terminate the LDP must complete final stabilization of the parcel of record and submit a notice of termination (NOT) request. Requests for NOT are done by completing the NOT/permit modification form supplied with the permit; or using other proper NOT communication (phone call, e-mail) and submitting it to the director or designee as provided with the notice of coverage. 
    Compliance with the LDP is required until a NOT is submitted and approved by the city. The NOT becomes effective fifteen (15) calendar days after the postmarked date of the completed NOT form or other proper notification, unless the Permittee is contacted by the city during the fifteen (15) day period and notified of an incomplete NOT. As-built drawings for all stormwater structures must be provided to the City of Fairmont before a NOT can be processed by the city. All other land disturbance permits must show that all stormwater structures are in compliance with the grading plan. A notice of permit termination will be issued once the termination is approved. 
(n)  Land disturbance inspections. The city shall have the right to enter and inspect a property to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  Self-inspections. The permittee or their designee must make regular inspections of all the BMPs and the entire site at least once every seven (7) days during active construction and within twenty-four (24) hours after a rainfall event greater than one-half (0.5) inch in twenty-four (24) hours. Records of these inspections shall be made available to the city upon request. 
(2)  City inspections. The director and/or their designee shall make inspections and either approve that portion of completed work or notify the permittee where work is non-compliant. The LDP fee shall cover the cost of routine inspections. Additional inspections due to noncompliance may be billed to the affected property owner at two and one-half (2.5) times the base hourly salary of the inspector. 
(o)  Post construction maintenance. Property owner shall maintain all stormwater facilities in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally designed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Sec. 25-1004. - Stormwater management performance standards and design criteria. 
(a)  The performance standards and design criteria in this section shall only apply to sites in which land disturbance is equal to or greater than one-half (0.5) acre. 
(b)  Reducing need for stormwater management. The applicant shall consider reducing the need for stormwater management structural controls by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as natural swales and depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the receiving water body. The development shall minimize impact to significant natural features. 
(c)  Shoreland development. Stormwater management of shoreland development shall comply with the standards set forth in Fairmont City Code. In designated shoreland areas the development shall meet the impervious surface requirements of the shoreland ordinance regardless of conveyance systems. 
(d)  Use of existing facilities. If stormwater is conveyed to an existing approved, on-site or regional stormwater ponding/retention facility, documentation must be provided to show that the existing facility was designed to accommodate the changes in stormwater rate and volume due to the project and that use of the facility for the project will not impinge on the ultimate capacity of the facility or otherwise adversely affect the ability of the facility to achieve its original planned purpose. City may charge a fee for use of any existing facility that is commensurate with the replacement cost for any reduction in ultimate stormwater volume, rate capacity and sediment storage. 
(e)  Requirements. Proposed design, suggested location and phased implementation of effective, practicable stormwater management measures shall be designed, engineered and implemented to achieve the following results: 
(f)  Post construction stormwater standards. 
(1)  Rate Control Standards. The following rate control standards shall be met as described below for all development and redevelopment projects where land disturbing activity occurs on one-half (0.5) acre or more. 
a.  Discharge rates shall be derived using the standards methods of the Natural Resources Conservation Service TR-55 or TR-20 as defined in the current Hydrology Guide for Minnesota. 
b.  For agricultural land subject to this section, the maximum runoff curve number (RCN) used in such calculations for pre-existing undeveloped conditions shall be based on average cultivated row crop conditions and shall not exceed 67 for Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) A, 76 for hydrologic soil group B, 83 for HSG C, and 86 for HSG D. The TR-55-specified curve numbers for other land uses shall be used. Post development HSG for disturbed sites will be lowered one (1) class for hydrologic calculations to reflect reduced soil permeability impacts unless city approved practices have been implemented to restore soil structure to pre-developed conditions, in which case no HSG class modification is required. 
c.  Maintain pre-project peak runoff rates for the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm event. 
d.  Maintain pre-project peak runoff rates for the ten-year, twenty-four-hour storm event. At a minimum the storm sewer conveyance system shall be designed for this storm event. Low areas must have an acceptable overland drainage route with the proper transfer capacity when the storm event is exceeded. 
e.  Maintain pre-project peak runoff rates for the one hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm event. Provide stabilized outlet to safely pass this event. 
f.  Outlets. Discharges from new construction sites must have a stable outlet capable of carrying designed flow at a nonerosive velocity. Outlet design must consider flow capacity and flow duration. This requirement applies to both the site outlet and the ultimate outlet to stormwater conveyance or water body. 
(2)  Volume and pollution control standards. The following volume and pollution control standards shall be met as described below for all development and redevelopment projects where land disturbing activities occur on one (1) acre or more. Development or redevelopment projects less than one (1) acre that are part of a larger common plan of development are also subject to the volume and pollution control standards of this article. 
a.  All new development projects shall retain, on-site (i.e. infiltration or other volume reduction practices) and not discharge off-site, a runoff volume equal to one (1) inch from the proposed increase of impervious surfaces. New development projects shall also have no net increase (on an annual average basis) of total suspended solids (TSS) and total phosphorus (TP) stormwater discharges. 
b.  All redevelopment projects shall retain, on-site (i.e. infiltration or other volume reduction practices) and not discharge off-site, a runoff volume equal to one-quarter (1/4) inch from all redeveloped impervious surfaces. Newly added impervious surfaces must meet the new development standard of one (1) inch. Redevelopment projects shall also have a net reduction (on an annual average bass) of total suspended solids (TSS) and total phosphorus (TP) stormwater discharges. 
TABLE 25-1: VOLUME CONTROL REQUIREMENT Type Impervious Surfaces New Development 1" from the proposed increase Redevelopment 1/4" for all redeveloped 
1" for all expansion  
c.  To the maximum extent practicable, volume and pollution control measures should be distributed evenly throughout the development areas. 
d.  Green infrastructure techniques and practices (including, but not limited to, infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry, green roofs), shall be given preference as design options consistent with zoning, subdivision and PUD requirements. 
e.  Best management practices must meet design specifications as outlined and incorporated in Appendix A of this Code, permanent stormwater design checklist. 
f.  For linear projects, a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain right-of-way during the project planning process for volume and pollution control practices. For linear projects where the lack of right-of-way precludes the installation of volume control practices, exceptions, as described in this section 25-1004(e)(5)., post construction stormwater standards, exceptions and mitigation, can be applied. 
g.  Wetlands/ponds are considered to be an impervious surface. While subject to rate control requirements, rainfall on wetlands/ponds is not subject to volume control standards. 
h.  As sites redevelop, the proposed site modifications must meet or exceed the stormwater volume standards that were previously achieved. 
(3)  Review and approval. All stormwater design calculations, specifications, site plans and supporting hydraulic modeling are subject to the review and approval of the city engineer or its designee. 
(4)  Soil boring and approval. A minimum of one soil boring shall be done where a proposed infiltration or filtration site is located on the project site to insure it meets the requirements for infiltration rate and it does not contain any contaminated soil. 
(5)  Stormwater facility maintenance. Property owner shall maintain all stormwater facilities in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally designed. 
(6)  Post construction stormwater standards, exceptions and mitigation. 
a.  Projects shall fully attempt to comply with the volume control requirements in section 25-1004(f), post construction stormwater standards. A reduced volume control on the site of the original construction activity may be applied, at the discretion of the city, under the following circumstances: 
1.  The owner and/or operator of the construction activity is precluded from infiltrating stormwater through a designed system due to limitations as specified and incorporated in Appendix A of this Code, permanent stormwater design checklist; and, 
2.  The owner and/or operator of the construction activity implements to the maximum extent practicable volume reduction techniques, other than infiltration, on the site of the original construction activity that reduces stormwater discharge volumes. 
b.  If the owner and/or operator of a construction activity is granted a volume control exception, alternatives 1, 2, and 3 are required to be followed as specified and incorporated in Appendix B of this Code, alternative stormwater treatment options. This process includes mitigation provisions for requirements that cannot be met on the site of the original construction activity. 
c.  The owner and/or operator of a construction activity must provide appropriate documentation to the city as support for volume control exceptions and/or mitigation provisions as specified and incorporated in Appendix B of this Code, alternative stormwater treatment options. 
(7)  Post construction maintenance and inspections of structural stormwater BMPs. Any structural stormwater BMPs that the city determines to be private shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  A permanent public easement shall be provided to the city for access for inspection and/or maintenance purposes. Costs incurred by the city for any maintenance of private systems will be billed and/or assessed to the owner per section 25-1005, violations and enforcement. 
b.  The owner shall enter into a recorded maintenance agreement with the city. The agreement shall include as an attachment an inspection and maintenance plan. The terms and conditions of the maintenance agreement with attachments shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of the parties and their respective successors and assigns. 
c.  The permanent public easement and maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder or registrar of titles in the respective county where the structural stormwater BMP is located. A copy of the recorded permanent public easement and maintenance agreement shall be provided to the city prior to the certificate of occupancy or one (1) year after the site's land disturbance permit is approved, whichever comes later. 
d.  The inspection and maintenance plan shall be developed, approved, and included as an attachment with the maintenance agreement. At a minimum, maintenance plans must include the following information: 
1.  Responsible person(s) for completing inspections and conducting maintenance; 
2.  Frequency of inspections of maintenance; and 
3.  Inspection checklist and type of maintenance anticipated. 
e.  If site configurations or structural stormwater BMPs change, decreasing BMP effectiveness, new or improved structural stormwater BMPs must be designed and implemented to meet the requirements of this section. New and/or improved BMP plans must be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. 
f.  The property owner shall maintain all structural stormwater BMPs in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally designed. 
g.  The property owner shall keep on file all structural stormwater BMP annual inspection and maintenance records for five (5) years and submit to the city as requested. 
(8)  Public structural stormwater BMPs and drainage easements. 
a.  Alterations affecting the function of a public structural BMP, and/or drainage easement, must be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Sec. 25-1005. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Violation enforcement. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. It is the duty of the director or designee to enforce the provisions of this article, including the power to inspect private premises and issue orders for abatement. 
(b)  Right of entry. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter the property, without prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property, at the owner's expense. The city will pursue measures to recover all costs associated with the restoration. 
(c)  Stormwater system service suspension. The director or designee may suspend MS4 service when necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to public health or safety, the environment, or the stormwater system, or would cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES stormwater permit. Any user notified of a suspension of the stormwater system service shall immediately stop the discharge. In the event the user fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director or designee shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the stormwater connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, public health or public safety. The director or designee shall reinstate the stormwater system service upon proof of elimination of the non-complying discharge. 
(d)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order in the event of: immediate danger to public health and safety, or the environment; noncompliance with this article or a land disturbance permit; failure to obtain a land disturbance permit; land disturbance permit was issued based on incorrect information. 
(1)  Only work to remedy the stop work order will be allowed. The stop work order will state what remedial work is necessary and state the time limits for completing the remedial work. 
(2)  If necessary remedial work is not begun or completed by the violator as specified in the stop work order, the abatement of the violation will be under the direction of the director, or designee. The expenses for the abatement will include a seventy-five dollars ($75.00) administrative fee in addition to the actual costs of the abatement. Abatement actions that require the presence of city staff for more than one (1) hour during the abatement or other extraordinary coordination efforts will be billed to the property owner at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour. If abatement expenses are not paid, they will be levied against the property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special assessments. 
a.  A fifty-dollar charge will be added to all accounts certified to the county auditor's office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty or interest that may be charged by the county as a result of the certification. 
(3)  Upon successful remediation of the land disturbing activity, the stop work order will be lifted. 
(e)  Land disturbance permit revocation. If the violator refuses or fails to cease work after the stop work order, the city shall revoke the LDP. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Whenever the director or designee finds that any person has violated or is violating this article where an immediate public health threat does not exist, the director or designee shall issue a notice of violation and order to correct by personal service, regular mail or electronic mail. The notice of violation and order to correct will be served upon the property owners, responsible parties, violators, permittees, and/or other responsible persons. The notice will require corrective measures to be taken within a specified time period. 
(g)  Abatement of violation. If, after service of notice, the person served fails to abate the violation or make the necessary repairs, alterations or changes as required by the order of the City of Fairmont, the same may be abated under the direction of the director or designee. The expenses for the abatement will include a seventy-five-dollar administrative fee in addition to the actual costs of the abatement. Abatement actions that require the presence of city staff for more than one (1) hour during the abatement or other extraordinary coordination efforts will be billed to the property owner at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour. If abatement expenses are not paid, they will be levied against the property as a special assessment and collected as in the case of other special assessments. 
(1)  A fifty-dollar charge will be added to all accounts certified to the county auditor's office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct from any penalty or interest that may be charged by the county as a result of the certification. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Sec. 25-1006. - Penalties. 
(a)  Administrative citations. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any person who is found to have violated any provision of this article, or permits and orders issued hereunder, may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation. Each calendar day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. The process for citations shall follow the city's administrative citation process. 
(b)  Criminal penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. 
(c)  Permit fee doubled. No construction, installation, alteration or repair, for which a land disturbance permit is required, will commence without first obtaining the land disturbance permit. A violation of this permit requirement will result in the permit fee being doubled. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Appendix A. - Permanent Stormwater Design Checklist. 
    Proposed drainage plan and calculations shall be prepared in accordance with the current city standards for volume, rate, and water quality control as outlined in the city's stormwater management code, section 25-1004. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Proposed drainage plan and hydraulic calculations are dated and signed by a licensed professional. 
b.  Owner, engineer and architect name, address, phone and email listed. 
c.  Plan is to scale. North arrow shown. 
d.  Size of the project shown. 
e.  Existing impervious and pervious surface areas of the site shown. 
f.  Ultimate (when site fully developed) impervious and pervious surface of the site shown. 
g.  Development schedule: show phasing and calendar year each phase is planned for construction. 
h.  Plan is drawn in two-foot contours. Existing contours are dashed and proposed are solid. All contours are labeled and legible. Where applicable, extend existing two-foot contour lines a minimum one hundred (100) feet beyond the site boundary or more to accurately depict the drainage patterns. 
i.  Existing vegetation: Describe and identify the location of existing vegetation. 
j.  Areas not to be disturbed clearly defined. 
k.  On-site soil characteristics: Boundaries of different soil types are described. Groundwater elevations are shown. 
l.  Existing drainage: Show pre-developed drainage areas, land use and the direction of flow for each area and travel path used to determine the time of concentration. 
m.  Final drainage: Show post-developed drainage areas, land use and the direction of flow for each area and travel path used to determine the time of concentration. 
n.  Identify off-site catchment areas draining to the site. Provide two-foot contours. Show land use and the direction of flow for each area and travel path used to determine the time of concentration. 
o.  Existing public and private utilities shown. 
p.  All receiving waters, including wetlands, identified. 
q.  Property limits shown. Streets labeled. Lot and block information shown if platted. Street address shown if unplatted. 
r.  A long-term inspection and maintenance plan for all permanent stormwater treatment practices is required to be submitted with the SWPPP. 
(2)  Drainage swales, easements, building lots. 
a.  Existing and proposed drainage easements shown and labeled on the plan. 
b.  All existing and proposed lot corners shown on the plan. 
c.  Control/spot elevations for drainage ways provided. 
d.  100-year flow contained in easement. 
e.  Minimum slope of side lot drainage swales is two (2) percent, direction arrow shown. 
f.  Minimum back lot drainage swale slope is one (1) percent, direction arrow shown. 
g.  Building pads, type of house to be built, garage floor elevation, lowest floor elevation and lowest opening elevation are shown. 
h.  Driveway slope, from garage to the gutter is shown. 
i.  Lowest opening elevation: min. two (2) feet above 100-year HWL, and min. one (1) foot above emergency overflow elevation. 
(3)  Storm drain system, inlets, and overflows. 
a.  Storm drain system design - Rainfall frequency shall be based on Atlas 14 precipitation frequency estimates. 
b.  Pipe size, length, grade and material shown. 
c.  Top of castings and all inverts of catch basins and manholes shown. Label storm drain structures. 
d.  All apron elevations (inlets and outlets) shown. 
e.  Four hundred-foot maximum manhole spacing. 
f.  Flow direction change (ninety (90) degrees at junctions is desirable. 
g.  Apron inlets to storm sewer system shall include trash guards. Trash guards are optional on true culverts. 
h.  Discharge direction of flow generally forty-five (45) degrees or less to the flow direction of receiving ditch or stream. 
i.  Overflow design to be considered for events greater than storm sewer system design event. 
(4)  Permanent ponds. 
a.  Entire drainage/service area shown (in the report). 
b.  Grading plan with pond cross section. All apron elevations (inlet and outlet) shown. 
c.  Hydraulic calculations for ponding provided. 100-year high water level shown. and normal water level shown. 
d.  Where possible, provide a forebay at the inlet; locate inlet and outlet at opposite ends of pond; and provide length to width ratio 3:1. 
e.  Multi-cell design where practical. 
f.  Pond side slopes shall not exceed four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (4:1) above normal water level. 
g.  10:1 bench is provided for first one (1) foot of depth below normal water elevation. 
h.  The permanent pool must reach a minimum of three (3) feet, stay below ten (10) feet, and be configured to minimize scour and re-suspension of solids. Vegetation and slope stabilization methods are subject to city's approval. 
i.  Outlet is designed to prevent short-circuiting and discharge of floating debris. 
j.  Permanent pool volume one thousand eight hundred (1,800) cf per acre drained (minimum). 
k.  Outlet sized to discharge water quality volume at no more than five and sixty-six hundredths (5.66) cfs/acre of pond surface area. 
l.  Energy dissipation on outlet piping. 
m.  Emergency overflow spillway provided to accommodate storms greater than the 100-year event. High point elevation and direction of overflow are marked on plans. Top of berm is one (1) foot above emergency overflow spillway. 
n.  Emergency overflow spillway is located to protect adjacent property and large fill sections. 
o.  Minimum eight-foot width at top of berm. 
p.  Twelve-foot wide access and turn-around area for maintenance vehicles is shown on a slope = fifteen (15) percent, cross slope = six (6) percent. 
q.  Pond access is included in a min. 15-foot wide portion of the pond outlot. If access is in an easement across private property, a 12-foot wide access road shall be provided. 
r.  Ponds shall not be located in a wetland unless mitigated for. 
s.  As part of the drawing set submittal, provide in table form the following information: 
i.  Elevation of normal water level (NWL). 
ii.  Elevation of 100-year high water level (HWL), with respective discharge rate. 
iii.  Elevation of water quality water level, with respective discharge rate, and pond water surface in sq. ft. 
iv.  Sediment storage volume (for sediment accumulation during construction and twenty (20) years thereafter). 
(5)  Infiltration/filtration. 
a.  Refer to the Minnesota Stormwater Manual for specific infiltration/filtration practices. 
b.  Infiltration systems shall meet volume control standards as set by the City. Filtration systems shall achieve approximately eighty (80) percent removal of total suspended solids. 
c.  Infiltration or filtration systems should not be excavated to final grade until the contributing drainage area has been constructed and fully stabilized. 
d.  During construction of infiltration or filtration systems, rigorous erosion prevention and sediment controls (e.g. diversion berms) should be used to keep sediment and runoff completely away from the infiltration or filtration area. The area must be staked off and marked so that heavy construction equipment will not compact the soil in the proposed infiltration or filtration area. 
e.  A pretreatment device such as a vegetated filter strip, small sedimentation basin, or water quality inlet (e.g. grit chamber) is required before the stormwater discharges into the infiltration or filtration system. The Minnesota Stormwater Manual and Minimal Impact Design Standards (MIDS) shall be used when sizing and designing pre-treatment. 
f.  Pre-treatment sumps shall have a minimum three-foot sump depth. 
g.  Area to be infiltrated or filtrated shall be delineated on plans. 
h.  Calculations or computer model results that demonstrate the design adequacy of the infiltration or filtration system must be included as part of the SWPPP. 
i.  The water quality volume shall discharge through the soil surface or filter media in forty-eight (48) hours or less. Additional flows that cannot be infiltrated or filtered in forty-eight (48) hours should be routed to bypass the system through a stabilized discharge point. A way to visually verify that the system is as designed must be provided. 
j.  Appropriate on-site testing is required and must be consistent with the recommendations in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual. Testing shall be conducted to verify soil types, infiltration capacity characteristics, and to ensure a minimum of three (3) feet of separation from the seasonally saturated soils and the bottom of the proposed infiltration system. 
k.  Provide at a minimum one (1) soil boring at each infiltration or filtration site. 
l.  Adequate maintenance access must be provided (typically twelve (12) feet wide). 
m.  Provide scaled drawing of infiltration or filtration BMP, with typical detail and typical cross section. Outline area which runoff is directed to the BMP. As part of the drawing set submittal, provide in table form the following information: 
For Infiltration BMP: 
i.  Runoff volume directed to infiltration BMP in cu. ft. 
ii.  Storage volume of infiltration BMP in cu. ft. 
iii.  Time of infiltration in hours (must be forty-eight (48) hours). 
iv.  Separation in feet between the ground water table and the bottom of BMP. 
For Filtration BMP: 
v.  Runoff volume directed to filtration BMP in cu. ft. 
vi.  Percent of TSS reduction level. 
vii.  Time of filtration in hours (must be forty-eight (48) hours). 
(6)  Infiltration prohibitions and restrictions. 
a.  Infiltration is prohibited when the infiltration BMP will receive discharges from, or be constructed in areas: 
i.  Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS industrial stormwater permit issued by the MPCA 
ii.  Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur 
iii.  With less than three (3) feet of separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated soils or the top of bedrock 
iv.  Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be mobilized by the infiltrating stormwater 
b.  Infiltration is restricted unless higher engineering review provides sufficient information that the treatment system can function properly and prevent adverse impacts to groundwater when the infiltration system will be constructed in areas: 
i.  With predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay) soils 
ii.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet up-gradient, or one hundred (100) feet down-gradient of active karst features 
iii.  Within a Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA) as defined in Minn. R. 4720.5100, subd. 13. 
iv.  Where soil infiltration rates are more than eight and three-tenths (8.3) inches per hour 
(7)  Alternative volume reduction and treatment practices. 
a.  Must follow requirements and recommendations in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual. 
b.  Full calculations and plans included (narrative in drainage report). 
(8)  Better site design/low impact development. 
a.  Green infrastructure techniques and practices (including, but not limited to, infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry, green roofs), shall be given preference as design options consistent with zoning, subdivision and PUD requirements. 
b.  Additional low impact development design features shall be considered and indicated on the plans such as preserving natural areas, site reforestation, stream and shoreline buffers, soil compost amendments, disconnecting of surface impervious cover, and stormwater landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Appendix B. - Alternative Stormwater Treatment Options. 
    The following is based on the flexible treatment options process developed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Minimal Impact Design Standards (MIDS) Community Assistance Package. The City of Fairmont encourages the use of the MIDS calculator to show volume reduction from alternative practices and pollutant removal documentation. The MIDS calculator is located: http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Calculator 
    Projects must fully attempt to comply with the appropriate volume reduction requirement as described in the city's stormwater management code section 25-1000. Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. If full compliance is not possible due to any factors listed below, the applicant must document the reason and submit to the City Engineer for review and approval. If site constraints or restrictions limit the full volume reduction requirement, the following flexible treatment options shall be used: 
    Documentation of the flexible treatment options sequence starting with alternative #1 shall be provided to the city engineer; if alternative #1 cannot be met, then alternative #2 shall be analyzed. Applicants must document the specific reasons why alternative #1 cannot be met based on the factors listed below. 
Alternative #1: 
Applicant attempts to comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Achieve at least half of the volume reduction required. 
b.  Remove seventy-five (75) percent of the annual TP load from the increase in impervious surfaces if the site is new development or from the new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site. 
c.  Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. 
Alternative #2: 
Applicant attempts to comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Achieve volume reduction to the maximum extent practicable. 
b.  Remove sixty (60) percent of the annual TP load from the increase in impervious surfaces if the site is new development or from the new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site. 
c.  Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. 
Alternative #3: 
Off-site mitigation, as approved by the city engineer, equivalent to the volume reduction requirement for the construction activity, can be used in areas selected in the below order of preference. Off-site mitigation projects shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months after the start of the original construction activity. 
a.  Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives runoff from the original construction activity. 
b.  Locations within the same Department of Natural Resources (DNR) catchment area as the original construction activity. 
c.  Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area up-stream. 
d.  Locations anywhere within the city. 
If alternative #2 cannot be met then alternative #3 can be considered. Applicants must document the specific reasons why alternative #2 cannot be met based on the factors listed below. 
Volume reduction techniques that will be considered shall include infiltration; reuse & rainwater harvesting; canopy interception & evapotranspiration; and/or additional techniques included in the minimal impact design standards (MIDS) calculator and the Minnesota Stormwater Manual. 
Higher priority shall be given to BMPs that include volume reduction. Secondary preference is to employ filtration techniques, followed by rate control BMPs. 
Factors to be considered for each alternative include: 
a.  Karst geology; 
b.  Shallow bedrock; 
c.  High groundwater; 
d.  Hotspots or contaminated soils; 
e.  Drinking water source management areas or within two hundred (200) feet of drinking water well; 
f.  Zoning, setbacks or other land use requirements; 
g.  Excessive cost; 
h.  Poor soils (infiltration rates that are too low or too high, problematic urban soils); 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , 3-12-18) 
Chapter 26 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; planning and development, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning ordinances, M.S. § 462.357. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Abutting or abuts means areas or lots whose boundaries at least touch one (1) another at a single point, including areas or lots whose boundaries would touch but for an intervening public right-of-way including streets and alleys. 
    Accessory structure or use means a subordinate structure or use located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use. On waterfront lots accessory structures shall include boathouses, decks, permanent boat lifts and stairways. 
    Agricultural means an area in excess of five (5) contiguous acres used for the production of farm crops customary on open tracts of land and the accessory raising of livestock and poultry. The term shall also include incidental retail selling by the producer of products raised on the premises, provided that space necessary for parking of customers vehicles shall be furnished off the public right-of-way. The term does not include commercial feedlots or the commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals. 
    Airport means the municipal airport. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way twenty (20) feet or less in width, affording a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Apartment means a part of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms which is used for a semi-permanent residence for one (1) family or an individual, and is equipped with cooking facilities, other than a boardinghouse, hotel or motel. 
    Automobile repair-major means the general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding and major painting service. 
    Automobile repair-minor means the replacement of any part or repair of any part which does not require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine, transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering service when said service above stated is applied to passenger automobiles, and trucks not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. 
    Automobile wrecking and junkyard means land or buildings where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, kept, sold, stored, exchanged, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metal, rags, paper, hides, rubber products and products resulting from the wrecking of automobiles, other vehicles, or machinery. 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground but having half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Bed and breakfast inn means an owner-or manager-occupied business other than a boardinghouse, hotel or motel, in which a room or rooms are rented on a nightly basis and in which only breakfast is included as part of the basic compensation, and where the rooms are single, habitable units used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes. 
    Bluff means a topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than eighteen (18) percent over a distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff): 
(1)  Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area; 
(2)  The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the ordinary high water level of the waterbody; 
(3)  The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five (25) feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty (30) percent or greater; and 
(4)  The slope shall drain toward the waterbody. 
    Bluff impact zone means a bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet from the top of a bluff. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel containing at least one (1) dwelling unit, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods lodging, or lodging and meals, are provided for one (1) to eight (8) persons not members of the principal family therein. 
    Boathouse means an accessory structure primarily used for storage of boating and marine equipment. Boathouses shall not be used for permanent habitation or contain sanitary facilities not connected to the municipal sewer and water system. 
    Building means any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. When a structure is divided by area separation walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or to the highest point of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    Building line means the line beyond which no structure may project. 
    Bulk materials means uncontained solid matter such as powder, grain, stone, sand, sulphur, etc., that would become airborne if not covered. 
    Business means any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation. 
    Clear-cutting means removal of an entire stand of trees or shrubs on waterfront lots. 
    Commercial animal raising or kennel means any premises where three (3) or more animals at any one (1) time, over six (6) months of age are owned, boarded and bred or offered for sale. 
    Commercial feedlot means any facility consisting of barns, confinement buildings, corrals, or fenced areas of any kind, for the purpose of breeding or feeding domestic livestock for the sole purpose of retail or wholesale sale. Commercial operation is that use that can be determined to be beyond what is for personal consumption. 
    Commercial planned unit developments, in shoreland means uses that provide transient, short-term lodging spaces, rooms, or parcels and where the operations are essentially service oriented. For example, hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks, retail, offices and other primarily service-oriented uses as defined in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 394. 
    Comprehensive plan means a compilation of material, statements, goals, standards and maps adopted by the planning commission and used by the commission in making recommendations for guiding the orderly development of the private and public sectors of the city. 
    Conditional use means those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning use district, which for their respective conduct, exercise or performance in such designated use districts may require reasonable but special, peculiar, unusual or extraordinary limitations, facilities, plans, structures, thoroughfares, conditions, modifications, or regulations in such use district for the promotion or preservation of the general public welfare, health, convenience, or safety therein and in the city and therefore may be permitted in such use district only by a conditional use permit. 
    Condominium means real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. 
    Curb level means the mean level of the curb where it is not already in place. 
    Daycare, home means a family dwelling in which foster care, supervision and training for children of school or preschool age out of their home is provided during part of a day (less than twenty-four (24) hours) with no overnight accommodations or facilities and children are delivered and removed daily. The number to be cared for in one (1) daycare home shall not exceed ten (10) including the family's own children. 
    Daycare, group nursery means a service provided to the public, in which six (6) or more children of school or preschool age are cared for during established business hours. No overnight facilities are provided. The children are delivered and removed daily. 
    Deck in shoreland means a horizontal, enclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three (3) feet above ground. 
    Duplex, triplex, and quad means a dwelling structure on a single lot, having two (2), three (3), and four (4) units respectively, being attached by common walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation facilities. 
    Dwelling means that part of a building intended to be occupied for residential purposes, but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, trailers, cabins or mobile homes. 
    Dwelling, attached means a dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or more abutting walls. 
    Dwelling, detached means a single dwelling having a yard on all sides. 
    Dwelling, multiple means a structure or portion thereof intended and designed for three (3) or more dwellings. 
    Dwelling, townhouse means a single structure consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units on individual lots having one (1) or more walls abutting with another dwelling and designed to have all exits open directly to the outside. 
    Dwelling, twin home means two (2) single-family attached dwellings located on individual lots in such a manner that a common party wall is located on the common side lot line. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a dwelling on a single lot, designed or intended exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other, commonly referred to as a duplex. 
    Dwelling, zero lot line means two (2) to four (4) single-family dwellings attached by party walls in such a manner that the common party wall(s) are located on the common side or rear lot line(s). This definition includes but is not limited to such common references as twin homes. 
    Dwelling site means a designated location for residential use by one (1) or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle site in the shoreland. 
    Dwelling unit means any structure or portion of a structure, or other shelter designed as short-or long-term living quarters for one (1) or more persons, including rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel, hotel, and resort rooms and cabins in the shoreland. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission and distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems by public utilities, municipal or other governmental agencies. 
    Extractive use means the use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes, sections 93.44 to 93.51. 
    Family means one (1) or more persons each related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or group of not more than four (4) persons not so related maintaining a common household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities. 
    Fence means any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal area of several floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. 
    Floor area, habitable means the same as floor area except that its application is limited to dwellings. It is measured from the interior faces of the interior walls, and excludes all unused cellars, garages, porches, attics, stairways, unimproved basements, storage, utility, heating rooms and similar areas. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or, in the case of planned developments-group projects by gross site area. 
    Forest land conversion means the clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand. 
    Garage, private means an accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry is carried on. 
    Hardship means the property in question cannot be put to reasonable use under the conditions allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to his property, not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under terms of the official controls. 
    Home occupation means an accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision, or sale of goods and services as regulated by this chapter. 
    Hotel means a building having provision for nine (9) or more guests in which lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open to transient or permanent guests or both, and where no provision is made for cooking in any guest room, and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge. 
    Housepet means a dog, cat or any animal of a type customarily used for a pet by an individual family. 
    Intensive vegetation clearing means the complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block. 
    Large domestic animal means horses, swine, cattle, llamas, camels, buffalo or other like animals. 
    Livestock means any domestic animal except a house pet-horses, swine, cattle, llamas, camels, buffalo, sheep, goats, rabbits, poultry or other like animals over one (1) year of age. 
    Lot means land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings together with such open spaces as are required under this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved access. 
    Lot area means the area of lot in a horizontal plan bounded by the lot lines. 
    Lot corner means a lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot line means the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the street right-of-way or a proposed street right-of-way, the line of such street right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this chapter. 
    Lot line, front means that boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated private or public street, and in case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension on a street except that a corner lot in a nonresidential area,shall be deemed to have frontage on both streets. 
    Lot line, rear means that boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot in a nonresidential area, such line shall be parallel to the front line facing the existing or proposed main entrance. 
    Lot of record means a platted lot or metes and bounds parcel which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior to June 30, 1986. 
    Lot, through means a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this chapter. 
    Lot, width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured parallel to the front lines of the lot at the front building setback line. 
    Manufactured home, single family means a manufactured, transportable, single-family dwelling unit, suitable for year-round occupancy and containing water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences designed for attachment to outside systems. A manufactured home is designed so that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways and streets. 
    Manufactured home park means a contiguous parcel of land which has been developed and is licensed for the placement of mobile homes. 
    Mini-storage or self-storage means a building or group of buildings in a controlled access or fenced area that contains varying sizes of individual compartmentalized units, which are accessed by separate exterior doorways for each unit, designed for the storage of property for individuals, organizations and businesses. These are also known as self-storage facilities or mini-warehouse facilities. 
    Motel means a building or group of detached, semi-detached, or attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings, each of which has a separate outside entrance leading directly from the outside of the building, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient guests traveling by automobile. 
    Motor fuel station means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also may be engaged in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. These may include sale of petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items, washing and lubrication services, and the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair. 
    Nonconforming building, structure or use means a building, structure or use which does not conform with the district regulations in which it is situated. 
    Open sales lot means land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building. 
    Ordinary high water level means the boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool. 
    Parking space means an area, enclosed in a main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) standard automobile, which has adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress or egress of an automobile. 
    Planned development in shoreland means a type of development characterized by a unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease, and also usually involving clustering of these units of sites to provide areas of common open space, density increases, and a mix of structure types and land uses. These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums, the time-share condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units, residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings, campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels, and conversions of structures and land uses to these uses. 
    Planned unit development means the improvement of any sized parcel of land on which two (2) or more principal buildings and supporting structures are possible and permitted according to a development plan agreed upon by the city and developer according to conditions set forth in this chapter. 
    Public open space means any publicly owned open area, including but not limited to the following: parks, playgrounds, school sites, parkways and streets. 
    Public waters means any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 105.37, subdivisions 14 and 15. However, no lake, pond or flowage of less than ten (10) acres in size in municipalities and twenty-five (25) acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated for the purposes of Minnesota Rules parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the local government, be exempted from Minnesota Rules parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900. 
    Residential planned unit development means a use where the nature of residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured home parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives, and full fee ownership residences would be considered as residential planned unit developments. 
    Semipublic use means the use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization. 
    Sensitive resource management means the preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, road, highway, property line, or other facility, from an ordinary high water level of the top of a bluff. 
    Sewage treatment system means a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in MPCA Rules Chapter 7080. 
    Sewer system means pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other constructions, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal. 
    Shore impact zone means land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty (50) percent of the structure setback. 
    Shoreland means land located within the following distance from public waters: 
(1)  One thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and 
(2)  Three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. 
    The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources. 
    Sign means any outdoor structure either stationary or movable containing any writing, announcements, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or illumination used to advertise or promote the distribution of any merchandise or the sale of property or service of any person. 
    Sign, advertising means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located. 
    Sign, business means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered on the premises on which such sign is located. 
    Significant historic site means any archeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota state archeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites. 
    Solar collector means any device or structure, or combination thereof, that collects solar radiation and converts it to chemical, electrical, mechanical and thermal energy. 
    Solar energy means radiant energy (direct, defuse, and reflected) received from the sun. 
    Steep slope means land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over twelve (12) percent, as measured over horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not bluffs. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story. 
    Street means a dedicated private or public right-of-way not less than fifty (50) feet in width which affords a primary means of access to abutting property, and shall also include avenue, highway, or road, excepting existing public right-of-way of lesser width. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected on, or connected to the ground. 
    Subdivision means land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent, or lease, including planned unit development. 
    Surface water-oriented commercial use means the use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use. 
    Toe of the bluff means the point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of bluff shall be determined to be the lower end of a fifty-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding eighteen (18) percent. 
    Top of the bluff means the point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the top of bluff shall be determined to be the upper end of a fifty-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding eighteen (18) percent. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity or defined by the performance standards in this chapter. 
    Use, accessory means a use subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Use, principal means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A principal use may be either permitted or conditional. 
    Use, substandard means any use of shorelands existing prior to June 30, 1986 which is permitted within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the minimum lot area and length or water frontage, structural setbacks, or other dimensional standards of the shoreland management district. 
    Variance means a modification or variation from provisions of this chapter applying to a particular parcel of property because of undue hardship due to circumstances peculiar and unique to the parcel. Variances shall be limited to height, bulk, density and yard requirements. 
    Waterfront lots means unplatted land or platted lots whose property line abuts a DNR designated lake or stream. 
    Wetland means a surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition), which is hereby incorporated by reference, is available through the Minitex interlibrary loan system, and is not subject to frequent change. 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) means any device that converts wind power to useable energy, such as electricity or heat. Such devices include: wind charges, windmills, and wind turbines. 
    Yard means an open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky. A yard extends along a lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, corner means a yard extending along a street right-of-way which is not a front yard. 
    Yard, front means a yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    Zoning district means an area or areas within the limits of the zoning jurisdiction for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.02, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 89-13, § I, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 96-7, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 2016-06 , 10-24-16; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-31-17; Ord. No. 2018-14 , 6-25-18) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted for the purpose of: 
(1)  Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(2)  Dividing the city into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of structures and land. 
(3)  Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, recreational and public areas. 
(4)  Providing for adequate light, air and convenience of access to property by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to surrounding properties. 
(5)  Limiting congestion in the public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(7)  Providing for the administration of this chapter and amendments thereto. 
(8)  Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies. 
(9)  Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.01(1), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-3. - Relationship to comprehensive plan. 
    It is the policy of the city that the enforcement, amendment and administration of this chapter be accomplished with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the comprehensive plan as developed and amended from time to time by the planning commission and the city council. The city council recognizes the comprehensive plan as the policy for responsibility to regulate land use and development in accordance with the policies and purpose herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.01(2), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-4. - Application and interpretation. 
(a)  In interpretation and application, this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirement shall prevail. 
(c)  No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Except as herein provided no building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.01(3), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-5. - Measurement of distances. 
    All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is one-half foot or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.01(4), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-6. - Nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify these requirements, circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures and uses will be operated and maintained. This chapter establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of these districts that nonconforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section that all nonconforming uses shall be eventually brought into conformity. 
(b)  The following provisions are applicable to nonconformities: 
(1)  Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this chapter shall not be enlarged but may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified or, subsequently amended. 
(2)  Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do no extend or intensify the nonconforming use. 
(3)  No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be moved to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was constructed or was conducted on June 30, 1986 unless such movement shall bring the nonconformance into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be physically changed to any nonconforming use. 
(5)  A lawful nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to lessen the nonconformity of use. Once a nonconforming structure or parcel of land has been so changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to increase the nonconformity. 
(6)  If at any time a nonconforming building, structure or use shall be destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value, the value to be determined by the county assessor and the building official, then without any further action by the council, the building and the land on which such building was located or maintained shall one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of said destruction, be subject to all the regulations specified by these zoning regulations for the district in which such land and buildings are located, unless a building permit has been applied for within that one-hundred-eighty-day time period. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property or water body. When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district with less than fifty (50) percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire or other peril to greater than fifty (50) percent of its estimated market value, the value to be determined by the county assessor and the building official, the structure's setback may be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent property or water body. Any building which is damaged to an extent of less than fifty (50) percent of its value may be restored to its former extent within a one-year period. The estimate of the extent of damage or destruction shall be made by the county assessor and the building official. 
(7)  Whenever a lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land is discontinued for a period of more than one (1) year, any future use of said structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful nonconforming residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units or bulk of the building. 
(9)  All nonresidential, nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be screened on the side and rear yards from abutting and surrounding residential uses in compliance with article VII. 
(10)  Any proposed structure which will, under this chapter, become nonconforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter, is not abandoned for a period of more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and continues to completion within two (2) years. Such structure and use shall thereafter be a legally nonconforming structure and use. 
(11)  An accessory structure relating to a lawful, nonconforming residential usage may be permitted to be constructed or expanded providing the zoning requirements for an accessory structure in a residential zone are complied with and the accessory structure is detached from the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.03, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 90-12, 10-22-90; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 2-27-12) 
Secs. 26-7-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-26. - Enforcement officer. 
(a)  This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development division, with the community development director or the designated agent as the administrative officer of this chapter. His or her duties, among others, shall be to: 
(1)  Serve as an ex-officio nonvoting member of the board of appeals and adjustments and planning commission. 
(2)  Receive, review, analyze and develop written reports on all applications for permits, certificates, appeals, variances, amendments, plats or other development matters regulated by this chapter. 
(3)  Issue permits when requirements of this chapter have been met, and maintain records thereof. 
(4)  Conduct inspections to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter and take remedial action when required. 
(b)  Upon finding that any of the zoning provisions of this chapter are being violated, or upon finding a condition which may lead to violation, the community development director shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violation or condition, ordering the action necessary to correct such condition or violation. He or she may order discontinuance of illegal work being done, order discontinuance of illegal use of structures and land, and order removal of illegal structures or additions. Further, in order to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of this chapter, the community development director may call upon the city attorney to institute legal proceedings and call upon the chief of police for assistance. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(1), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 2-12-18) 
Secs. 26-27-26-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Amendments, M.S. § 462.357, subds. 3, 4. 

Sec. 26-36. - Initiation. 
    Proceedings for amendment of this chapter or the official zoning map shall be initiated by the city council, planning commission, or any property owner who wishes to amend the district boundaries so as to affect their real estate or a larger parcel which includes such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(5)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-37. - Application. 
    All applications for amendments to this chapter or the official zoning map shall be made by the property owner in the office of the community development director on official zoning applications. Such applications shall be accompanied by graphic and written materials which explain the proposed development and/or use. Two (2) copies of all required graphics or materials shall be submitted, with at least one (1) copy reduced to the size of eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(5)(B), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-03 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-38. - Public hearing. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the request for an amendment to this chapter or the official zoning map. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date of hearing to the applicant and each property owner situated wholly or partly within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the property proposed to be rezoned. Identification of such property owners shall be determined by the city clerk from records made available to the public. Failure of property owners to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(5)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-39. - Action by planning commission. 
    Within sixty (60) days of the public hearing referred to in section 26-38, the planning commission shall make a written report to the city council stating its findings and recommendations. If the planning commission recommends denial of the amendment that action shall be final unless the applicant appeals the decision to the city council, in which case the procedure shall be as stated in section 26-40. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(5)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-40. - Action by city council. 
(a)  If the planning commission recommends approval of an amendment to this chapter or the official zoning map, the city council shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the recommendation. Notice of such hearing shall be published in the designated newspaper and mailed to the applicant and each property owner wholly or partly within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the property proposed to be rezoned. Such notice shall be published and mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date of hearing by the city clerk. Failure of the property owners to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. At the time of the hearing the city council may take final action on the application or continue the hearing for further investigation and testimony. The city council may also request further information and reports from the planning commission. After conclusion of the hearing the city council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in such form as it deems advisable. The amendment shall be effective only if a majority of all members of the city council concur on its passage. The adoption or amendment of any portion of this chapter or the official zoning map which changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds majority vote of all members of the governing body. 
(b)  Amendments may be denied by motion of the city council. Such motion shall contain appropriate findings and a determination that the proposal is not in the best interest for physical development of the city. Such findings and determination shall be made a permanent part of the council record. No application which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(5)(E), (F), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2017-08 , 8-28-17) 
Secs. 26-41-26-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS AND BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Appeals and adjustments, M.S. § 462.357, subd. 6. 

Sec. 26-56. - Board of appeals and adjustments. 
(a)  The board of appeals and adjustments is created and shall consist of six (6) members and two (2) nonvoting council liaison. All voting members shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve three-year terms. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
(b)  Three (3) members of the board constitute a quorum, and all action by the board requires the affirmative vote of a quorum. The board shall serve without compensation. The board shall elect from its voting members a chairman and vice chairman. The community development director shall provide secretarial and staff services to the board, and shall serve as an ex-officio nonvoting member. 
(c)  The board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  To hold special hearings as required by statute, ordinance, or when deemed necessary, and to counsel with the city's legal department where legal issues may be involved. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(A), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-04 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-57. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  An appeal for administrative review may be taken to the board of appeals and adjustments by any person affected by a decision of the community development director. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice specifying the grounds of the appeal in the office of community development director within thirty (30) days of the action or decision. If the appeal is not taken by the owner of the property, which is the subject matter of the decision appealed from, notice shall not be filed until it has been served upon such owner either in person or by mail. 
(b)  The community development director shall forthwith transmit to the board all materials constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal for an administrative review or a variance stays all proceedings, including criminal proceedings, in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the community development director certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. An application for a variance may be filed by the owner of the affected property at any time. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(B), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-05 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-58. - Board hearing. 
    Upon filing in the office of the community development director a petition for a variance or appeal from an administrative order or determination, a hearing date shall be set. The date of this hearing shall be no more than thirty (30) days from filing of the request. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date of hearing to the petitioner and each owner of property situated wholly or partly within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the petitioner's property, insofar as the names and addresses of such owners can be determined by the city clerk from records available to the public. Failure of property owners to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. The board of appeals and adjustments shall hold the hearing to consider the petition and its relation to the intent and purpose of the regulations of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. The petitioner may appear in person, or be represented by an agent or attorney. The board shall make its order deciding the matter within sixty (60) days of the date of hearing. Findings of fact and other testimony relevant to the board's decision shall be made part of the record of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(E), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-06 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-59. - Appeal from board decision. 
    Any petitioner, affected person or agency, aggrieved by any decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the city council by filing an appeal in the office of city engineer. The council shall consider the matter at its next regular meeting. The council may affirm, reverse, or modify, wholly or partly, the decision of the board. No petition which has been denied by the board, or council on appeal, may be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months from date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(F), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-60-26-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 26-76. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide the city with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain designated uses upon the general welfare, public health and safety. These conditional uses require particular consideration as to their effect on and location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses, their effect on traffic and adjoining roads, and relation to the planned development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-77. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the property owner in the office of the community development director on an official form. Such applications shall be accompanied by graphic and written materials which explain the proposed development and/or use. These materials may be required by the community development director to contain any or all of the following information: 
(1)  A site plan indicating topography, location of buildings, structures, driveways and vehicular access. 
(2)  Landscaping and screening plans. 
(3)  Site drainage plans indicating catch basins and underground improvement. 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading plans. 
(5)  Location, size, and type of outdoor storage facilities for equipment, stock and waste materials. 
(6)  Architectural plans for buildings indicating elevations, entrances, heights, floor plans and material to be used on the exterior. 
(b)  Two (2) copies of all required graphics or materials shall be submitted, with at least one (1) copy reduced to the size of eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(B), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-07 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-78. - Staff review. 
    The conditional use permit application shall be reviewed by the community development director and other pertinent staff. The community development director shall submit a report and recommendation to the planning commission in writing for consideration. These materials are to be made part of the permanent written record of the planning commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(C), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-08 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-79. - Public hearing. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the request for a conditional use permit. Notice of such hearing shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days before the date of hearing to the applicant and each property owner situated wholly or partly within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the applicant's property. Identification of such property owners shall be determined by the city clerk from records made available to the public. Failure of property owners to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-80. - Review standards. 
    The planning commission and pertinent staff shall review applications for conditional use permits based upon the following standards. Conditional uses: 
(1)  Must be in conformance with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Must not be detrimental or injurious to the general vicinity and uses already permitted in the area. 
(3)  Not impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding vacant property. 
(4)  Will be served by adequate utilities, public roads, and municipal facilities. Such requirements for public facilities shall not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the city. 
(5)  Must not cause offensive odors, fumes, dust, noise, and vibration that would be injurious or a nuisance to adjacent uses and the surrounding area. 
(6)  Will conform to specific standards of this chapter applicable to the particular use. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(E), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-81. - Conditions. 
    The planning commission may recommend conditions relating to the granting of a conditional use permit as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter and protect the general welfare of the city. Recommended conditions may include the following general conditions (if applicable) and shall include specific conditions listed for each conditional use in this chapter: 
(1)  That the architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area so as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. 
(2)  That the entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage. This surfacing is subject to approval by appropriate city staff. 
(3)  That the lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light visible from adjacent land in residential use or from a public right-of-way. 
(4)  That vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  That open storage and refuse from the use shall be adequately continued and controlled on-site. 
(6)  Any other condition as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(F), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-82. - Planning commission/city council action. 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days of the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a written report and recommendation to the city council. The city council shall consider the report and recommendation at its next regular meeting. If the planning commission recommends denial of the permit application, or the city council orders such denial, it shall include in its recommendation or findings as to the ways in which the proposed use does not comply with the standards required by this chapter. 
(b)  Conditional use permits issued by the city council shall be filed with the city clerk and county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(G), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-83. - Reconsideration of application. 
    No application for a conditional use permit which has been considered and denied by the city council shall be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months from date of said denial, except on the grounds of new evidence, or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(H), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-84. - Lapse of conditional use permit. 
    If substantial construction has not taken place within one (1) year after issuance of a conditional use permit, the permit is void, except that the city council upon recommendation of the planning commission, may extend the permit for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(I), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-85. - Annual review. 
    The planning commission shall conduct an annual review of all existing conditional use permits. A public notice indicating the date and place of permit review shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation ten (10) days prior to said review. A list of all existing conditional use permits shall be published with the notice. If at such time the planning commission feels that the conditional use permit is in compliance with the performance standards and conditions of the permit, and by majority vote, may decide to waive the annual review for a specific conditional use permit. Also, the planning commission may decide at any time to bring the specific conditional use permit back for review because of a complaint or violation of the conditions or performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(J), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2009-04, 5-11-09) 
Sec. 26-86. - Revocation. 
    A violation of any condition set forth in a conditional use permit shall be a violation of this chapter and shall automatically void the permit. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(K), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-87. - Performance bond. 
(a)  If the scope of development, or potential hazard of the use proposed in the conditional use permit application warrants, the city council upon recommendation by the planning commission may require a surety bond to be posted as a condition for permit issuance. The bond shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit, codes and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The surety bond shall be in the amount of the city building official's estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or development. 
(c)  The city shall hold the surety bond until completion of proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the conditional use permit, codes and ordinances of the city has been issued by the city building official. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit codes and ordinances of the city shall result in forfeiture of the bond. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(4)(L), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-88-26-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Variances, M.S. § 462.357, subd. 6. 

Sec. 26-101. - Generally. 
    No variance shall be granted to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter. Variances shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and when the terms of the variance are consistent with the comprehensive plan. In granting a variance the board may prescribe appropriate conditions in conformity with this chapter. When such conditions are made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, violation of the conditions is a violation of this chapter. A variance shall not be granted by the board of appeals and adjustments, or by the city council on appeal, unless it conforms to the following standards. 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved that cause practical difficulties in complying with the requirements of this chapter and do not result from the actions of the petitioner. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute practical difficulties. 
(2)  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the petitioner of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter and the granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(3)  Granting the variance will not confer on the petitioner any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same area and the petitioner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner. 
(4)  The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of air and light to adjacent property, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(C), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2011-09, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 26-102. - Application. 
    The applicant shall file in the office of city engineer an application for a variance. The application shall contain a detailed site plan and if deemed necessary by city staff, a copy of a registered survey of the property indicating the exact location of monuments and structures on-site. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-103. - Revocation or lapse of variance. 
    A violation of any condition set forth in granting a variance is a violation of this chapter and automatically terminates the permit. A variance shall become void one (1) year after it was granted unless extended by the city council for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(2)(G), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-104-26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-151. - A Agriculture-transition district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the A agricultural-transition district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Agriculture, including residential dwellings, crop farming, raising and training domestic animals for noncommercial purposes. All uses subject to state pollution control standards. Maximum numbers of livestock permitted: 
a.  On five (5) acre plots but less than ten (10) acres: Number of large and small domestic livestock permitted are two (2) large animals and four (4) small animals. 
b.  On ten (10) or more acre plots: Number of large and small domestic livestock permitted are one (1) large, adult animal per acre and two (2) small animals or animals under one (1) year of age per acre. 
(2)  Public parks, recreational areas, wildlife areas and game refuges. 
(3)  Nurseries and tree farms. 
(4)  Essential services. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Home occupations. 
(2)  Living quarters of persons employed on the premises. 
(3)  Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this district. 
(4)  Signs. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  Government and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that: 
a.  When abutting a residential use in a residential district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with article VII. 
b.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(2)  Commercial outdoor recreational areas including golf courses and clubhouse country clubs, swimming pools and similar facilities provided that: 
a.  The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character. 
b.  Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site be covered by buildings or structures. 
c.  When abutting a residential use in a residential district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with article VII. 
(3)  Commercial riding stables, dog kennels and similar uses provided that: 
a.  Animal building, holding, grazing and exercise areas are located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any commercial, industrial, or residential district. 
b.  The land area of the property containing such use meets the minimum established for the district. 
c.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(4)  Recreational, travel vehicle camp sites (not including mobile homes) and resorts provided that: 
a.  The land area of the property containing such use meets the minimum established for the district. 
b.  The site to be served by a major street or highway capable of accommodating generated traffic. 
c.  All driveways and parking areas be hard surfaced. 
d.  The site is served by municipal sewer and water. 
e.  Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site be covered by permanent buildings or structures. 
f.  The location of such use be at minimum one hundred (100) feet from any existing abutting residential district. 
g.  All signing, or visual communication devices be in compliance with article VIII. 
h.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(5)  Machine shops shall be a conditional use with restrictions, in the A agriculture-transition district provided that: 
a.  The machine shop shall be constructed in a manner to provide off-street parking in compliance with article VIII. 
b.  Any machine shops located less than three hundred (300) feet from any R zone shall be screened in compliance with article VII. 
c.  All materials and equipment shall be stored in a manner to prevent their being visible from the street. 
d.  The use of signs shall be in compliance with article X, and the machine shop shall be limited to the use of one (1) sign only visible from the street. Said sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
e.  Any machine shop located less than three hundred (300) feet from any R zone shall comply with all the performance standards of article VII. 
(6)  Agricultural related buildings and structures. Provided that: 
a.  When abutting a residential use or a residential district, the property shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with article VII. 
b.  The same yard requirements shall be maintained as are required for the primary structure. 
(e)  Lot area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  No parcel of land shall be created which is less than five (5) acres in size. 
(2)  No height limitation shall be imposed for any agricultural building except where hazardous conditions may result. All other buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(3)  Lot width, three hundred (300) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, one hundred (100) feet minimum. 
b.  Side yards, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
c.  Rear yard, fifty (50) feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 89-6, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 96-7, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 26-152. - R-1 Single-family residential district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Noncommercial gardening. 
(3)  Day-care (home). 
(4)  Public parks and playgrounds. 
(5)  Essential services. 
(6)  Manufactured single-family dwellings, as regulated in article V. 
(7)  State licensed group home serving six (6) or fewer mentally retarded or physically handicapped persons. 
(8)  Twinhomes. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures as defined and regulated in article IV. 
(2)  Home occupations as defined and regulated by article IX. 
(3)  Private swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated by and for the principal residents and their guests. 
(4)  Signs, as regulated in article IX. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  Government and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that: 
a.  Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and yard requirements are met. 
b.  Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage. 
c.  Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with article VII. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(2)  Residential single-family planned unit developments as regulated by article V and provided there is no increase density as allowed in the shoreland section herein. 
(3)  Public or semi-public recreational buildings, hospitals, nursing home facilities and medical clinics, neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions, religious institutions, cemeteries, and buildings provided that: 
a.  Side yards shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Adequate screening for abutting residential areas and landscaping is provided in compliance with article VII. 
c.  Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on site in accordance with article VIII. Such parking should be adequately screened and landscaped in compliance with article VIII. 
d.  Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where applicable by article VIII. 
e.  The site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated. 
f.  All signing, information, or visual communication devices are in compliance with article X. 
g.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(4)  Resorts provided that they meet conditions listed in articles IV and VII. 
(5)  Bed and breakfast inn, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The owner/operator shall reside on the property. 
b.  The inn shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations governing its existence and operation, including but not limited to the state building code, the state fire code, and the state health code. 
c.  There shall be no more than five (5) guest rooms in the inn with occupancy limited to two (2) persons per guest room for a total occupancy rate of ten (10) persons per inn. 
d.  The dining facilities of a bed and breakfast inn shall not be open to the public, but shall be used exclusively by the registered guests and shall only provide a breakfast meal. There will be no cooking permitted in the guest rooms. There will be no liquor sold on the premises. 
e.  There shall be a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space for each guest room and one (1) off-street parking space for the owner or manager. 
f.  Any and all signs relating to the bed and breakfast establishment shall comply with the Fairmont Zoning Code requirements in R districts and match architectural features. 
g.  Exterior lighting and parking shall be screened so as not to disturb or offend the neighboring residents. 
h.  A bed and breakfast inn shall have a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area. 
i.  Guests shall not stay for more than twenty (20) days within any ninety-day period. The owner or manager shall maintain a guest register showing the names, addresses and dates of occupation of the guests. 
j.  Receptions, business meetings or any other home occupation shall not be permitted in a bed and breakfast inn. 
k.  The owner or manager shall provide proof of all inspections, licenses, insurance and certificates, as well as proof of a $1 million liability insurance policy to the zoning administrator upon the initial application for a conditional use permit and upon the approval renewal thereof. 
(6)  Single-family attached dwelling units, in which each dwelling unit is to be under separate ownership providing the total structure does not contain more than four (4) dwelling units and is in compliance with article V. 
(7)  Day care (group nursery), provided that: 
a.  Only the rear yard is used as a play area. The play area is to be fenced. 
b.  The site is a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
c.  Adequate off street parking exists. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are satisfactorily met. 
(8)  Nameplate signs or identification signs exceeding six (6) square feet provided that: 
a.  The sign shall in no way change the residential character of the neighborhood. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. 
c.  Lighting shall be shielded to prevent such light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the sign is located. 
d.  The sign shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any lot line. 
e.  No lighting shall be allowed that gives off an intermittent, sequential or rotating beam of light. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot size, eight thousand five hundred (8,500) feet. 
(2)  Except exempted use, no structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in building height. 
(3)  Lot width, eighty-five (85) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. On lots of record where adjacent structures have less than the required setback, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of adjacent structures. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback be less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Interior side yards shall equal ten (10) percent of lot width, with not more than ten (10) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. On lots of record corner yard requirements shall not reduce buildable width of the lot to less than twenty-five (25) feet. In no case shall the minimum corner yard setback be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  A rear yard with a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth is required. 
e.  Porch, open on three (3) sides, roofed or unroofed described as open air/non-screened above thirty-six (36) inches above the finished floor may extend into the required front/corner yards a distance not to exceed eight (8) feet; shall not in any case be closer than fifteen (15) feet from the front/corner property lines and cannot extend into the required interior side yards. 
(5)  Floor area, eight hundred sixty (860) square feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § II, 9-25-89; Ord. No. 90-10, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 93-7, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 99-10, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 2002-04, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-31-17; Ord. No. 2019-08 , 2-25-19) 
Sec. 26-153. - R-2 One-and two-family district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the R-2 one-and two-family district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Twin homes, as regulated in article V. 
(4)  Single-family attached dwelling units, in which each dwelling unit is to be under separate ownership providing the total structure does not contain more than four (4) dwelling units and is in compliance with article V. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted accessory uses as allowed in the R-1 district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses, subject to the same conditions as allowed in the R-1 district. 
(2)  Townhouses as regulated in article V. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements: 
(1)  Lot size: 
a.  Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet (single-family). 
b.  Nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet, (two-family). 
(2)  Except exempted use, no structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in building height. 
(3)  Lot width, eighty-five (85) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. For single-family homes on lots of record where adjacent structures have less than the required setback, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of adjacent structures. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback be less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Interior sideyards shall equal ten (10) percent of lot width, with not more than ten (10) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. On lots of record corner yard requirements shall not reduce buildable width of the lot to less than twenty-five (25) feet. In no case shall the minimum corner yard setback be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  A rear yard with a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth is required. 
e.  Porch, open on three (3) sides, roofed or unroofed described as open air/non-screened above thirty-six (36) inches above the finished floor may extend into the required front/corner yards a distance not to exceed eight (8) feet; shall not in any case be closer than fifteen (15) feet from the front/corner property lines and cannot extend into the required interior side yards. 
(5)  Floor Area: 
a.  Eight hundred sixty (860) square feet per unit (single-family). 
b.  Six hundred (600) square feet per unit (two-family). 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.04, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 90-10, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 99-10, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-22-12; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-31-17) 
Sec. 26-154. - R-3 Multiple-family residential district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the R-3 multiple-family residential district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 district. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings with eight (8) units or less. 
(3)  Boarding houses. 
(4)  State licensed residential facility serving from seven (7) to sixteen (16) mentally retarded or physically handicapped persons. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 district. 
(2)  Off-street parking and loading as regulated by article VIII. 
(3)  Offices used to administrate multi-family complexes. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based on procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses, subject to the same conditions, as allowed in an R-2 district. 
(2)  Condominiums, as defined and regulated in article V. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings with eight (8) or more units as defined and regulated by article V. 
(4)  Day-care (group nursery) provided that: 
a.  Only the rear yard is used as a play area, the play area is to be fenced, screened, and landscaped in compliance with article VII. 
b.  The site is a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
c.  Adequate off-street parking is provided. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot size: 
a.  Two-bedroom units, two thousand two hundred fifty (2,250) square feet. 
b.  Three-bedroom units, three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(2)  Floor area per dwelling unit: 
a.  One-family structure, eight hundred sixty (860) square feet. 
b.  Two-family structure, six hundred (600) square feet. 
c.  Three (3) or more dwelling units: 
1.  Efficiency units, five hundred (500) square feet. 
2.  One-bedroom units, six hundred (600) square feet. 
3.  Two-bedroom units, seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
4.  Three (3) or more bedroom units, eight hundred fifty (850) square feet. 
(3)  All structures shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(4)  Lot width, eighty-five (85) feet minimum. 
(5)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
b.  Interior side yards shall have a width equal to ten (10) percent of the lot width with not less than ten (10) feet permitted and not more than thirty (30) feet required. 
c.  Side yard adjacent to R-1 and R-2 districts, minimum thirty-foot setback. 
d.  Corner yard, twenty-five (25) feet. 
e.  A rear yard with a depth of not less than thirty (30) percent of lot depth is required. 
(Ord. No. 90-10, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 2019-02 , 1-28-19) 
Sec. 26-155. - R-4 Multi-family district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the R-4 multi-family district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks as regulated in article V. 
(2)  Hotels, motels, and apartment hotels. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading as regulated by article VIII. 
(2)  Administrative offices, recreation building and facilities, laundry and other uses of a supporting nature to the principal use. 
(3)  Manufactured home sales. 
(d)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot area, one (1) acre minimum. 
(2)  No structure or building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet in height. 
(3)  Lot width, two hundred (200) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
b.  Side yard, ten (10) feet minimum. 
c.  Corner yard, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. 
d.  Side yard adjacent to R-1 and R-2 districts, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
e.  Rear yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.04, 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-156. - B-1 Neighborhood business district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the B-1 neighborhood business district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Barbershops. 
(2)  Beauty parlors. 
(3)  Clinics for human care. 
(4)  Clubs and lodges. 
(5)  Commercial and professional offices. 
(6)  Essential services. 
(7)  Government buildings and offices. 
(8)  Libraries, museums or other cultural institutions. 
(9)  Private and public colleges, universities, and vocational institutions. 
(10)  Multi-family residential structures. 
(11)  Hospitals and human care facilities. 
(12)  Religious institutions. 
(13)  Funeral homes, mortuaries and crematoriums. 
(14)  Municipal and private swimming pools. 
(15)  Single-family residences and twin homes. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Commercial buildings and structures for a customary accessory use to the principal use. 
(2)  Off-street loading and parking (except semi-trailer truck parking) as regulated by article VIII. 
(3)  Signage, informational, or visual communication devices as regulated by article X. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  Motor fuel station, auto repair-minor and tire and battery service provided that the provisions of article II, division 4 and article V are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(2)  Boat and marine sales and service including small personal recreational vehicle sales and service provided that: 
a.  A drainage system subject to the approval of appropriate city staff shall be installed. 
b.  Off-street parking, outdoor sales and storage areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential uses or an abutting "R" district in compliance with article VII. 
c.  That sales or storage does not take up on-site parking space, as required for conformity to this chapter. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(3)  Drive-in and convenience food establishments, laundromat, self-service washing and drying, provided that: 
a.  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property (including parking areas and driveways) is screened in compliance with article VII. 
b.  Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot are landscaped or covered. 
c.  Parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less than six (6) inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade. 
d.  A drainage system subject to the approval of the city engineer shall be installed. 
e.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(4)  Commercial planned unit developments as regulated by article V. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot area, ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  No structure shall exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(3)  Lot width, eighty (80) feet. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
b.  Interior side yards equal to ten (10) percent of lot width are required with not less than ten (10) feet permitted, with not more than thirty (30) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
d.  Side yard adjacent to R district, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. 
e.  Rear yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
(5)  Day care (group nursery), provided that: 
a.  Only the rear yard is used as a play area. The play area is to be fenced. 
b.  The site is a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
c.  Adequate off street parking exists. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are satisfactorily met. 
(6)  Yard requirements for single-family residences and twin homes: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. On lots of record where adjacent structures have less than the required setback, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of adjacent structures. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback be less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Interior side yards shall equal ten (10) percent of lot width, with no more than ten (10) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. On lots of record corner yard requirements shall not reduce buildable width of the lot to less than twenty-five (25) feet. In no case shall the minimum corner yard setback be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Rear yard with a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth is required. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.04, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 90-5, 5-31-90; Ord. No. 94-8, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-27-98; Ord. No. 99-11, 9-27-99; Ord. No. 2002-04, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 2005-03, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2010-03, 2-22-10; Ord. No. 2011-08, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 26-157. - B-2 Central business district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the B-2 central business district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Bakeries, delicatessen, grocery stores and supermarkets. 
(2)  Banks and financial institutions, office buildings and related structures and uses. 
(3)  Bus terminals. 
(4)  Custom manufacturing restricted production or repair limited to the following: art, needlework, jewelry, watches, dentures, optical lenses, dressmaking, tailors, footwear and leathercraft, small appliances. 
(5)  Florists. 
(6)  Governmental and public utility buildings and structures. 
(7)  Liquor stores. 
(8)  Permitted uses as allowed in the B-1 neighborhood business district. 
(9)  Religious institutions. 
(10)  Restaurants, taverns, and coffee shops. 
(11)  Retail service stores and shops. 
(12)  Theaters and auditoriums. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are permitted accessory uses as allowed in a B-1 neighborhood business district. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  Open and outdoor rental, sales or storage as an accessory use provided that: 
a.  Outside service, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is limited to thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal use. 
b.  The area is fenced and screened from view of any public right-of-way or residential district and use in compliance with article VII. 
c.  Storage area is grassed or surfaced to control dust. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(2)  Plumbing shops, provided, that: 
a.  They do not employ more than six (6) persons in repair or processing. 
b.  There is no exterior storage of appliances, materials or parts. 
c.  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property is screened in compliance with section 22-554. 
(3)  Laundromats. 
(4)  Day care-group nurseries. 
(5)  One and two family apartments, provided that: 
a.  They comply with all building and fire code requirements. 
b.  The main level remain business or mercantile. 
c.  An early warning smoke detection system is required. 
d.  The primary use of the building shall remain business or mercantile. 
e.  This conditional use be allowed only in the B-2 central business zone. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. All uses located in the B-2 district are exempted from lot area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.04, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 87-2, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 87-5, 4-27-87; Ord. No. 88-1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 88-2, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 96-1, 2-26-96; Ord. No. 97-7, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Sec. 26-158. - B-3 General business district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the B-3 general business district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the B-2 districts as regulated herein. 
(2)  Auto accessory stores. 
(3)  Automobile, truck, snowmobile, motorcycle, boat and marine sales, farm implements and accessory service. 
(4)  Building material and lumber yards. 
(5)  Commercial greenhouse and garden supply stores. 
(6)  Commercial recreational uses. 
(7)  Food lockers. 
(8)  Hotels, motels, and motor motels. 
(9)  Newspaper printing and publishing. 
(10)  Radio and television broadcasting stations and towers. 
(11)  Equipment rental stores. 
(12)  Stone and monument sales. 
(13)  Mini-storage or self-storage facilities. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted accessory uses as allowed in the B-2 central business district. 
(2)  Off-street parking for semi-trailer trucks as regulated by article VII. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted as conditional in the B-1 neighborhood business district, B-2 central business district and I-1 light industrial district as regulated in this chapter. 
(2)  Animal hospital or clinic, kennels provided that: 
a.  Provisions are made to control and reduce noise and odor. 
b.  Open structures housing animals outdoor are fenced and screened from view of neighboring commercial and residential uses in compliance with article VII. 
c.  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property is screened in compliance with article VII. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(3)  Car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service) provided that: 
a.  Magazine or stacking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum thirty-minute period. 
b.  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property is screened in compliance with article VII. 
c.  Provisions are made to control and reduce noise in compliance with article VII. 
d.  Each light standard island and all islands in the parking area are landscaped or covered. 
e.  Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with article VII. 
f.  The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to approval by appropriate city staff. 
g.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(4)  Air conditioning, electrical service, heating, plumbing, and major appliance service shop provided that: 
a.  They do not employ more than six (6) persons in repair or processing. 
b.  There is no exterior storage of appliances, materials or parts. 
c.  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property is screened in compliance with article VII. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(5)  Signs exceeding forty (40) feet in height provided that: 
a.  The site of the sign would be within one thousand (1,000) feet of the edge of the Interstate highway right-of-way. 
b.  The maximum height of eighty (80) feet. 
c.  Engineering will be required for the zoning or building permit. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width, and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot area, twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(2)  No structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(3)  Lot width, one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
b.  Interior side yards equal to ten (10) percent of lot width are required with not less than ten (10) feet permitted, with not more than thirty (30) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
d.  Side yard adjacent to R district, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. 
e.  Rear yard, fifteen (15) percent of the lot depth but not more than thirty (30) feet required. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.04, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 89-7, § 1, 4-24-89; Ord. No. 2005-03, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 2007-02, 2-26-07; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-24-08; Ord. No. 2018-14 , 6-25-18) 
Sec. 26-159. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-05, adopted February 28, 2005, repealed § 26-159, which pertained to B-4 freeway business district and derived from Ord. No. 2002-5, 7-22-02. 
Sec. 26-160. - I-1 Light industrial district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the I-1 light industrial district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are activities, and warehousing including the following uses which meet performance standards applicable to the district: 
(1)  Automobile and motor vehicle repair-Major. 
(2)  Bottling and cold storage plants. 
(3)  Building materials-storage yard and shop. 
(4)  Building contractor-storage yard and shop. 
(5)  Commercial laundry and dry-cleaning services. 
(6)  Commercial printing, engraving and reproduction firms. 
(7)  Essential services. 
(8)  Food processing and packaging, except alcohol or alcoholic beverages, fish, meat products, pickles, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast or any other resulting in emission of strong odors. 
(9)  Government and public utility buildings and structures. 
(10)  Machine shops. 
(11)  Manufacturing, assembly of previously prepared products (cloth, leather, paper, plastics, metals, stone, wood, etc.). 
(12)  Manufacture of electrical appliances, instruments, signs, electronic assembly and testing. 
(13)  Manufacture of pottery and ceramic products using previously processed clay and electric or gas kilns. 
(14)  Manufacture of light sheet metal products. 
(15)  Plumbing, heating/cooling and electrical contractor shops and storage yards. 
(16)  Radio and television towers. 
(17)  Wind energy conversion systems. 
(18)  Grain processing and agricultural related manufacturing. 
(19)  Crematoriums. 
(20)  Concrete mixing facilities. 
(21)  Mini-storage or self-storage facilities. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are open storage yards, fenced and screened in accordance with article VII. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are as follows: 
(1)  Industrial planned unit developments are regulated by article V. 
(2)  Trucking and freight terminals provided that: 
a.  Such terminals have direct access to a designated truck route. This route must be constructed minimum ten-ton state highway (MnDOT) standards. 
b.  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property is screened in compliance with article VII. 
c.  Provision is made to control and reduce noise in compliance with this chapter. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(3)  Grain storage. 
(4)  Correctional or rehabilitation centers such as detention centers, jails, chemical dependency treatment facilities, and similar uses, but not including state-licensed group homes. 
(5)  Food processing and packaging of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, fish, meat products, pickles, vinegar, yeast or other products that may or may not omit odors not consistent with the normal community environment. 
a.  Such meat processing cannot include the slaughter of live animals of more than twenty (20) units per day or five thousand (5,000) pounds per day averaged over a one (1) week period or whichever is greater. 
b.  Such establishments must have a waste stream that is compatible with the existing wastewater facility. Provide wastewater characteristics and treatment loading requirements to the director of public works for a special permit and determination of pretreatment requirements. A determination of proposed waste stream compatibility and pretreatment requirements will be forwarded to the planning commission. 
c.  Have direct access to designated truck route. This route must be constructed to minimum nine (9) ton state highway (MnDOT) standards. 
(6)  Auto, truck, farm implement and salvage yards of more than ten (10) units. 
a.  Provide eight-foot screening. 
b.  Provisions made to control and reduce the number of units stored outside the screening. 
c.  Provide for adequate access to all parts of yard for firefighting equipment. 
(7)  The practice and establishment of commercial recycling of such products as oil, oil product containers, filters, chemical drums, drums that have stored petroleum products, products that may have a negative impact on the environment when placed in a concentrated area. 
a.  Products or materials containing any hazardous materials must be declared and registered with the Fairmont fire department as regulated by the Minnesota Right to Know Laws. 
b.  Approval of the Fairmont fire marshal or the authority having jurisdiction at time of permit process. 
c.  Provide for adequate screening to eliminate noise and or the visual presence of large amounts of stored material. 
d.  Provide for adequate access of firefighting and rescue equipment. 
e.  Provide a storm water management plan at time of permit process. 
All practices covered in the conditional use shall conform to article VII, article II and other height and yard requirements as outlined in this section. 
(8)  Any use permitted in a B-3 general business district that is compatible with I-1 light industrial uses. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  Light industrial Lot area, twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet. 
(2)  There is no height requirement, except that for every foot that a building exceeds thirty (30) feet, an additional foot of setback shall be provided from the nearest property line. 
(3)  Lot width, one hundred (100) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, forty (40) feet minimum. 
b.  Interior side yards equal to ten (10) percent of lot width are required with not less than ten (10) feet permitted nor more than thirty (30) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, forty (40) feet minimum. 
d.  Side yard adjacent to R district, forty (40) feet minimum. 
e.  Rear yard, thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 92-12, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 95-7, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 95-10, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 96-4, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 2011-04, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 2013-04, 2-25-13; Ord. No. 2017-02 , 5-22-17; Ord. No. 2018-14 , 6-25-18) 
Sec. 26-161. - I-2 Heavy industrial district. 
(a)  Scope. This section applies to the I-2 heavy industrial district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Uses permitted in the I-1 light industrial district. 
(2)  Trucking and freight terminals provided that they comply with provisions listed in article VIII. 
(c)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in this chapter and are any other industrial use not otherwise prohibited by law, yet subject to article II, division 4 and article VII. 
(d)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are any use permitted as allowed in the I-1 light industrial district. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width, and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot area, one (1) acre minimum. 
(2)  There is no height requirement. 
(3)  Lot width, one hundred and fifty (150) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, forty (40) feet minimum. 
b.  Interior side yards equal to ten (10) percent of lot width are required, with not less than fifteen (15) feet permitted nor more than thirty (30) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, forty (40) feet minimum. 
d.  Rear yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. 
e.  Side yard setbacks abutting railroad right-of-way five (5) feet, and other setbacks will be fifteen (15) feet for power plants owned by a municipal corporation or political subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.04, 6-30-86; Ord. No. 92-12, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 2011-05, 2-28-11) 
Sec. 26-162. - Airport zoning district. 
(a)  The airport zoning district is an area designated which includes public owned and operated airfields and a prescribed area beyond. The regulations in this district are in addition to, rather than in lieu of regulations imposed by any other zoning classification for land designated. The section applies to such district. 
(b)  The purpose of this section is to: 
(1)  Limit development of future construction to a reasonable height and use so as not to constitute a hazard for planes operating to and from the airfields. 
(2)  Control the type and extent of land development adjacent to and near the airfields so as not to impede proper expansion of the field and otherwise be detrimental to the air operations. 
(c)  The following zones are established: 
(1)  Qualified land use zone. 
a.  This zone is a fan-shaped area extending from the end of the runway for a distance of two (2) miles and the outer limit thereof extending at right angles for three thousand (3,000) feet on each side of the projected centerline of the runway. 
b.  Uses shall not be permitted within this zone which might result in an assembly of persons, manufacturing or storage of materials which explode on contact, and the storage of flammable liquid above ground. 
c.  Prohibited uses shall include educational, institutional, amusement and recreational. Permitted uses may include single-family homes, commercial and industrial uses. 
d.  No use may be permitted in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communications between airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(2)  Airport zoning. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except as required necessary and incidental to airport operations or recommended by or in accordance with the rules of the Federal Aviation Administration, no structure shall be constructed, altered or maintained, and no trees shall be allowed to grow so as to project above the landing area or any of the airport referenced imaginary surfaces described below: 
a.  Horizontal surface, a circular plan, one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, with a radius from the airport reference point of seven thousand (7,000) feet. 
b.  Conical surface, a surface extending from the periphery of the horizontal surface outward and upward at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for the horizontal distance of twelve thousand (12,000) feet and to the elevation of five hundred (500) feet airport elevation. 
c.  Primary surface, a surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending in length two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of a runway. The elevation of any point on the longitudinal profile surface, including the extensions, coincides with the elevation of the centerline of the runway, or extension, as appropriate. The width of a primary surface is five hundred (500) feet. 
d.  Approach surface, a surface longitudinally centered on the extended centerline of the runway, beginning at the end of the primary surface, with slopes and dimensions as follows: The surface begins five hundred (500) feet wide at the end of the primary surface and extends outward and upward at a slope of forty (40) to one (1), expanding to a width of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet. 
e.  Transitional surfaces, these surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline at a slope of seven (7) to one (1) from the edges of the primary and the approach surfaces until they intersect the horizontal, or conical surface. 
f.  All height limitations are computed from the established airport elevation. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.11(I), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-163. - R-2S One- to four-family district. 
(a)  Purpose. Residential areas developed near the central business district and industrial corridor prior to 1940, contain a mixture of single-family and low density multi-family dwellings. In order to recognize this unique land use, encourage maintenance and redevelopment of these areas, this special district has been created. This section applies to such district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district. 
(2)  Two-, three- and four-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses as regulated by article V. 
(4)  Boarding and rooming houses. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  All permitted accessory uses as allowed in the R-1 district. 
(2)  Off-street parking as regulated in article VIII. 
(d)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by article II, division 4 and are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses, subject to the same conditions as allowed in the R-1 district. 
(2)  Planned unit developments involving not more than four (4) dwelling units per structure, as regulated in article II, division 4 and article V. 
(3)  Day-care (group nursery) provided that: 
a.  Only the rear yard is used as a play area, the play area is to be fenced, screened, and landscaped in compliance with article VII. 
b.  The site is a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
c.  Adequate off-street parking is provided. 
d.  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(e)  Lot area, floor area, height, lot width and yard requirements. 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 2,000 square feet
More details below:
a.  One-family structure, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
b.  Two-family structure, three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet. 
c.  Three-family structure, two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet. 
d.  Four-family structure, two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(2)  Except exempted use, no structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in building height. 
(3)  Lot width, seventy-five (75) feet minimum. 
(4)  Yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard, thirty (30) feet minimum. For dwellings on lots of record where adjacent structures have less than the required setback, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of adjacent structures. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback be less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Interior side yards shall have a width equal to ten (10) percent of the width of the lot, with not more than ten (10) feet required. 
c.  Corner yard, twenty-five (25) feet minimum. On lots of record corner yard requirements shall not reduce buildable width of the lot to less than twenty-five (25) feet. In no case shall the minimum corner yard setback be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  A rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth is required. 
(5)  Floor area per dwelling unit: 
a.  One-family structure, eight hundred sixty (860) square feet. 
b.  Two-family structure, six hundred (600) square feet. 
c.  Efficiency unit, five hundred (500) square feet. 
1.  One-bedroom unit, six hundred (600) square feet. 
2.  Two-bedroom unit, seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
3.  Three-bedroom unit, eight hundred fifty (850) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.12(III), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 90-10, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-31-17) 
Secs. 26-164-26-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-201. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish general development standards. These standards are intended and designed to assure compatibility of uses; to prevent blight, deterioration and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the community. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08, 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-202. - Lots. 
(a)  Dwelling on a small lot. In any "R" residential district, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record despite the fact that the lot fails to meet area and width requirements of that district. Such development, however, must meet yard dimensions and other requirements for the district. This exemption from area and width requirements applies only to a lot without continuous street frontage with other lots in the same ownership. 
(b)  Lots in same ownership. If two (2) lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous street frontage in single ownership are of record on the effective date of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the area and width requirements of this chapter for lots in the district, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter, and no portion of such parcel shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and area requirements of this chapter, nor shall the parcel be so divided that any remaining lot does not comply with such requirements. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08(1), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-203. - Dwelling unit restrictions. 
(a)  No basement, cellar, garage, tent or accessory building shall at anytime be used as an independent residence or dwelling unit, temporarily or permanently. 
(b)  Basements or cellars may be used as living quarters and rooms as a portion of residential dwellings, provided they comply with the building code. 
(c)  Tents, playhouses or similar structures may be used for play or recreational purposes. 
(d)  Relocation of a dwelling or other principal structure onto a vacant lot will require review and approval by the board of appeals and adjustments. The review process will be the same as a variance request, with all applicable hearings and notifications. If the board determines that a structure would depreciate the area into which it is being moved, it may withhold issuance of a permit for such relocation. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08(2), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-204. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise regulated in this chapter, the building height limits established herein for zoning districts shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Belfries. 
(2)  Chimneys or flues. 
(3)  Church spires. 
(4)  Communications transmission and reception equipment not regulated by this chapter. 
(5)  Cooling towers. 
(6)  Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space. 
(7)  Elevator penthouses. 
(8)  Essential service structures. 
(9)  Farm structures. 
(10)  Flag poles. 
(11)  Monuments. 
(12)  Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances. 
(13)  Solar energy systems. 
(14)  Parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the limiting height of the building. 
(15)  Wind energy conversion systems. 
(b)  No excluded roof equipment or structural element extending beyond the limited height of a building may occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of such roof. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08(3), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-205. - Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
    Placement of accessory buildings and structures shall be subject to the following regulations. 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures, unless otherwise noted in this chapter are permitted only in buildable areas and required rear yard areas. Such structures may be placed to within three (3) feet of any lot line. Accessory buildings and structures, in aggregate, shall not occupy more than thirty-five (35) percent of required rear yard area. In no case shall such structures be located within eight (8) feet of an alley. 
(2)  Accessory buildings on waterfront lots in aggregate residential districts are permitted in required front yard areas. Such buildings must maintain a fifteen-foot setback from the existing street right-of-way and a three-foot setback from any interior lot line. Accessory building in aggregate shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of required front yard area. 
(3)  Accessory buildings or structures attached to or part of the principal building shall maintain the same setbacks as required for the principal building. 
(4)  No accessory building or structure, unless an integral part of the principal building, shall be erected, altered or moved within five (5) feet of the principal building. 
(5)  Accessory buildings or structures in residential districts shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in building height. Accessory structures in residential zones may be built to a maximum one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area or ten (10) percent of the lot area whichever is larger to an aggregate accessory structure maximum of three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and structures in commercial and industrial districts on lots which abut residential districts must maintain a twenty-five-foot setback from adjacent residential property. 
(7)  Solar energy systems which are detached and freestanding shall be considered accessory structures. 
(8)  Solar energy systems attached structurally to the principal building shall comply in all respects with setback requirements applicable to the main building. 
(9)  In residential districts, accessory buildings or structures may be built on an undeveloped non-conforming lot which abuts a lot with the principal structure. Accessory buildings or structures built on abutting lots must meet the following standards: 
a.  The abutting undeveloped lot does not meet the minimum lot size of the residential district. 
b.  The accessory building or structure is allowed only in buildable areas and required rear yard area of the undeveloped lot. 
c.  The accessory building or structure shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in building height. 
d.  The accessory building or structure shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the undeveloped lot area. 
e.  Only one (1) accessory building or structure is allowed on the undeveloped abutting lot. 
f.  The abutting lot used for an accessory building or structure shall be clubbed by the county, for property tax purposes, with the lot bearing the principal structure and shall not be sold separately at a later date. 
(10)  Sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, and eaves may project not more than three (3) feet into any required yard. 
(11)  Uncovered landings or decks twenty-five (25) square feet or less in size, retaining walls, fences, paved terraces, structures used ornamentally or for gardening or for private recreation purposes, all accessory to and customarily incidental to the principal use, are permitted in required yards provided that a side yard strip two (2) feet in width adjoining the side line of the plot shall be unobstructed by any structure or feature, that is higher than two (2) feet above ground level, except a fence. 
(12)  Open work fire balconies and fire escapes may not extend more than four (4) feet into a required yard. 
(13)  Chimney and flues may not extend more than two (2) feet into a required yard or court. 
(14)  The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in above-ground tanks located outside of a building other than bulk storage plants is allowed in B-3 general business district, I-1 Light industrial district and I-2 heavy industrial district. The installation and location of the tanks shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State Fire Code and this zoning code, whichever is more restrictive. A mechanical permit is required for new installations. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08(4), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 91-3, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 2000-5, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 2013-07, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 2016-06 , 10-24-16; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-31-17) 
Sec. 26-206. - General fencing, screening and landscaping. 
(a)  Fences in residential districts may be located on any lot line (subject to corner yard restrictions) to a height of three and one-half (3.5) feet, except that a fence located along lot lines behind and along side the principal structure and adjacent to the rear yard of the property may be up to six (6) feet in height. Fences located within the principal buildable area of a lot may be up to eight (8) feet in height. 
(b)  Fences in commercial and industrial districts may be erected on a lot line (subject to corner yard restrictions) to a height of eight (8) feet. Fences which are electrically charged or have a security arm with barbed wire will require approval of the board of appeals and adjustments. 
(c)  Hedges and shrubs adjacent to lot lines along front yard areas shall not exceed three and one-half (31/2) feet in height. 
(d)  In all zoning districts, the lot area remaining after providing for off-street parking, off-street loading, sidewalks, driveways, building site and/or other requirements shall be planted and maintained in grass, sodding, shrubs or other acceptable vegetation or treatment generally used in landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08(5), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2009-09, 11-23-09) 
Sec. 26-207. - Corner lot requirements. 
    On a corner lot in all zoning districts, nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of three and one-half (31/2) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersection streets within twenty-five (25) feet of the street intersecting lines. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.08(6), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-208. - Individual septic systems and water supply. 
(a)  Public sewers shall be used when available. Where individual sewage systems are used, they shall be in accordance with MPCA rules Chapter 7080. 
(b)  A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of this section must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level. Systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards in effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing. Except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, sewage pits or other deep disposal methods or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by Chapter 7080, shall be considered nonconforming. 
(c)  All septic systems not in conformity with this section and MPCA Rules Chapter 7080 shall be upgraded within one (1) year from the passage of this section or discovery of the nonconforming system to conform to the provisions hereof and MPCA Rules Chapter 7080. 
(d)  Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes shall meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
(e)  Private wells shall be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the Water Well Construction Code of the Minnesota Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-209. - Temporary family health care dwellings. 
    No temporary family health care dwellings will be allowed in any residential districts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , 8-11-16) 
Secs. 26-210-26-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-251. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to provide for recent innovations in development types and uses. Such development, when executed in accordance with the provisions of this article, will provide the community with a wider variety of development types and uses, yet still protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09, 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-252. - Earth-sheltered buildings. 
(a)  Earth-sheltered buildings or dwellings are subject to lot area, width, floor area, height, and hard requirements of the underlying zoning district with the following modifications: 
(1)  Where an earth-sheltered building substantially alters the natural watershed of the lot, computations for yard area shall be based on measurements from the surrounding cover of earth. In cases where the earth-sheltered building has been made part of the natural terrain, computations for yard area shall be made from the exterior surface of the building. 
(2)  Side yard setbacks shall equal the depth of the structure. In no case shall the side yard setback be less than ten (10) feet for earth-sheltered buildings. 
(3)  Accessory buildings constructed on top of an earth-sheltered building cannot exceed the height of adjacent principal structures. 
(b)  All applications for building permits for earth-sheltered buildings shall be accompanied by a drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(3), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-253. - Single-family manufactured housing. 
    Single-family manufactured homes placed on individual lots in R residential districts shall conform to the following design standards. 
(1)  Placement of such homes shall be in conformance with all zoning regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(2)  The homes shall conform to the Manufactured Home Building Code, as defined in Minnesota Statutes sections 327.31 to 327.35. 
(3)  Such manufactured housing shall have a minimum habitable floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet. No such home shall have a width of less than twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Roof lines must have at least a three-twelfths pitch; flat or shed roofs are not permitted. 
(5)  Such homes shall be placed on a permanent perimeter foundation. The foundation must meet requirements listed in the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the state. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall have exterior siding which is of a conventional exterior dwelling-type material. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-254. - Motor fuel station. 
    Motor vehicle fuel stations and their accessory uses shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing building or area so as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot. For the purposes of architectural appropriateness, each side of the motor fuel station shall be considered a front face. 
(2)  The entire site, other than that taken up by structures and landscaping shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete material to control dust and provide adequate drainage. 
(3)  The setback of any overhead canopy or weather protection, free-standing or projecting from the station structure, shall not be less than ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line, nor less than twenty (20) feet from an adjacent property line. 
(4)  Open or dead storage of motor vehicles shall not be permitted for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(5)  No sales of motor vehicles, trailers and campers is permitted. 
(6)  At the boundaries of a residential district or use, the property (including parking areas and driveways) shall be screened in compliance with article VII. 
(7)  Renting of recreational vehicles, campers, trailers, or motor vehicles shall be allowed as an accessory use, provided that: 
a.  Such is limited to thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal use. 
b.  The vehicles or rental equipment storage area is fenced and screened from view of any public right-of-way or residential district or use in compliance with article VII. 
(8)  All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residential uses. Such lighting shall be in compliance with article VII. 
(9)  A curb not less than six (6) inches above grade shall separate motor vehicle service areas from public sidewalks and landscaped yards. 
(10)  All signage shall be in compliance with article X. 
(11)  Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands with proper protection from motor vehicles. 
(12)  The following minimum requirements for yards and setbacks, including standards applicable to the underlying zoning district, shall be observed in the development of motor fuel stations: 
Lot Width 
(feet) Front Yard 
(feet) Side Yard Rear Yard 
(feet) Pump 
Setback 
(feet) Adj. to 
Another Lot 
(feet) Adj. to 
Street 
(feet) Motor Fuel Station 150 60 30 60 30 25 Truck Stop 200 80 60 80 60 30  
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-255. - Satellite television antennas. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for the installation and placement of satellite television antennas. Satellite television antennas, as regulated by this chapter, are dish type antennas greater than one (1) meter (39.37 inches) in diameter used in the reception of television communication signals from orbiting satellites. These antennas shall be allowed to be placed in a position to receive a usable satellite signal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Usable satellite signal shall constitute signal strength capable of providing television receiver picture quality equivalent to reception from local commercial stations or cable television. 
(b)  If a usable satellite signal is not obtainable, the applicant may request a variance from the appropriate section of this chapter, upon demonstration of such inability to receive a usable satellite signal. The procedures for such a variance shall be in accordance with article II, division 5. 
(c)  Installation and location requirements for satellite dish antennas are as follows: 
(1)  Satellite television antennas shall be placed in rear or side yards only in all zoning districts. All satellite television antennas shall have set backs from adjacent property lines so that antenna placement and usage will not infringe on neighboring property. 
(2)  Satellite television antennas may be placed on the roof of a building in accordance with Uniform Building Code requirements and accepted engineering standards. 
(3)  The distance of guy wires or any supportive device for satellite television antennas shall be at least two (2) feet from the property line. 
(4)  All satellite television antennas shall be properly grounded and have their electrical wiring securely supported or buried underground in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 
(5)  Satellite television antennas placed in required yards shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  Not more than one (1) satellite television antenna shall be allowed in any single-family residential zone on any lot less than one-half acre in size. More than one (1) dish may be allowed if the property owner holds a valid amateur radio license and is using the additional dishes for experimentation or non-commercial microwave reception. Any noncommercial satellite television antenna may not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter. 
(7)  In all residential districts, satellite television antennas shall be located and designed to reduce visual impact from surrounding properties and public streets. 
(8)  Satellite television antennas used for demonstration or display purposes by commercial entities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period of up to thirty (30) days. 
(9)  All satellite television antennas must be placed in a permanent foundation within thirty (30) days of operation unless inclement weather makes such placement unobtainable. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(6), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-256-26-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 26-276. - Generally. 
(a)  This division applies to planned unit developments (PUD). 
(b)  This article is intended to encourage efficient use of land and public services, and a more flexible means of land development through site design and architecture. These developments may occur on vacant land or in developed areas of the community which require rehabilitation. It is further intended that planned unit developments reflect changes in technology and land development. Development types regulated in this division include: 
(1)  Condominiums. 
(2)  Townhomes. 
(3)  Multi-family dwellings with more than eight (8) dwelling units. 
(4)  Residential development of varying densities (i.e. single/multi-family). 
(5)  Commercial-residential mixed use developments. 
(6)  Planned commercial developments. 
(7)  Planned industrial developments and parks. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(1)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-277. - Procedures and requirements for establishment. 
    The following provisions apply to a planned unit development: 
(1)  An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed based upon procedures established by article II, division 4. Planned unit developments shall follow all requirements for conditional use permits. 
(2)  The conditional use permit application shall be accompanied by a development plan, drawn to a scale of not more than fifty (50) feet per inch, showing the following: 
a.  The entire outline, overall dimensions and area of the tract and location of all roadways and structures on site. 
b.  The uses, zoning and ownership of all adjacent properties within one hundred (100) feet of the tract boundaries including the location of all structures thereon and the right-of-way width and travelled width of all adjacent public roadways. 
c.  The existing and proposed topography of the tract with contour intervals not greater than five (5) feet. 
d.  The location, general exterior dimensions and approximate gross floor areas of all proposed buildings. 
e.  The type of each use proposed to occupy each building and the approximate amount of building floor area devoted to each separate use. 
f.  The proposed location, arrangement and number of automobile parking stalls. 
g.  The proposed location, arrangement and general dimensions of all truck loading facilities. 
h.  The location and dimensions of all vehicular entrances, exits, and driveways, and their relation ships to all existing or proposed public streets. 
i.  The location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits and walks. 
j.  The general drainage system. 
k.  The location and dimensions of all walls, fences and plantings designed to screen the proposed district from adjacent uses. 
l.  The types of all ground covers. 
m.  Standards for exterior finish, exterior lighting, location and type of exterior signs, architectural style, and any other variables which will be controlled in the design of buildings in the development area. 
n.  Location and type of storage facilities for waste. 
o.  A proposed schedule of construction. If the construction of the proposed planned unit development is to be in stages, then the components contained in each stage must be clearly delineated. The development schedule shall indicate the starting date and the completion date of the total development plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(1)(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-278. - Property control. 
(a)  In order that the purposes of this article may be achieved, the property shall be in single ownership or under the management and supervision of a central authority or otherwise subject to such supervisory lease or ownership control as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to the use, occupancy or sale or the execution of contracts for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tract, condominium, townhouse, or apartment, a common area, a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions or an equivalent document and a set of floor plans shall be filed with the city. The filing with the city shall be made prior to the filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of the county. 
(c)  Approval of the city shall be secured as to the documents described in subsection (b). 
(d)  The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, or equivalent document, shall specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses, or apartments shall subject the properties to the terms of the declaration. 
(e)  If applicable, the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owners' association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners shall be members of the association or corporation, which shall maintain all common properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess individual property owners' proportionate shares of joint or common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the city attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing effective private control. 
(f)  The declaration shall additionally, amongst other things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the city or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and in the event the city incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or corporation, then the city shall have the right to assess each property its pro rata share of said expenses. Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each such assessment is made and, in addition, each such assessment, together with such interest thereon and such costs of collection thereof, shall also be a personal obligation of the person who was the owner of such property at the time when the assessment became payable. 
(g)  It is the intent of this division to require subdivision of property simultaneous with application for conditional use. The subdivision and/or platting of land as a planned unit development shall be subject to such requirements for approval and recording with the county register of deeds as have been established by the city. 
(h)  Condominiums shall comply to all applicable state statutes regarding their development. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(1)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-279. - General development provisions. 
    The following provisions apply to planned unit development: 
(1)  Yards. 
a.  The front and side yard restrictions at the periphery of the planned unit development site as a minimum shall be the same as imposed in the respective districts. 
b.  No building shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curbline along those roadways which are part of the internal street platform. 
(2)  Roadways. 
a.  Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface to twenty (20) feet or more in width and shall be so designed as to permit the city fire trucks to provide protection to each building. 
b.  No portion of the required twenty (20) feet road system may be used in calculating required off-street parking space. 
(3)  Public services. 
a.  The proposed project shall be served by city water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer. Fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations as necessary to provide fire protection. All utilities shall be constructed to standards specified by the city engineer. 
b.  Where more than one (1) property is served from the same service line, a shutoff valve must be located in such a way that each unit's service may be disconnected by the city. This valve is in addition to the shutoff valve in the street. 
c.  Where more than one (1) unit is served by a sanitary sewer lateral which exceeds three hundred (300) feet in length, provision must be made for a manhole to allow adequate cleaning and maintenance of the lateral. All maintenance and cleaning shall be the responsibility of the property owners' association, or owner. 
(4)  Building types. In addition to the conventional type of construction and arrangements of buildings, structures, uses and property as allowed by this chapter, it shall be permissible to cluster, adjoin and attach structures in a row house, townhouse, patio home or similar style of development within the planned unit development. The number of units or structures by density bonus provisions, shall not exceed the number of units or structures allowable under the standard development requirements of the district classification which applies to said property. 
(5)  Subdivision and ownership. It shall be permissible within a planned unit development to subdivide properties into lesser size parcels for individual ownership and create common open space areas in undivided proportions under joint ownerships. Such ownership arrangements are commonly defined as condominium and/or cooperative developments. The joint area of the project must, however, conform to the minimum area requirements established for the respective district classification which jointly applies to said property. 
(6)  Minimum project size. 
a.  Within residential districts there are no minimum area requirements for a planned unit development. All developments must be planned to follow good design practice. 
b.  Within a commercial or industrial district a planned unit development shall not be applied to a parcel of land containing less than two and one-half (21/2) acres. 
(7)  Density bonus. As a consequence of all planned unit development's planned and integrated character, the number of dwelling units allowed within the respective zoning district may be increased by five (5) percent. The building, parking and similar requirements for these extra units shall be observed in compliance with this chapter. 
(8)  Project initiation. Construction on all planned unit developments must begin within nine (9) months of project approval (conditional use permit issuance). Failure to begin the project within the above stated time voids the permit. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(1)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-280. - Review and evaluation. 
    The review and evaluation of a proposed planned unit development and supportive materials and plans shall include but not be limited to the following criteria: 
(1)  Adequate property control is established and provided to protect the individual owner's rights and property values and to define legal responsibilities for maintenance and upkeep. 
(2)  The interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public right-of-ways does not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the safety of the project residents and general public. 
(3)  A sufficient amount of usable open space is provided. 
(4)  The arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory uses does not unreasonably disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding uses. 
(5)  The architectural design of the project is compatible with the surrounding area. 
(6)  The drainage and utility system plans are submitted to the city engineer and are subject to his approval. 
(7)  The development schedule insures a logical development of the site which will protect the public interest and concerned landowners. 
(8)  Principal and accessory uses, and requirements are in compliance with the district provisions in which the development is intended. 
(9)  The performance standards of this chapter are complied with. 
(10)  Planned unit developments in shoreland management areas meet regulations and requirements listed in article VII. Such developments shall be subject to review by the state department of natural resources. 
(11)  The provisions of article II, division 4 are considered and satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(1)(E), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-281-26-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZERO LOT LINE DWELLINGS 

Sec. 26-296. - Twinhomes. 
    Twinhomes shall be allowed in the R-2 and R-3 residential districts subject to the following: 
(1)  The required lot area and width for each dwelling in a twinhome shall be at a minimum one-half of the required lot area and width for a detached single-family dwelling in the underlying zoning districts. 
(2)  Each dwelling in a twinhome shall have a front yard of not less than thirty (30) feet, a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet, and a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Dwellings on corner lots must maintain the corner yard setback required by the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  Twinhomes shall be governed by the height and ground coverage regulations for the underlying zoning district. 
(4)  Deed restrictions shall be recorded with the property requiring that the structure and yard areas shall have a uniform exterior appearance in terms of color, design and maintenance. These restrictions shall be in the form of a homeowners association or homeowners agreement. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(2)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-297. - Other dwellings. 
    This section does not apply to twinhomes. Zero lot line dwellings with four (4) or less attached single-family dwelling units shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Zero lot line dwellings may be erected in such a manner that two (2) single-family dwellings share a common rear lot line or that three or four single-family dwellings share common walls with other dwellings, and said walls are located on the rear or the side lot lines. 
(2)  The zero lot line dwelling described in subsection (1) shall be permitted uses in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 residential districts and as a conditional use in the R-1 residential district. The zoning standards shall be proportionate to the minimum standards for single-family attached dwellings in the relevant zoning district. 
(3)  Zero lot line dwellings with three (3) or four (4) single-family dwellings, which share common walls and said common walls are shared on the side lot lines only, shall be required to provide access to the rear yards of all of the dwellings via a platted public alley. 
(4)  Deed restrictions shall be recorded with the property requiring that the structure and yard areas shall have a uniform exterior appearance in terms of color, design and maintenance. These restrictions shall be in the form of a homeowners agreement or homeowners association. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(2)(B), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 99-10, 7-12-99) 
Secs. 26-298-26-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS 

Sec. 26-316. - Scope. 
    This division applies to manufactured housing parks. 
Sec. 26-317. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to develop or extend any manufactured home park unless a valid permit is issued by the office of the city engineer. Approval of such permits shall be made by the city council. 
(b)  Applications. All applications for permits shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Location and legal description of the development. 
(3)  Complete site plans for the specific development. The plans should include the topography and grading plan for the site; layout of mobile home lots, roadways and walkways; location of all utilities; drainage plans; location of permanent buildings; landscaping and screening plan; park areas and recreational equipment. 
(c)  Review of application. The planning commission shall review all applications for permits issued hereunder and shall hold such hearings as deemed necessary. The findings and recommendations of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the city council for appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(1)-(B)(3), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-318. - Inspections. 
    The building official shall make such inspections of manufactured home parks as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter, including the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for such purpose. It shall be the duty of the park management to give the building official free access to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(4), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-319. - Repairs. 
    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of the park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as necessary to effect compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(4), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-320. - Miscellaneous responsibilities of park management. 
(a)  The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this section. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator of the manufactured home park to keep a register containing a record of all manufactured home owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the name and address of each manufactured home occupant; the name and address of the owner of each manufactured home and motor vehicle by which it is towed; the make, model, year and license number of each manufactured home and motor vehicle, and the state, territory or country issuing such license; and the date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home. The register shall be available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, the building official, public health officials and other officials whose duty necessitates acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3) years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(4), (B)(10), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-321. - General requirements. 
    Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property, health and safety of the occupants. The site should not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion shall be subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-322. - Area. 
    Each manufactured home park shall be of sufficient size to contain at least ten (10) fully-developed lots and required accessory structures and areas. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-323. - Lot area. 
    The minimum lot area per manufactured home within the park shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-324. - Lot width. 
    The minimum lot width per manufactured home shall be forty-five (45) feet. Each lot shall be clearly defined by a permanent marker in the ground. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-325. - Required separation between manufactured homes. 
    Such homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least twenty (20) feet or the sum of the heights of both units. Manufactured homes placed end-to-end must have a minimum separation of fifteen (15) feet. An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet, carport, windbreak, or covered porch shall, for purposes of separation requirements, be considered to be part of the manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-326. - Open space. 
    A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet per manufactured home shall be provided for definable play areas and open space within the park. Such areas of open space and play area shall not be areas included within any setback, nor shall they include any areas of less than twenty (20) feet in length or width. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-327. - Required setbacks. 
    All manufactured homes shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any property line abutting a public right-of-way, and at least twenty (20) feet from all other property lines. There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet between the manufactured home stand and abutting park road. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-328. - Landscaping and screening requirements. 
    Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the park shall be paved, or covered with stone, screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. All parks located adjacent to residential, recreational, commercial or industrial land uses shall provide required screening as defined in section 26-554. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-329. - Cluster development. 
    Cluster development shall be encouraged. The planning commission and city council may modify or vary the required setbacks, lot area and open space requirements in order to accommodate this development. Such developments should use sound planning design in their formulation. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-330. - Density. 
    Notwithstanding the type of development concept used, the maximum density shall be eight (8) manufactured homes per acre. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(5), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-331. - Accessory buildings. 
    One (1) accessory building per individual lot is required to provide outside storage of equipment and refuse. The accessory buildings shall be a minimum of forty-eight (48) square feet and designed of weather resistant material that will enhance the general appearance of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(6), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-332. - Street system and parking. 
(a)  General requirements. All manufactured home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Such access shall be provided by streets, driveways or other means. 
(b)  Park entrance. Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. No parking shall be permitted on the park entrance street for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from its point of beginning. 
(c)  Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All streets except minor streets shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width from face of curb to face of curb. Streets without curb shall be considered minor streets. 
(2)  Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to five hundred (500) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having an outside roadway diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet. All dead-end streets shall be marked with approved signs at the entrance to the dead-end street. 
(3)  Minor streets twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be acceptable only if less than five hundred (500) feet long and serving less than eight (8) manufactured homes or of any length if manufactured home lots abut on one (1) side only. 
(d)  Car parking. Off-street parking areas for the use of park occupants and guests shall be furnished at a rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each manufactured home lot, of which at least one-half of the spaces may be in compounds. All off-street parking areas shall be paved concrete or bituminous surface or crushed rock treated with oil so it is dust free. 
(e)  Required illumination of park street systems. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night: 
(1)  All parts of the park street systems, 0.6 footcandle; and 
(2)  Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps, individually illuminated, with a minimum of 0.6 footcandle. 
(Ord. No. 7.09, § 7.09(4)(B)(7), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-333. - Street construction and design standards. 
(a)  Pavements. All streets shall be provided with a paved concrete or bituminous surface. Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base. Street surfaces shall be maintained, free of cracks, holes and other hazards. 
(b)  Grades. Longitudinal grades of all streets shall range between 0.4 and eight (8) percent. Transverse grades (crown) of all streets shall be sufficient to insure adequate transverse drainage. If conditions warrant, an adequate storm sewer system shall be provided to dispose of all runoff water. The storm sewer system may be connected to existing city storm sewer system upon city approval. 
(c)  Intersections. Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection, streets shall be at right angles. A distance of at least eighty-five (85) feet shall be maintained between the centerlines of offset intersection streets. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one (1) point shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(8), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-334. - Walks. 
(a)  General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual manufactured homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. 
(b)  Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of four and one-half (41/2) feet. 
(c)  Individual walks. All manufactured homes shall be connected to common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two (2) feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(9), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-335. - Patio. 
    Each manufactured home lot shall have a four-inch concrete patio with minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(10), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-336. - Trees. 
    A minimum of one (1) tree per lot is required. In open area park areas, a minimum of twenty (20) trees per acre is required. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(11), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-337. - Skirting. 
    All manufactured homes shall have skirts around the entire trailer made of metal, plastic, fiberglass or comparable, noncombustible material approved by the building inspector and shall be painted to match the appropriate trailer so that it will enhance the general appearance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(12), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-338. - Water supply and sewage disposal. 
    All manufactured homes shall be serviced by the city water and sanitary sewer systems. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(13), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-339. - Service building and other community service facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities, laundry facilities, indoor recreation areas, and commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park occupants. 
(b)  Structural requirements for buildings. All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather. 
(c)  Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisances both on the property on which used and on neighboring property, and shall comply with all appropriate ordinances, laws or other regulations. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(14), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-340. - Refuse handling. 
    The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(15), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-341. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Grounds, buildings and structures. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the city health ordinances. 
(b)  Parks. Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(c)  Storage areas. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least one (1) foot above ground. 
(d)  Screens. Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
(e)  Brush, weeds and grass. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac, and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(16), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-342. - Fuel supply and storage. 
    Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems and no outside or buried fuel tanks will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(17), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-343. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Litter, rubbish, etc. Manufactured home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable material. 
(b)  Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers rated for classes A, B and C fires shall be kept visible in service buildings and at other locations conveniently and readily accessible for use by all of the occupants and shall be maintained in good operating condition. Their capacity shall not be less than ten (10) pounds. 
(c)  Fires. Fires shall be made only in stoves, indoor incinerators, and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
(d)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park water supply system is capable to serve them in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The water supply system shall permit the operation of standard city fire hydrants. 
(2)  Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any manufactured home, service building or other structure in the park. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(4)(B)(18), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-344-26-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 26-376. - Permitted uses. 
    Wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted in the A agricultural district, B-4 business districts, I-1 and I-2 industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(7)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-377. - Permit. 
    A valid building permit shall be obtained before installation of a wind energy conversion system. Such systems must comply with Uniform Building Code standards (as adopted by the state), standards listed in this division, and accepted engineering standards. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(7)(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-378. - Location. 
(a)  No part of any wind energy conversion system may, at any time, extend over any property line. This includes the full arc area created by any rotor (blade/wind collector) used in the system. 
(b)  No part of any wind energy conversion system or any equipment used in connection therewith or connected thereto shall be constructed or maintained in or upon any drainage or utility easements. 
(c)  No such system shall be constructed within twenty (20) feet laterally of any overhead power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines or service drops). Setback from underground distribution lines shall be at least five (5) feet. 
(d)  No such system shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a residential use or R residential district. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(7)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-379. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  No supporting tower for a wind energy conversion system shall exceed a height of one hundred (100) feet, measured from the base of the tower to the highest point of the tower, or highest extension of the rotor, whichever is greater. There shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet between the lowest arc made by the rotor and the ground. 
(b)  A wind energy conversion system's tower shall be self-supporting (such as a latticed, tubular steel, or octahedron tower). The tower and tower foundation shall be designed to resist two (2) times the wind uplift calculated pursuant the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the state. Calculations documenting such compliance shall be provided and attested to by the manufacturer and installer. 
(c)  Wind energy conversion systems utilizing a rotary blade shall not have an arc diameter greater than thirty-three (33) feet. 
(d)  Such systems shall be equipped with an automatic overspeed control device. 
(e)  Such systems shall be adequately grounded and designed to withstand lighting strikes. 
(f)  Electrical equipment and connections on wind energy conversion systems shall comply to all applicable state and local government regulations. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(7)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-380. - Operation and maintenance. 
(a)  Wind energy conversion system shall be guarded against unauthorized climbing. The first twelve (12) feet of the tower shall be unclimbable by design or be enclosed by a six-foot high nonclimbable fence with a secured access. 
(b)  The system shall be designed and operated so as to not cause radio and television interference. 
(c)  Such systems shall not exceed noise levels as stated in article VII. 
(d)  Interface of a wind energy conversion system's operation with the consumer's electrical service shall be pursuant to all applicable federal and state regulations. The owner shall notify his local electric utility company in advance of said application and shall submit an agreement for co-generation if connected to the electrical utility service. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.09(7)(E), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-381-26-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SHORELAND MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-501. - Policy. 
    The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public water, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise development of shorelands of public waters. The state legislature has delegated responsibility to the municipalities of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface water, preserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This responsibility is recognized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.11(II)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-502. - Shoreland management classification. 
    In order to guide the wise development and utilization of shorelands of protected waters for the preservation of water quality, natural characteristics, economic values and the general health, safety and welfare, certain protected waters in the city have been given a shoreland management classification. These protected waters of the city have been classified by the commissioner of natural resources as follows: 
General Development Lakes DNR I.D. # Hall Lake 46-31 Amber Lake 46-34 Sisseton Lake 46-25 Budd Lake 46-30 Lake George 46-24  
Tributary Streams Cedar Creek Center Creek Dutch Creek George Lake Outlet Lily Creek  
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.11(II)(B)(1), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-503. - Shoreland overlay district (SOD). 
(a)  The shorelands of the city are designated as the shoreland overlay district. The purpose of the shoreland overlay district is to provide for the wise utilization of shoreland areas in order to preserve the quality and natural character of these protected waters of the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses in the district are all permitted uses allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying this shoreland overlay district as indicated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(c)  Conditional uses in the district are as follows: 
(1)  All conditional uses and applicable attached conditions allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying this shoreland overlay district as indicated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(2)  Boathouses. 
(d)  Any uses of shorelands in existence prior to June 30, 1984, which are permitted within the applicable underlying zoning district, but do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks, or other dimensional requirements of this division are substandard uses. Substandard uses other than uses regulated in subsection (e) shall be allowed to continue. However, any structural alteration or addition to a substandard use on waterfront lots that will increase the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed. 
(e)  Prohibited uses are in the district. Any uses which are not permitted or conditional uses as regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying this shoreland overlay district as indicated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.11(II)(B)(2), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-504-26-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC LAND USE RESTRICTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 92-13, adopted Dec. 14, 1992, amended Ch. 26, Art. VI, Div. 2, to read as herein set out in §§ 26-516-26-527. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, §§ 26-516-26-525 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.11 (II)(C)-(H), adopted June 30, 1986. 

Sec. 26-516. - Lots and setbacks. 
    In order to reduce the effects of overcrowding, to prevent pollution of waters of the state, to maintain property values and to maintain natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas, the following standards shall be applied to all shorelands of the protected waters within the city as listed in Division 1 of this article: 
(1)  Lot area: 
Minimum Lot Area for Sewered Lots (square feet) 
Waterfront Lots Other Lots Single 15,000 10,000 Duplex 26,000 17,500 Triplex 38,000 25,000 Quad 49,000 32,500  
Minimum Lot Area for Nonsewered Lots (square feet) 
Waterfront Lots Other Lots Single 20,000 40,000 Duplex 40,000 80,500 Triplex 60,000 120,000 Quad 80,000 160,000  
(2)  Water frontage and lot width: 
Minimum Water Frontage and Lot Width for Sewered Lots 
Waterfront Lots Other Lots Single  85  85 Duplex 135 135 Triplex 195 190 Quad 255 245  
Minimum Water Frontage and Lot Width for Nonsewered Lots 
Waterfront Lots Other Lots Single 100 150 Duplex 180 265 Triplex 260 375 Quad 340 490  
(3)  Structure setback from ordinary high water mark: 
a.  For sewered lots: fifty (50) feet. 
b.  For unsewered lots: one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Structure setbacks from road: 
a.  Highways (federal, state & county), fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Municipal roads, thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Structure setback from top of bluff, thirty (30) feet, and no structures except stairways, lifts and landings are allowed in bluff impact zone. 
(6)  Structure setback from unplatted cemeteries, fifty (50) feet. 
(7)  Sewage systems from ordinary high water level, seventy-five (75) feet. 
(8)  Where the requirements of the underlying zoning district as shown on the official map are more restrictive the more restrictive standards shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-517. - Agricultural use standards. 
    General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and fifty (50) feet from the ordinary high water level. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-518. - Significant historic sites. 
    No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the value of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-519. - Elevation of lowest floor. 
    The lower floor level shall be at least three (3) feet above the highest known water level or three (3) feet above the ordinary highwater level, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-520. - Stairways, lifts and landings. 
    Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements: 
(1)  Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four (4) feet in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments. 
(2)  Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty-two (32) square feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments. 
(3)  Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings. 
(4)  Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion. 
(5)  Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical. 
(6)  Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of subsections (1)-(5) hereinabove are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1340. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-521. - Shoreland alterations and development standards. 
(a)  Steep slopes. The city shall evaluate possible erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation. 
(b)  Vegetation alterations. 
(1)  Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by this division are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow. 
(2)  Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in this ordinance is allowed subject to the following standards: 
a.  Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is located. 
b.  In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented access structures or facilities, provided that: 
1.  The screening of structures, vehicles, or facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions is not substantially reduced; 
2.  Along rivers, existing sharing of water surface is preserved; and 
3.  The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches which are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards. 
c.  Use of fertilizer and pesticides in the shoreland management district shall be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into the shore impact zone or public water by the use of earth, vegetation, or both. 
(c)  Topographic alterations, grading and filling. 
(1)  Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate permit. Grading and filling standards in this section shall be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways. 
(2)  A grading and filling permit will be required for: 
a.  The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones. 
b.  The movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones. 
(3)  The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals: 
a.  Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 wetland shall be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland: 
1.  Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention; 
2.  Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage; 
3.  Fish and wildlife habitat; 
4.  Recreational use; 
5.  Shoreland or bank stabilization; and 
6.  Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others. 
b.  Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time. 
c.  Mulches or similar material shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover shall be established as soon as possible. 
d.  Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature shall be used. 
e.  Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts of the United States Soil Conservation Service. 
f.  Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope. 
g.  Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes shall be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and shall not create finished slopes of thirty (30) percent or greater. 
h.  Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact zones. 
i.  Any alterations below the ordinary high water level or public waters shall first be authorized by the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources under Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.245. 
j.  Alterations of topography shall only be allowed if they are permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties. 
k.  Placement of natural rock rip rap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter-blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical, the landward extent of the rip rap is within ten (10) feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the rip rap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three (3) feet. 
(4)  Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, shall be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources has approved the proposed connection to public waters. 
(d)  Placement and design of roads, driveways and parking areas. 
(1)  Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials. 
(2)  Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts. 
(3)  Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of this division shall be met. 
(e)  Stormwater management. The following general and specific standards shall apply. 
(1)  General standards. 
a.  When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces shall be to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters. 
b.  Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site. 
c.  When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities. 
(2)  Specific standards. 
a.  Impervious surface coverage limitations for lots or properties within the shoreland management district are as follows: 
1.  Riparian lots or properties (Tier "A") are allowed to cover not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total square footage. 
2.  Non-riparian lots or property within five hundred (500) feet of the ordinary high water level (Tier "B") are allowed to cover not more than thirty (30) percent of the total square footage. 
3.  Non-riparian lots or property within five hundred (500) to one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high water level (Tier "C") are allowed to cover not more than forty (40) percent of the total square footage. 
4.  Any lots or properties zoned business or industrial and which are new developments are limited to seventy (70) percent impervious surface coverage and subject to the city's general storm water management standards which are constructed on site to remove sediment and/or oil from surface water leaving the site. Any business or industrial parcels or lots with existing facilities shall be allowed to reconstruct or demolish and rebuild to the existing impervious conditions provided the usage, building, and structures comply with section 26-6 of this Code. 
5.  If the boundary line for the five hundred (500) foot or the one thousand (1,000) foot line divides a lot, the lot shall be designated to be entirely in the tier that the majority of the area lies in. 
6.  Each residential lot or parcel within the shoreland management zone will be allowed a maximum twenty-two-foot wide impervious driveway which will be excluded from the impervious coverage calculation. The excluded driveway area must extend from the garage or primary structure to the street right-of-way via a route that is perpendicular and most direct to the street right-of-way. If a residential lot or parcel of land has more than one (1) garage, the driveway exclusion area shall be computed as twenty-two-foot wide from the garage nearest the street to the street right-of-way. Any additional driveways or driveway widths will be included in the impervious lot computation. 
7.  Any property clubbed with an abutting lot pursuant to city Code section 26-205(9)(f) will have each lot's impervious surface figured separately. 
b.  When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts. 
c.  New construction of stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge. 
d.  Extractive use standards. Processing machinery shall be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs. An extractive use site development and restoration plan shall be developed, approved by the city, and followed over the course of operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It shall also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and shall clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 96-11, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 2016-06 , 10-24-16) 
Sec. 26-522. - Subdivisions/platting provisions. 
(a)  Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision, authorized under this subdivision, shall be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the city shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. 
(b)  Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions shall conform to all official controls of the city. A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one (1) or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with this ordinance and MPCA Rules Chapter 7080 can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements, including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two (2) standard soil treatment systems, where public sewer is unavailable. Lots that would require use of holding tanks will not be approved. 
(c)  Information requirements. Subdivision applications will include the following information: 
(1)  Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less from United States Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site characteristics. 
(2)  The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes, section 505.02, subdivision 1, to be shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources. 
(3)  Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods. 
(4)  Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities. 
(5)  Location of one hundred-year flood plain areas from existing maps or data. 
(d)  Platting. All subdivisions shall be processed by the city as plats in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 505. 
(e)  Dedications. If there are land or easement dedications, there shall be easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands. 
(f)  Controlled access or recreational lots. Lots intended as controlled access to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by nonriparian lots within a subdivision shall meet or exceed the sizing criteria in this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-523. - Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semipublic uses. 
(a)  Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public water may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this ordinance, the uses shall be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures; 
(2)  Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons shall centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need. 
(3)  Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards: 
a.  No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or upon public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff. 
b.  Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs shall not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall not be located higher than ten (10) feet above the ground, and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters. 
c.  Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights. 
(b)  Uses without water-oriented needs may be located on lots or parcels without public frontage, or if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-524. - Planned Unit Development (PUD's). 
(a)  Types of PUD's permissible. Planned unit developments (PUD's) are allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land. The land use districts in which they are an allowable use are identified in the land use district descriptions of this ordinance and the official zoning map. Also, any multifamily buildings over four (4) units in the shoreland area shall comply with the PUD regulations of this section. 
(b)  Processing of PUD's. Planned unit developments shall be processed as a conditional use, except that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six (6) or less new dwelling units or sites since the date this ordinance was adopted is permissible as a permitted use provided the total project density does not exceed the allowable densities calculated in the project density evaluation procedures. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS) is complete. 
(c)  Application for PUD's. Application for a PUD shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan and/or plat for the project showing locations of property boundaries, surface water features, existing and proposed structures and other facilities, land alterations, sewage treatment and water supply systems (where public systems will not be provided), and topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less. When a PUD is a combined commercial and residential development, the site plan and/or plat shall indicate and distinguish which buildings and portions of the project are residential, commercial, or a combination of the two. 
(2)  A property owners association agreement (for residential PUD's) with mandatory membership, and all terms in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(3)  Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other instruments that: 
a.  Properly address future vegetative and topographic alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft, and construction of commercial buildings in residential PUD's; and 
b.  Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of open space in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in this ordinance. 
(4)  When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project and the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied. 
(5)  Those additional documents as requested by the planning commission that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will function. 
(d)  Site "suitable area" evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments shall be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation. 
(1)  The project parcel shall be divided into tiers by locating one (1) or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level at three hundred-foot intervals, proceeding landward. 
(2)  The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites. 
(e)  Residential and commercial PUD density evaluation. The procedures for determining the base density of a PUD and density increase multiplies are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other tier closer. 
(1)  Residential PUD base density evaluation: 
a.  The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes or, for rivers, the single residential lot width standard times the tier depth, which shall then be used to yield a base density of dwelling units or site for each tier. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments are then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analysis herein and the design criteria. 
(2)  Commercial PUD base density evaluation: 
a.  Determine the average inside area size of units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites. Computation of inside area sizes need not include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space. 
b.  Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table: 
Commercial Planned Unit Development 
Floor Area Ratios* 
Public Water Classes 
*Average Unit Floor 
area (sq. ft.) All Lakes and 
River Segments   200 .040   300 .048   400 .056   500 .065   600 .072   700 .082   800 .091   900 .099 1,000 .108 1,100 .116 1,200 .125 1,300 .133 1,400 .142 1,500 .150  
*For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for two hundred (200) square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios listed for one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at four hundred (400) square feet. Manufactured home sites in recreational camping areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
c.  Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for units or sites. 
d.  Divide the total floor area by tier computed in subsection c. hereinabove by the average inside area size determined in subsection a. hereinabove. This yields a base number of units and sites for each tier. 
e.  Proposed locations and numbers of units or sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the tier, density and suitability analysis herein and the design analysis and criteria herein. 
(3)  Density increase multipliers: 
a.  Increases to the unit or site base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards are met or exceeded and the design criteria are satisfied. The allowable density increases below will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are increased to at least fifty (50) percent greater than the minimum setback or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the city and the setback is at least twenty-five (25) percent greater than the minimum setback. 
b.  Allowable unit or site density increases for residential or commercial planned unit developments: 
Density Evaluation Tiers Maximum Density Increase 
Within Each Tier (Percent) First  50 Second 100 Third 200 Fourth 200 Fifth 200  
(f)  Maintenance and design criteria. 
(1)  Maintenance and administration requirements. 
a.  Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate provisions shall be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development. 
b.  Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means shall be provided to ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments shall include all of the following protections: 
1.  Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUD's); 
2.  Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine maintenance prohibited; 
3.  Construction of additional buildings or storage or vehicles and other materials prohibited; and 
4.  Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited. 
c.  Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all residential planned unit developments shall use an owners association with the following features: 
1.  Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site purchaser and any successive purchasers; 
2.  Each member shall pay a pro rata share of the association's expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites; 
3.  Assessments shall be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and 
4.  The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities. 
(2)  Open space requirements. Planned unit development shall contain open space meeting all of the following criteria. 
a.  At least fifty (50) percent of the total project area shall be preserved as open space; 
b.  Dwelling units or sites, or road right-of-ways, or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water oriented accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space; 
c.  Open space shall include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries; 
d.  Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners or dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units or sites, and by the general public; 
e.  Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems; 
f.  Open space shall not include commercial facilities or uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities; 
g.  The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetarian, and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means; and 
h.  The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, shall be included as open space. For residential PUD's, at least fifty (50) percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least seventy (70) percent of the shore impact zone area of new developments shall be preserved in its natural or existing state. For commercial PUD's, at least fifty (50) percent of the shore impact zone shall be preserved in its natural state. 
(3)  Erosion control and stormwater management. Erosion control and stormwater management plans shall be developed and the PUD shall: 
a.  Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. This shall be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques shall be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and 
b.  Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious surface coverage within any tier shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tier area, except that for commercial PUD's thirty-five (35) percent impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan consistent with this subdivision. 
(4)  Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization and design of facilities and structures shall be done according to the following standards: 
a.  Planned unit development shall be connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems shall be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and this subdivision. On-site sewage treatment systems shall be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors shall be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system. 
b.  Dwelling units or sites shall be clustered into one (1) or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They shall be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification: Setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the ordinary high water level shall be increased in accordance with this subdivision for developments with density increases; 
c.  Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming area, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, shall be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability shall include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soil, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft shall not exceed one (1) for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercially used harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers; 
d.  Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shoreland by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the city, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening shall be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided; 
e.  Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented accessory structures, shall meet the required principal structure setback and shall be centralized; and 
f.  Water oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in this subdivision and are centralized. 
(g)  Conversions. The city may allow existing resorts or other land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of the following standards are met: 
(1)  Proposed conversions shall be initially evaluated using the same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these standards shall be identified. 
(2)  Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation facilities shall be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use permit. 
(3)  Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies shall be evaluated and reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion. These improvements shall include, where applicable, the following: 
a.  Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones; 
b.  Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from the water; and 
c.  If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations. The conditions shall also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced. 
(4)  Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed standards may be allowed for continue but shall not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the future. Efforts shall be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities by requiring seasonal use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-525. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses established by the city code. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply with shoreland areas: 
(1)  Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic vegetation, and soils conditions on the site shall be made to ensure: 
a.  The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction; 
b.  The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited; 
c.  The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatments; and 
d.  The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft. 
(2)  Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The city, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this subdivision. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level; 
b.  Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirements that additional vegetation be planted; and 
c.  Special provisions for the location design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-526. - Variances for substandard lots of record. 
    A variance for lot size can be considered only if the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard and was created compliant with official controls in effect at the time. If, in a group of two (2) or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any lots do not meet the area requirements, the lots must be combined to create one (1) or more lots meeting the area requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Sec. 26-527. - Notification procedures. 
(a)  Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources or the commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed plats shall include copies of the plats. 
(b)  A copy of approved amendments and plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources or the commissioner's designated representative and postmarked within ten (10) days or of final action. 
(Ord. No. 92-13, 12-14-92) 
Secs. 26-528-26-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-551. - Generally. 
    The guiding of urban development so as to develop a compatible relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained. Uses, whether permitted or conditional in any district shall conform to this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-552. - Glare and heat. 
    Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one (1) footcandle (meter reading) as measured from the centerline of said street. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall not exceed 0.4 footcandles (meter reading) as measured from said property. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-553. - Explosives. 
    Any use requiring the storage, utilization or manufacturing of products which could decompose by detonation shall be located not less than four hundred (400) feet from any R district line, provided that this section shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquified petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-554. - Screening. 
(a)  Screening shall be required in residential zones where: 
(1)  Any off-street parking area contains more than four (4) parking spaces and is within thirty (30) feet of an adjoining residential lot line; and 
(2)  Where the driveway to a parking area of more than six (6) parking spaces is within fifteen (15) feet of an adjoining residential lot line. 
(b)  Where any commercial or industrial use (parking, storage or structure) is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a residential zone, but not on the side of a business or industry considered to be the front as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Fencing or screening as required by this chapter shall consist of either a fence or greenbelt planting strip. 
(d)  A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of evergreen ground cover and shall be of sufficient width and density to provide screening of eighty (80) percent view for every square yard. This planting strip shall contain no structures or other use. Such planting strips shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height. Earth mounding or berms may be used but shall not be used to achieve more than three (3) feet of the required screen. Such plantings shall be set back at least three (3) feet from the property line to allow maintenance. The planting plan and type of shrub shall be approved by the planning commission based upon a recommendation by appropriate city staff. 
(e)  A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, treated or decay resistant wood, steel or a combination thereof. Such fence shall provide screening of eighty (80) percent view for every square yard and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height or be less than six (6) feet in height. Such fence shall not extend within fifteen (15) feet of any street or driveway opening onto a street. The design and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission based upon a recommendation by appropriate city staff. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-554.1. - Maintenance. 
    In all districts, all structures, required landscaping, and fences shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health or safety conditions. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(E), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-555. - Waste material. 
    Waste material shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system nor the sanitary sewer system without a permit from the city. If said permit is not granted a method of disposal shall be devised which will not require continuous land acquisition for permanent operation and will not cause a detrimental effect to the adjacent land. Should the waste be of a solid form rather than fluid the storage area shall be so located and fenced as to be removed from public view. In all districts, all waste material debris, refuse, garbage, materials not currently in use for construction or otherwise regulated herein shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a tight fitting closed container for such purposes. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such vacant land free of waste material and noxious weeds. Existing uses shall comply with this provision within six (6) months following enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(F), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-556. - Drainage. 
(a)  No land shall be developed, and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off causing flooding or erosion on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area or other suitable facility. Improvements resulting in increased surface run-off may be required to comply with the city's stormwater management ordinance, article IX. 
(b)  Water being discharged by sump pumps, downspouts, or other conduits shall be discharged on the property from which it is originated or be directed to the nearest street or storm sewer without crossing neighboring properties. Water directed over sidewalks or onto adjacent properties shall not cause a nuisance condition for the property owner or the general public. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(G), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-17 , 10-22-18) 
Sec. 26-557. - Traffic control. 
    The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on public streets, safety hazards or excessive traffic through residential areas. Traffic into and out of all business and industrial uses or areas shall in all cases be forward moving with no backing onto streets or pedestrian ways. No access drive to any lot shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any two (2) intersecting minor or collector street right-of-way lines nor within forty (40) feet of any two (2) intersecting major thoroughfare street right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(H), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-558. - Off-street loading. 
    In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(I), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-559. - Radiation and electrical emissions. 
    No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment including but not limited to radio and television reception other than that of the creator of the disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(J), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-560. - Odors. 
    The emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive shall not be permitted. The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state pollution control standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15 and as subsequently expanded. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(K), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-561. - Noise. 
(a)  All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness, and as measured at any property line, shall not exceed the following intensity in relation to sound frequency measured at a property line: 
Octave Band, 
Cycles Per Second Sound Levels in 
Decibels Measured 
at Property Line Period Within Which 
Existing Uses 
Must Comply Residence 
Districts Nonresidential 
Districts 37.5 to 75 58 73 5 years 75 to 150 54 69 150 to 300 50 65 300 to 600 46 61 600 to 1200 40 55 1200 to 2400 33 48 2400 to 4800 26 41 Over 4800 20 35  
(b)  The standards as established in this section shall conform to Minnesota noise control standards. 
(c)  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the above noise level regulations. 
(1)  Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  The noise of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(3)  Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads. 
(4)  The levels specified in clause one (1) above may be exceeded by ten (10) decibels for a single period, no longer than fifteen (15) minutes in length, in any one (1) day. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(L), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-562. - Vibration. 
    Vibration shall not be discernible at any property line to the human sense of feeling for three (3) minutes or more in any one (1) hour. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(M), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-563. - Smoke. 
    The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulate matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state pollution control standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15 and as subsequently expanded, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(1)(N), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-564. - Drainage plans. 
    In the case of multiple family dwellings and commercial and industrial developments, drainage plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for his review and comments, with the final drainage plans and development subject to his approval. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(2), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-565. - Exterior storage. 
    All materials and equipment, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, shall be stored within a building or structure or full screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following: 
(1)  Clothes lines and poles. 
(2)  Recreational equipment and vehicles. 
(3)  Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the premises. 
(4)  Off-street parking of licensed and operational passenger vehicles and trucks. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(3), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-566. - Junkyards. 
    Automobile or farm implement salvage and wrecking operations, industrial metal and waste salvage operations, and junkyards are permitted uses in the I-2 general industry district. Such operations shall be conducted within an area enclosed with a fence not less than eight (8) feet in height. If such operation is adjacent to a public right-of-way or an R residential district, a screening fence is required to enclose the operation. Nonconforming existing operations have one (1) year from the effective date of this chapter in order to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(4), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-567. - Land reclamation and mining. 
    Land reclamation and mining shall be permitted in agricultural and industrial districts by conditional use permits. The conditional use permit shall include as a condition thereof an approved finish grade plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and an approved program for regulating the type of fill permitted, for control of rodents, fire, vehicular ingress and egress, hours of operation, unstable slopes, materials dispersed by wind or hauling of material to or from the site, and general maintenance of the site. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.05(5), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-568-26-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-601-26-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING 

Sec. 26-651. - Generally. 
(a)  The regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures. 
(b)  This division shall apply to all off-street parking facilities in all of the zoning districts of the city. 
(c)  A permit shall be secured from the zoning official prior to placement or replacement of driveways, sidewalks, parking lots and other hard surfaces in the following zones: 
(1)  All commercial and industrial zones; and, 
(2)  All residential zones except for one-to four-family dwellings. 
    A site plan shall accompany the application showing the proposed location and area to be paved. The council shall set a permit fee which may be reviewed. 
(d)  The term "floor area," for the purposes of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces, shall mean the net usable floor area of the various floors, devoted to retail sales, services, office spaces, processing and fabrication, exclusive of hallways, utility space, and storage areas other than warehousing. 
(e)  Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces existing upon the effective date of this chapter shall not be reduced in number or size unless said number or size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use. 
(f)  Should a nonconforming structure or use be damaged or destroyed by fire, it may be re-established if elsewhere permitted in these zoning regulations, except that in doing so, any off-street parking or loading space which existed before shall be retained. 
(g)  No change of use or occupancy of land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces, or loading spaces shall be made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made which reduces the area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking requirements below the minimum prescribed by this chapter. 
(h)  Any change of use or occupancy of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking area shall not be permitted until there are furnished such additional parking spaces are as required by this chapter. 
(i)  When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space. 
(j)  In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each eighteen (18) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining requirements. 
(k)  Should a structure contain two (2) or more types of use, each use shall be calculated separately for determining the total off-street parking spaces required. 
(l)  In residential zones, residential parking areas shall be used for vehicles only and shall not contain any outdoor storage for sales of goods and materials, commercial repair work or other such uses, with the exception of sporadic and temporary sales in the nature of yard sales or garage sales. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(A)-(C), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 89-1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 4-23-90; Ord. No. 2008-05, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 26-652. - Stall, aisle and driveway design. 
(a)  Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length exclusive of access lanes, and each space shall be served adequately by access lanes. Handicapped stalls shall be twelve (12) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length. 
(b)  The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing a space so designed within the principal building or one attached thereto. However, if provisions are so made, no building permit shall be issued to convert said space into a dwelling unit or living area unless other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Except in the case of single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in the case of one-to four-family dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited. 
(d)  No curb cut access shall be located less than fifty (50) feet, or in the case where such is not possible, not less than two-thirds of the lot width, from an intersection of two (2) public streets. Such distance shall be measured from the curblines which intersect. 
(e)  Except in the case of single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, parking areas and their aisles shall be developed in compliance with the following standards: 
Space Requirements for Off-Street Parking Parking 
Angle 
(degrees) Stall 
Width 
(feet) Stall 
to Curb 
(feet) Aisle 
Width 
(feet) Curb 
Length 
(feet) Center to Center Width (feet) 
of Two-Row Bin With 
Access Road Between 30 9 17.8  11 18   47 45 9 20.51 13 12.7 54 60 9 21.82 18 10.4 56 90 9 20    24 9 64  
(f)  No curb cut access shall exceed twenty-two (22) feet in width. 
(g)  Driveway access curb openings onto a public street except in the case of single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings shall not be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from one another. 
(h)  All areas intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with materials suitable to control dust and drainage. Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted to the city engineer for his comments, and the final drainage plan shall be subject to his approval. 
(i)  Except for one- to four-family structures all parking stalls shall be marked with white painted lines not less than four (4) inches wide. 
(j)  Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses, and public right-of-ways, and shall be in compliance with article VII. 
(k)  No sign shall be so located as to restrict the orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot. 
(l)  Except for one- to four-family dwellings, open off-street parking may be required to have a barrier system to contain vehicles. Said barrier systems, if required, shall be of such configuration so as to prevent trespassing above or on abutting or adjacent property. The public works director/engineer shall review the site plan for the proposed parking area and may require: 
(1)  Drainage controls and/or; 
(2)  Traffic control devices and/or; 
(3)  Green space for grass, plantings or surface material and/or; 
(4)  Pedestrian walkways and/or; 
(5)  Other special requirements. 
(m)  All open commercial and industrial off-street parking areas of five (5) or more spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding residential districts in compliance with article VII. 
(n)  In residential zones, all areas associated with residential buildings and used for vehicle parking and driveway, with the exception of the backyard area, shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous or compactable rock or gravel to minimize dust and erosion. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(D), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 89-1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 4-23-90; Ord. No. 92-7, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 2008-05, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 26-653. - Location. 
    All accessory off-street parking facilities shall be located and restricted as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in section 26-56, required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same ownership as the principal use being served. 
(2)  Except for one-to four-family dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with each stall having its own direct access to the public street, shall be prohibited. 
(3)  There shall be no off-street parking within fifteen (15) feet of any street surface. 
(4)  In all zoning districts, vehicle parking shall not be permitted within any residential use's front yard, corner yard or side yard that abuts a street, except upon a properly surfaced driveway. The driveway width may not extend more than twelve (12) feet past the end of the garage or dwelling, if there is no garage. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(E), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2008-05, 8-25-08; Ord. No. 2015-03, 3-23-15) 
Sec. 26-654. - Use of required area. 
    Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, storage of inoperable vehicles, storage of snow. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(F), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-655. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the joint and severed responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses and/or building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, accessways, striping, landscaping, and required fences. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(G), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-656. - Off-site parking. 
    Any off-site parking which is used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be a conditional use and shall be subject to the conditions listed below: 
(1)  Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all requirements and standards of this chapter. 
(2)  Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served shall be provided. 
(3)  The site used for meeting the off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall be under the same ownership as the principal use being served or under public ownership. 
(4)  Off-site parking for multiple family dwellings shall not be located more than one hundred (100) feet from any normally used entrance of the principal use served. 
(5)  Off-site parking for nonresidential uses shall not be located more than three hundred (300) feet from the main entrance of the principal use being served. No more than one (1) main entrance shall be recognized for each principal building. 
(6)  Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this chapter shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site location until such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in closer proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking. 
(7)  One (1) handicapped stall shall be provided for every fifty (50) parking stalls required. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(H), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-657. - Number of spaces required. 
    The following minimum areas shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement, and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  One-family to four-family and townhouse units. One (1) space per unit. 
(2)  Boarding houses. At least two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) persons for whom accommodations are provided for sleeping. 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings. Two (2) fee or free spaces per unit, plus one (1) space for each employee not resident on the premises. 
(4)  Motels, motor hotels, hotels. One (1) space per rental unit plus one (1) additional space for each ten (10) units and one (1) space for each employee on any shift. 
(5)  Church, theatre, auditorium. At least one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall. 
(6)  Schools-high school through college. One (1) space for each seven (7) students based on design capacity, plus one (1) for each three (3) classrooms. 
(7)  Hospitals. One (1) space per every two (2) beds, plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(8)  Medical, dental or hospital out-patient clinics. Three (3) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
(9)  Sanitariums, convalescent homes, rest homes, nursing homes or day nurseries. One (1) space for each three (3) beds for which accommodations are offered, plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(10)  Elderly (senior citizen) housing. One (1) space per unit, plus one (1) space for each employee not resident on the premises. 
(11)  Drive-in and convenience food establishments. At least one (1) parking space for each sixty (60) square feet of dining area. 
(12)  Office buildings and professional offices. Three (3) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
(13)  Bowling alleys. At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within the principal structure. 
(14)  Motor fuel stations. At least four (4) off-street parking spaces, plus two (2) off-street parking spaces for each service stall. Those facilities designed for sale of other items than strictly automotive products, parts and/or service shall be required to provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable sections of this division. 
(15)  Retail stores and service establishments. At least one (1) off-street parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 
(16)  Retail sales and service businesses with fifty (50) percent of gross floor area devoted to storage, warehouses and/or industry. One (1) space for each one hundred forty (140) square feet devoted to public sales and/or service, plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of storage area or one (1) space for each employee on the maximum shift, whichever is appropriate. 
(17)  Restaurants, cafes, private clubs serving food and/or drinks, bars, taverns, nightclubs. At least one (1) parking space for each sixty (60) square feet of dining area. 
(18)  Undertaking establishments. At least twenty (20) parking spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises. Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral procession. 
(19)  Auto repair, bus terminal, boats and marine sales and repair, bottling company, shop for a trade employing six (6) or less people, garden supply store, building material sales in structure. Three (3) off-street parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
(20)  Manufacturing, fabricating or processing of a product or material; warehouse, storage, handling of bulk goods, post offices. At least eight (8) spaces, plus one (1) space per one (1) employee on each shift based on maximum planned employment or at least eight (8) spaces plus a minimum one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
(21)  Car washes. (In addition to required magazine or stacking space.) 
a.  Automotive drive through, serviced. A minimum of ten (10) spaces, or one (1) space for each employee on the main shift, whichever is greater. 
b.  Self-service. A minimum of two (2) spaces. 
c.  Motor fuel station car wash. Zero (0) in addition to that required for the station. 
(22)  Skating rinks and dance halls. Forty (40) spaces plus one (1) additional space for each seventy-five (75) square feet over two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(I)(I), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2005-04, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-06) 
Secs. 26-658-26-675. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET LOADING 

Sec. 26-676. - Generally. 
    The regulation of loading spaces is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-street loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-677. - Location. 
(a)  All required loading berths shall be off-street and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. 
(b)  All loading berths shall be located fifty (50) feet or two-thirds of the length of the lot from the intersection of two (2) or more street right-of-ways. This distance is to be measured from the curbline of the intersecting streets. 
(c)  No loading berth shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a residential district unless within a structure. 
(d)  No loading berth shall be located in a front yard or at the front of a building. 
(e)  Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the least interference with traffic. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II)(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-678. - Surfacing. 
    All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with a durable material to control the dust and drainage according to a plan subject to approval by appropriate city staff. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II)(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-679. - Accessory use, parking and storage. 
    Any space allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the terms of these zoning regulations shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or snow, nor be included as a part of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II)(C), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-680. - Screening. 
    Except in the case of multiple dwellings all loading areas shall be screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding residential uses in compliance with article VII. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II)(D), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-681. - Size. 
    Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations the first loading berth shall be not less than fifty (50) feet in length and additional berths required shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet in length, and all loading berths shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II)(E), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-682. - Number of loading berths. 
    Required loading berths in connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, and which will have a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more, shall be provided on the basis of the following minimum requirements: 
Square Feet of Aggregate 
Gross Floor Area Minimum Required 
Number of Berths 5,000 up to and including 16,000 1 16,000 up to and including 40,000 2 40,000 up to and including 70,000 3 70,000 up to and including 100,000 4 For each additional 40,000 1 additional Multiple dwelling 10,000 square feet and up 1 berth  
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.06(II)(F), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-683-26-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-701. - Generally. 
    The purpose of this article is to permit only those home occupations compatible with other permitted uses and with the residential character of neighborhoods. This article applies to home occupations. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(A), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-702. - Existing home occupations. 
    Home occupations existing June 30, 1986, and authorized by previous issuance of a conditional use permit, shall apply for a home occupation permit. If those home occupations are able to conform with the performance standards listed in this section, they shall do so within six (6) months. Any conditional use permit, issued prior to June 30, 1986, for home occupations that meet the requirements of this section, including the performance standards set forth herein, shall thereafter be void. Any conditional use permit previously issued for a home occupation which is not permitted under the provisions of this chapter or cannot meet the performance standards set forth herein shall be allowed to continue. A violation of a permit condition shall void the permit and all proceedings shall be as set forth herein with respect to conditional use permits. No fee shall be charged in issuance of home occupation permits for authorized existing home occupations which meet the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(F), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 87-10, 8-10-87) 
Sec. 26-703. - Permitted home occupations. 
    The following uses are permitted as home occupations subject to section 26-705: 
(1)  Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors. 
(2)  Music, art or dancing teachers (limited to not more than five (5) students at any one (1) time). 
(3)  Artists, sculptors, authors or composers. 
(4)  Office facility of physicians, dentists or other licensed medical practitioners. 
(5)  Office facility of lawyers, architects, engineers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers, salesmen and members of similar professions. 
(6)  Office facility of ministers, rabbis, priests or members of religious orders. 
(7)  Home crafts, such as model-making, rugweaving and lapidary work. 
(8)  Barber or beauty shops. 
(9)  Limited photo developing or processing. 
(10)  Limited upholstery. 
(11)  Limited carpentry work. 
(12)  Any occupation which meets the performance standards contained in section 26-705, and is approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(H), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 26-704. - Prohibited home occupations. 
    The following home occupations shall not be permitted: 
(1)  Animal hospitals or pet shops. 
(2)  Clinics or hospitals. 
(3)  Mortuaries. 
(4)  Private clubs. 
(5)  Renting of trailers. 
(6)  Auto repair, major or minor. 
(7)  Repair shops or service establishments, except the repair of nonmotorized bicycles, electrical appliances, typewriters, cameras or other similar small items. 
(8)  Restaurants. 
(9)  Stables or kennels. 
(10)  Painting and restoration of vehicles, trailers or boats. 
(11)  Retail sales. 
(12)  Manufacturing. 
(13)  Warehousing or on-site storage of goods for redistribution. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(I), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 26-705. - Performance standards. 
(a)  No more than one (1) person other than a member of the immediate family occupying the dwelling shall be employed on the premises at any one (1) time. 
(b)  Identification signs shall conform with provisions of article X. 
(c)  In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, advertising signs, or by the emission of sounds, odors, noises, vibrations, heat, glare or electrical disturbances. 
(d)  Home occupations which require entrance of the general public shall comply with all applicable regulations of the Uniform Building and Fire Codes as adopted by the state. 
(e)  Home occupations shall be an accessory use of the principal structure and shall not occupy more than two (2) rooms within the building. 
(f)  The use shall not create substantial traffic. More than twenty (20) vehicles coming to the dwelling unit for service or products during any one (1) day shall be considered substantial additional traffic. Any need for parking shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
(g)  No home occupation shall cause an increase in sewer or water usage so that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the normal range for residences in the city. 
(h)  There shall be no storage or display of any kind connected with the home occupation visible from the outside of the dwelling unit. 
(i)  Any construction, alteration, electrical or mechanical equipment, or chemicals or materials, shall not change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is located. 
(j)  The operation of the home occupation shall begin no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and end no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(k)  Home occupations shall not be permitted in any building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
(l)  Discontinuance of a home occupation for more than a six-month period shall void the permit. 
(m)  Any other standard deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(D), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-706-26-725. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-726. - Generally. 
    No person shall conduct a home occupation without a valid home occupation permit. Permits shall only be issued for occupations listed in section 26-703. Permits are issued to the applicant for a specific use and are nontransferable to new property owners or different occupations. Home occupation permits issued in accordance with the requirements of this division shall be reviewed annually and are valid for a five-year period. Notice of permit expiration shall be sent to the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(B), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-727. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  Application for a home occupation permit shall be made in the office of the community development director. Applications for a home occupation permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Location and type of proposed occupation. 
(3)  Site or building plan (if applicable), showing the facilities to be used for the proposed occupation. 
(b)  Applications shall be reviewed by the planning commission at its regular monthly meeting. No home occupation shall be permitted that does not meet the performance standards listed in section 26-705. Final action on such applications will be reported to the city council. A fee, as determined by city council, will be charged the home owner to defray the costs associated with the annual review. 
(c)  Notice of application review shall be mailed to all adjoining property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the applicant's property. The names of adjoining property owners shall be determined from records available to the public. Failure to receive a notice shall not invalidate the review. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(C), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-09 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-728. - Annual review. 
    Valid home occupation permits shall be reviewed by the planning commission on an annual basis for compliance with performance standards listed in this chapter. The city shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation ten (10) days before annual review. The public notice shall state the time and place of review and shall list all valid permits to be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(E), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-729. - Revocation. 
    Violations of section 26-705 standards shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. Notice of intent to revoke the permit shall be sent by the zoning administrator to the permit holder. The notice shall state the grounds for revocation. The holder of the permit shall have ten (10) days from the receipt of the notice to file an appeal to the planning commission. Failure to file an appeal within ten (10) days waives any challenge of revocation. At the expiration of ten (10) days the permit is revoked and the home occupation shall cease. After revocation, no permit shall be granted for the same dwelling unit during the three-month period following revocation. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.10(G), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-730-26-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS 

Sec. 26-801. - Generally. 
    It shall be the intent of this article to ensure compatibility of signs with surrounding land usage, to conserve property values in all districts, to protect the public investment in streets and highways, to promote the safety and recreational value of public travel, and to strengthen the economy of the city. All signs erected or maintained in the city shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07, 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-802. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the following signs. Such signs, however, are still subject to the provisions of section 26-806: 
(1)  A temporary real estate sign not exceeding thirty-five (35) square feet in area in a business or industrial district, and nine (9) square feet in a residential district. 
(2)  Residential and professional nameplates, not exceeding two (2) square feet in surface area. 
(3)  Signs or bulletin boards, not over thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area, for public, charitable, or religious institutions, where the same are located on the premises of said institutions. 
(4)  A temporary political sign in regard to a candidate or an election. Such sign shall be removed within fourteen (14) days following the election as related to the sign. 
(5)  A temporary construction sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area in multiresidential, business or industrial districts during construction, which identifies the project, contractors and subcontractors. 
(6)  Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices and other such temporary, emergency, or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the city council. 
(7)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and dates of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material. 
(8)  Flags, decorations, emblems and signs of civic, political, patriotic and religious holidays may be displayed no more than forty (40) days prior to, nor more than seven (7) working days after, the appropriate holiday. Such decorations are exempt from provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(B), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2013-06, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 26-803. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Existing signs, other than temporary signs, which were permitted under previous ordinance may be kept as is and where they are presently located, even though they do not conform to this article. Upon fifty (50) percent replacement of the supporting structure of the sign, not including the footings, there must be compliance with this article. All temporary signs which do not conform to this article shall be removed or altered to as to conform to requirements of this article within three (3) months of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(H), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 96-2, 4-22-96) 
Sec. 26-804. - Variances. 
(a)  To provide reasonable flexibility in this article, the council may approve a variance for a sign otherwise not permitted by this article where such exception would not be inconsistent with the intent of this article. All requests for variances shall be made as outlined in article II, division 5. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted unless the council shall find that one (1) of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  All of the following: 
a.  Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
b.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
c.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district and the terms of this article. 
d.  Granting the variance requested would not confer on the applicant any special privilege for a use not common to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
e.  The proposed use of the property shall have an appearance that will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent properties, and there will be no deterrence to development of vacant land. 
(2)  Any proposed signage beyond the maximum square footage permitted would have the primary function of providing a public service. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(G), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-805. - Permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate any sign within the city without first obtaining a permit and paying the required permit fee. Application for sign permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the community development director and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected. 
(3)  When requested by the community development director, two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans or specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. 
(4)  When requested by the community development director, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(5)  Name of persons erecting the sign. 
(6)  Evidence of written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected. 
(7)  Such other information as the community development director shall require to show full compliance with all ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(A), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2018-10 , 2-12-18) 
Sec. 26-806. - General requirements. 
    No sign shall be erected or installed in the city unless it shall conform to the following: 
(1)  No sign shall be installed which by reason of position, shape, color or wording would interfere with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal. 
(2)  Illuminated flashing signs or devices giving off intermittent, sequential, or rotating beams of light shall not be permitted in any district. Lighted electronic message signs giving public service information shall be permitted in the B-3 and B-4 districts, provided that the bottom of the sign surface shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet above street grade and a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the center of any street intersection. 
(3)  Except for grand openings, special occasions and holidays, banners and streamers may not be used. The use of banners, streamers, and special promotional devices are permitted only by obtaining a permit from the city. Such use shall be discontinued within fifteen (15) days after the first day and they shall not be used in any location more than thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
(4)  There shall be no more than one (1) temporary (three (3) months or less) sign on any one (1) lot. The total area of such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. A permit is required for all temporary signs. 
(5)  All signs in the city attached to a building shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured in a manner approved by the building official, and shall be repaired and maintained as necessary, to keep them secure, safe and free from danger. 
(6)  No sign in the city shall obstruct access to fire escapes or required windows, doors, exits or standpipes. 
(7)  No signs shall be placed upon or overhang the public right-of-way or easement, except that the city council may grant a special temporary permit to locate signs and decorations on or within the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Signs on roofs shall not be allowed in any district. 
(9)  Signs shall not be painted directly on any exterior building surface. Signs, letters and symbols may be attached directly to a wall by adhesive or mechanical means. 
(10)  All existing signs shall be removed from the building and property by the owner of such property within thirty (30) days after the business or use is terminated. 
(11)  "Sign area," shall mean that area within the marginal lines or extreme outside edge of the surface which bears the advertisement or, in the case of message, figures or symbols attached directly to any part of a building, that area which is included in the smallest rectangle which can be made to circumscribe any message, figure, or symbol displayed thereon. For a sign with not more than two (2) back to back faces, only the area of one (1) side is computed in determining the sign area. 
(12)  Required setbacks are as follows: 
a.  All R districts, ten (10) feet from any lot line. Signs shall not be placed in required corner, rear or side yard areas. 
b.  All B districts, ten (10) feet from any lot line. Temporary signs may extend to the lot line. Signs shall not be placed in required corner yards. 
c.  I-1 and I-2 districts, ten (10) feet from any lot line. Signs shall not be placed in required corner yards. 
(13)  Exposed backs of all signs and sign structures must be painted a neutral color and otherwise be maintained so as not to have an adverse effect upon adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(C), § 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-807. - R districts. 
    Within residential districts the following signs are permitted and the following provisions apply: 
(1)  One (1) nameplate sign for each single-family dwelling. Such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(2)  One (1) nameplate sign for each multiple family dwelling. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(3)  One (1) sign for each permitted home occupation. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(4)  Symbols, statutes, sculptures, and integrated architectural features on buildings may be illuminated by flood lights provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way and not directly visible from the adjacent property. 
(5)  No sign shall be constructed to have more than two (2) surfaces. No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height. Signs may be illuminated but such lighting shall be diffused or indirect and not extend beyond any lot line. 
(6)  Electronic messaging signs (EMS) will be allowable for uses covered by section 26-152, R-1 single-family residential district, subsection (d) conditional uses, subsection (3) public or semi-public recreational buildings, hospitals and medical clinics, neighborhood or community centers; public and private educational institutions, religious institutes, cemeteries, provided that: 
a.  Location on major roads, i.e. S. Prairie Avenue, N. North Avenue, S. State Street; rather than on S. Hampton Street. 
b.  Electronic message center sign may not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
c.  Only one (1) electronic message center per parcel. 
d.  Prohibit orientation of a sign face directly towards residences. 
e.  No portion of the message may flash, scroll, change color, fade in or out or in any manner imitate movement. 
f.  The signage shall follow the standards established in Article X, Signs. 
g.  The sign shall be constructed as an integral part of a permanent sign constructed on site. Integral shall be considered to be incorporated into the framework and architectural design of the permanent sign. 
h.  Electronic message center signs may be used only to advertise activities or goods or services available on the property on which the sign is located or to present public service information. 
i.  Maximum luminance of between five thousand (5,000) to seven thousand five hundred (7,500) nits during daylight hours and five hundred (500) nits at night. 
j.  The sign display remain static for a minimum of eight (8) seconds and require "instantaneous" change of the display; i.e. no "fading" in/out of the message. 
k.  Require automatic brightness control keys to ambient light levels. 
l.  Require display to go dark if there is a malfunction. 
m.  Electronic message center signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts brightness because of ambient light conditions. 
n.  The owners of electronic message center shall include written certification from the sign manufacturer that the individual sign's maximum light intensity has been preset not to exceed the maximum daytime illumination levels established by the code and that the maximum intensity level is protected from end user manipulation by password protected software or other method approved by the appropriate city official. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(D), 6-30-86; Ord. No. 2012-09, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 26-808. - B and I districts. 
    Within business and industrial districts advertising and business signs are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  One (1) nameplate sign for each single-family dwelling, the total surface area of all business signs, not to exceed three (3) in number (except in a unified shopping center) on a lot, shall not exceed the following: 
District Maximum Signage B-1 One (1) square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage. Not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet per sign. B-2, B-3 and B-4 Two and one-half (2.5) square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage. Not to exceed two hundred eighty-eight (288) feet per sign. I-1 and I-2 Two and one-half (2.5) square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage. Not to exceed two hundred eighty-eight (288) feet per sign. Along the interstate the state size standards shall apply. Not to exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.  
(2)  Business and advertising signs shall conform to the following: 
a.  Building sign, two (2) feet above highest outside wall or parapet. 
b.  Pylon sign, minimum twelve (12) feet to the following maximum heights: 
District Maximum Height B-1, B-2 Twenty-eight (28) feet B-3 Forty (40) feet B-4 Fifty-five (55) feet I-1 and I-2 Forty (40) feet  
c.  Ground sign, ten (10) feet above grade. 
(3)  In a unified shopping center under single ownership or control, the total surface area of all advertising and business signs on the lot shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5) square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage on the lot. The number of signs shall not exceed the number of shops located within the center. A unified shopping center may also erect one (1) additional business sign for each separate street frontage, not to exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet in surface area, and not to display more than the name and location of the shopping center. 
(4)  Within the B-2 central business district up to three (3) signs per business shall be permitted. The total surface area of all advertising and business signs on the lot shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage of the lot. Signs placed over sidewalks may extend to within one (1) foot of the curb or paved street area. All signs placed over sidewalks must have a minimum ten-foot clearance under the sign to the sidewalk grade. 
(5)  In addition to signs allowed for individual industries, an identification sign for a unified industrial park shall be allowed. This sign shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet in area and not display more than the name and location of the industrial park. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(E), 6-30-86) 
Sec. 26-809. - Portable message signs. 
(a)  There shall be no more than one (1) portable message sign on any single lot in a B business district. The total area of such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Use of such signage for a period of one (1) month or less shall not require a sign permit. Use of such signage for a period exceeding one (1) month in a calendar year shall require the following: 
(1)  Submission of a detailed site plan to the city engineer indicating the permanent location of the sign and adjacent property lines. 
(2)  Permanent mounting or anchoring of the sign on site. Any electrical connections shall be properly installed and protected. 
(b)  Setbacks for portable message signs shall follow the setbacks for temporary signs. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-4, § 7.07(F), 6-30-86) 
Secs. 26-810-26-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 

Sec. 26-900. - Statutory authorization and purpose. 
(a)  Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(b)  Purpose: 
(1)  This article regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the City of Fairmont. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions. 
(2)  National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This article is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(3)  This article is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-901. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which ordinance applies: This article applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Fairmont shown on the flood hazard boundary and flood insurance rate maps adopted in section 26-901 (b) as being located within the boundaries of the floodplain district. The floodplain district is an overlay district that is superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other requirements in this article. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standards will apply. 
(b)  Adoption of flood maps: The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the official zoning map and this article. The attached material includes the effective flood hazard boundary and flood insurance rate Maps enumerated below. These materials are on file in the office of the City Clerk, 100 Downtown Plaza, Fairmont, MN. 
  FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Map, No. H 01 - dated December 12, 1975. 
  FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Map, No. H 02 - dated December 12, 1975. 
  FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Map, No. H 03 - dated December 12, 1975. 
  FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Map, No. H 05 - dated December 12, 1975. 
  Martin County Flood Insurance Rate Map, No. 22 - converted by letter September 1, 1988. 
  Martin County Flood Insurance Rate Map, No. 23 - converted by letter September 1, 1988. 
  Martin County Flood Insurance Rate Map, No. 28 - converted by letter September 1, 1988. 
  Martin County Flood Insurance Rate Map, No. 29 - converted by letter September 1, 1988. 
(c)  Interpretation: The boundaries of the floodplain district are determined by scaling distances on the flood hazard boundary and flood insurance rate maps. 
(1)  Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood elevations must be the governing factor. The community development director must interpret the boundary location based on the ground elevations that existed on the site on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area within the regulatory floodplain, and other available technical data. 
(2)  Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of zoning appeals and to submit technical evidence. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions: It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(e)  Warning and disclaimer of liability: This article does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article does not create liability on the part of the City of Fairmont or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(f)  Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this article shall not be affected and shall remain in full force. 
(g)  Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article must be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this article its most reasonable application. 
(1)  Base flood - The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(2)  Base flood elevation - The elevation of the "regional flood," as defined. The term "base flood elevation" is used in the flood insurance survey. 
(3)  Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings, manufactured homes, and other structures, recreational vehicles, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
(4)  Farm fence - A fence as defined by Minn. Statute §344.02 Subd. 1(a)-(d). An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a structure under this article. Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are not permitted in the floodplain district. 
(5)  Flood fringe - The portion of the floodplain located outside of the floodway. 
(6)  Flood insurance rate map - An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
(7)  Floodplain - The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. 
(8)  Floodway - The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
(9)  Manufactured home - A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
(10)  Obstruction - Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence (with the exception of farm fences), stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water. 
(11)  Recreational vehicle - A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this article, the term recreational vehicle is synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel vehicle." 
(12)  Regional flood - A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the one (1) percent chance/100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood". 
(13)  Regulatory flood protection elevation - An elevation no lower than three (3) feet above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. 
(14)  Structure - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, and other similar items. 
(15)  Substantial damage - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(16)  Substantial improvement - Within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
b.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." For the purpose of this article, "historic structure" is as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1. 
(h)  Annexations: The flood hazard boundary and flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference into section 26-901(b) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City of Fairmont at the time of adoption of this article. If any of these floodplain areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of this article, the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this article immediately upon the date of annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-902. - Establishment of floodplain district. 
(a)  Areas Included: The floodplain district for the City of Fairmont includes those areas designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary and flood insurance rate maps adopted in section 26-901 (b). The floodplain district is an overlay district to all existing land use districts. The requirements of this article apply in addition to other legally established regulations of the community. Where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article apply. 
(b)  Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Within the floodplain district, all uses not listed as permitted uses in section 26-903 are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-903. - Permitted uses and standards in the floodplain district. 
(a)  Permitted uses: The following uses are permitted within the floodplain district without a permit provided that they are allowed in any underlying zoning district and not prohibited by any other ordinance; and provided that they do not require structures, fill, obstructions, excavations, drilling operations, storage of materials or equipment or any other form of development as defined in section 26-901 (g) of this article. If the use does require any other form of development, a permit and compliance with section 26-903 (b) of this article is required. The permit requirement may be waived if there is an application for a public waters work permit from the Department of Natural Resources. 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. Farm fences that do not obstruct flood flows are permitted. 
(2)  Outdoor plant nurseries and horticulture. 
(3)  Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, shooting preserves, target ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails. 
(4)  Lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas. 
(5)  Railroads, roads, bridges, utility transmission lines, pipelines and other public utilities, provided that the Department of Natural Resources is notified at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of any permit. 
(b)  Standards for permitted uses: 
(1)  The use must have low flood damage potential. 
(2)  The use must not cause any increase in the stage of the one (1) percent chance or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected. This provision applies to structures (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposits, obstructions, storage of materials or equipment, and all other uses. 
(3)  Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system. 
(4)  Public utilities, roads, railroad tracks and bridges to be located within the floodplain must be designed in accordance with sections 26-903 (b)2 and 26-903(b)3 above, or must obtain a conditional letter of map revision meeting the requirements of 44 CFR 603(d). 
a.  When failure or interruption of these public facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area, such facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
b.  Where failure or interruption of service would not endanger public health or safety, minor or auxiliary roads, railroads or utilities may be constructed at a lower elevation. 
(5)  New or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-904. - Administration. 
(a)  Community development director: The community development director or other official designated by the city council must administer and enforce this article. 
(b)  Development approvals: Any construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, moving or demolition of any building or structure must comply with the requirements of this article. No mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, obstruction, drilling operation or other form of development as defined in section 26-901(g) of this article are allowed, other than the uses identified in section 26-903(a) and the activities allowed under section 26-905. 
(c)  Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the community development director prior to conducting the following activities: 
(1)  Expansion, change, enlargement, or alteration of a nonconforming use as specified in section (6) of this article. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in section 26-901(g) of this article. 
(2)  Any use that requires fill, obstruction, excavation, storage of materials, or any other form of development as defined in section 26-901(g) of this article. 
(3)  Permit applications must be submitted to the community development director on forms provided for that purpose and shall include the following where applicable: plans drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel. 
(4)  Prior to granting a permit, the community development director must verify that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits. 
(f)  Variances: 
(1)  An application for a variance to the provisions of this article will be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable state statutes as well as chapter 26, article II, division 5 of the Fairmont Zoning Code. 
(2)  A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law. 
(3)  The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be met: 
a.  Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
b.  Variances may only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)  The community development director must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to the Department of Natural Resources sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by email or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
(5)  A copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. 
(6)  The community development director must notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and 2) Such construction below the base or regional flood level increases risks to life and property 
(7)  The community development director must maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(g)  Notifications for watercourse alterations: Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the community development director must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statute, Sec. 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(h)  Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease base flood elevations: As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the community development director must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-905. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Continuance of nonconformities: A use, structure, or occupancy of land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this article, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the following conditions. 
(1)  A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. There shall be no expansion to the outside dimensions of any portion of a nonconforming structure located within the floodplain district. Any expansion or enlargement of uses, structures, or occupancies within the floodway district is prohibited. 
(2)  If any structure experiences a substantial improvement as defined in this article, then the entire structure must meet the standards of section 26-904 or 26-905 of this article for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the floodway or flood fringe district, respectively. If the current proposal, including maintenance and repair during the previous three hundred sixty-five (365) days, plus the costs of any previous alterations and additions since the first flood hazard boundary or flood insurance rate map (December 12, 1975) exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of any nonconforming structure, the entire structure must meet the standards of section 26-905 (b) of this article. 
(3)  If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is discontinued for more than one (1) year, any future use of the premises must conform to this article. 
(4)  If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in section 26-901(g) of this article, it may not be reconstructed unless it is located in the flood fringe portion of the floodplain and it is reconstructed in accordance with the standards of section 26-905(b) of this article 
(5)  Any substantial improvement, as defined in section 26-901(g) of this article, to a nonconforming structure, then the existing nonconforming structure must be located in the flood fringe portion of the floodplain and meet the requirements of section 26-905(b) of this article. 
(b)  Standards for reconstruction of nonconforming structures. The following standards and procedures apply to nonconforming structures in the flood fringe portion of the floodplain, as allowed under section 26-905(a). 
(1)  All structures, including manufactured homes, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(2)  Fill must be properly compacted, and the slopes must be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. 
(3)  Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system. 
(4)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(5)  On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems: Where public utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section. 
(6)  Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this article. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. 
(7)  Record of first floor elevation. The community development director must maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations to existing structures in the floodplain. The community development director must also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are floodproofed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-906. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Violation constitutes a misdemeanor: Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances) constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as defined by law. 
(b)  Other lawful action: Nothing in this article restricts the City of Fairmont from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the community development director within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this article and will be prosecuted accordingly. 
(c)  Enforcement: In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the community development director and city council may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The city must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Sec. 26-907. - Amendments. 
(a)  Floodplain designation-Restrictions on removal: The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources if the Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
(b)  Amendments require DNR and FEMA approval: All amendments to this article must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner of the DNR must approve the amendment prior to community approval. 
(c)  Map amendments require ordinance amendments. The floodplain district regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in section 26-901 (b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , 3-26-18) 
Chapter 27 - RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS 

Sec. 27-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program for identifying rental housing units within the City of Fairmont. This chapter is adopted to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Fairmont by: 
  Promoting safety from fires and accidents; 
  Providing a means for the fair administration and enforcement of this Code for all residential rental units; 
  Providing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities; 
  Reducing environmental hazards to health; and 
  Assisting in controlling criminal activities in rental housing. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-2. - Maintenance of records. 
    All records, files and documents pertaining to rental unit registration, complaints and complaint inspection information, shall be retained and maintained by the city for ten (10) years; and will be available to the public as allowed, permitted or required by state law or city chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-3. - Health and safety. 
(a)  The owner shall be responsible for maintaining the rental property in compliance with the requirements of the Minnesota codes regulating residential structures, as they are currently written and as might be amended in the future, including, but not limited to: the State Building Code Minn. Stat. §§ 326B101-194; the State Fire Code Minn. Stat. Chapter 299F; and Minnesota Administrative Rules Chapter 1300. 
(b)  Garbage. The owner of each rental unit shall provide garbage collection containers, dumpsters or other garbage management options adequate to accommodate all garbage and recyclables generated by each rental unit. Owners and tenants of single-family or multi-family units, shall comply with Fairmont City Code section 22-18. 
(c)  Lawn care. The owner shall be responsible for lawn care and for the removal of ice and snow according to Fairmont City Code section 17-2 and section 23-3, respectively. 
(d)  Mold, rodents and insect infestations shall be promptly eliminated by the owner and the rental unit shall then be kept mold and infestation free by the tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-4. - Registration and licensing of rental units. 
(a)  Registration and license required. It is unlawful for an owner to lease or allow to be occupied as a residence any rental housing unit owned by that owner in the city without first: 
(1)  Completing and submitting to the city a registration form. 
a.  Each owner filing a registration form shall consent to be bound by all of the provisions of this chapter and shall certify that they have completed and submitted a housing safety checklist form. 
b.  Each tenant occupying a licensed unit within the city shall be bound by all of the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  The city shall assign a number to each owner and rental unit. 
d.  Tenant information: The owner shall keep a listing of all adult tenants and inform each tenant that the booklet "Landlords and Tenants: Rights and Responsibilities" is distributed by the Attorney General's office, and that a copy of this chapter, is available from the Fairmont Community Development Department. 
e.  The registration form will be furnished by the city and shall require the following: 
1.  Owner contact information; 
2.  Local contact information if the owner lives in a city other than Fairmont; 
3.  The mailing address of each rental unit to be registered; 
4.  The type of each unit to be registered, i.e. single-family, duplex, apartment, etc.; and 
5.  Owner certification that there is fire and liability insurance on the rental property. 
(2)  Providing proof that the property taxes are current on the rental property. 
(3)  Paying the registration fee. 
a.  Rental housing units in existence on the date of the adoption of this chapter will not be charged the registration fee if the rental housing unit is registered within one hundred eighty (180) days of said adoption. 
b.  Every three (3) years the rental housing registration will be reapplied for and the then current registration fee will be paid. 
(4)  Receiving a rental license for the unit from the city. 
(b)  Transfer of ownership. In the event of the transfer of ownership of a unit by sale or otherwise: 
(1)  The owner(s), within ten (10) days after the transfer, shall provide to the city the name, address and telephone number of each transferee. 
(2)  The transferee shall register the unit with the city under the transferee's name and pay all applicable fees within thirty (30) days after the date of transfer; and 
(3)  If the rental license for the unit is valid and current and if the transferee so registers the unit and pays the fees, the rental license shall be transferred to the transferee. 
(c)  License expiration. The rental license will expire thirty-six (36) months after the date of original registration. 
(d)  The following dwellings are exempt from registration and licensing: 
(1)  Assisted living facilities. 
(2)  Nursing homes. 
(3)  State licensed facilities, i.e. REM units, hotels, etc. 
(4)  Single family homes rented for eighteen (18) months or less. 
(5)  Single family homes rented to another family member. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-5. - Rental housing inspection. 
(a)  The city has the authority to inspect any housing unit upon receiving a complaint of code violations. 
(b)  A rental housing inspection for general health and life safety shall be completed at least once in a three-year period; but does not have to be completed before licensing. 
(c)  The inspection may be completed by Fairmont City staff designated to complete inspections for a fee or the property owner may hire a licensed home inspector to complete the inspection and submit the inspection checklist to the city. 
(d)  The community development department staff will notify the owner of the date, place and time of any inspection conducted pursuant to this section. The owner may be present for the inspection. 
(e)  Properties inspected by another state or federal agency are exempt from three-year inspections. 
(f)  The city will provide an inspection checklist to be completed and signed by the inspecting party. 
(g)  Items on the inspection checklist found to be incomplete, missing or inoperable will be corrected by the owner. The correction will be made in a time frame agreeable to the inspector, owner and tenant. A re-inspection to insure correction has been completed is required but no additional fee will be assessed. 
(h)  Units that pass an inspection and do not receive a complaint within the three-year license period are exempt from the inspection for the next three-year period. All units must have an inspection after six (6) years without an inspection. 
(i)  The community development department staff will inspect rental units and common areas when a tenant files a complaint with the city regarding code violations. The tenant must notify the owner/representative of the code violation prior to making a complaint with the city. The tenant must allow the owner/representative access to the area of the property needing repair. 
(j)  Forms. The city shall provide forms upon which complaints may be made regarding the condition or license and registration status of any rental property. 
(k)  Property condition complaints. The complainant shall either: 
(1)  Promptly provide to the owner/representative a copy of the complaint filed with the city and all supporting documents and shall give the owner/representative forty-eight (48) hours to correct the alleged code violation or 
(2)  Shall provide not less than a seventy-two hours' written notice of its intention to have the city conduct an inspection of the rental unit. The owner/representative shall be assessed appropriate inspection fees if the complaint is found to be substantiated by this inspection. 
(l)  When a city staff person makes an inspection as a result of a tenant complaint and no violations are found the city will issue a notice of compliance to the tenant and the owner/representative. If the complaint is substantiated by the inspection, written notice of the observed violation(s) will be given to the owner/representative and tenant. The city inspector will work with the owner/representative to develop a timeline for the required repairs. A re-inspection will be conducted at the expiration of the time period set for repairs. If the repairs have been completed in a satisfactory manner, a notice of compliance will be issued to the owner/representative and the tenant. In the event the repairs have not been completed in a satisfactory manner further action will be taken as permitted by this Code or state law. 
(m)  License and registration complaints. Upon receipt of a complaint and verification that a residential rental unit is not licensed or registered, the city shall inform the owner in writing that the owner has ninety (90) days to either: 
(1)  Comply with the terms of this chapter by registering the unit and by paying all applicable fees; or 
(2)  Cease rental operations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-6. - Posting rental license. 
    The owner shall arrange for a copy of the rental license to be posted continuously on an inside sidewall of the kitchen sink cabinet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-7. - Revoking, suspending, denying or not renewing a license. 
(a)  The city community development department may revoke, suspend, deny or decline to renew any license issued under this section. In buildings containing more than one (1) rental unit, the revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal may apply to one (1) or more rental units based on specific violations. The basis for such revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal includes, but is not limited to, any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The license was procured by misrepresentation of the facts with regard to the rental dwelling unit. 
(2)  The applicant or one (1) acting on his/her behalf made oral or written misstatements pertaining to the application. 
(3)  The actions of the owner or owner's representative involving a rental unit have created a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(4)  The rental dwelling unit contains conditions that endanger the safety, health or welfare of any member of the public. 
(5)  Failure to pay any required application, penalty or reinstatement fee. 
(6)  Failure to correct violations of section 27-05(h) in the time period specified in the notice of violation and correction. 
(7)  Following the third instance of disorderly behavior specified in section 27-10. 
(8)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Notification. The community development department shall notify the owner or owner's representative in writing of the basis for the revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal of the rental license and the date upon which the action takes effect. 
(c)  The community development department shall notify the owner of their right to have the decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew the rental license reviewed by the board of zoning appeals. The owner may request a review of the licensing decision upon a form provided by the city. That request shall be filed with the community development department within fifteen (15) days after receiving the licensing decision from the department. The review hearing will be set for the next regularly scheduled board of zoning appeals meeting, unless that meeting is scheduled to occur in less than fifteen (15) days from the owner's request for review is received. In that event, the review hearing will be set on the following regularly scheduled board of zoning appeals meeting. 
(d)  The owner or owner's representative and the community development department shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The owner may be represented by counsel. Both sides may be permitted to examine the other side's witnesses and evidence. The board of zoning appeals shall hear all relevant evidence and arguments and shall review all testimony, documents, and other evidence submitted. The community development department shall record the review and keep a record of documentary evidence submitted. 
(e)  Decision. The board of zoning appeals shall make findings based on the evidence and shall make a decision on the recommendation to revoke, suspend, deny, or not renew a license based on the findings. The board of zoning appeals shall issue a written decision regarding the recommendation of the community development department within thirty (30) days following the date of the review and shall notify the owner or owner's representative of the decision by first class mail and by the owner's preferred method of communication. The decision shall specify the rental dwelling unit or units to which it applies, the duration of the revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal, and the conditions that must be met before the license may be reissued or reinstated. No rental dwelling units that have had their rental license revoked, suspended, denied, or non-renewed may be occupied. Revocation, suspension, denial, or non-renewal of a license shall not excuse the owner from compliance with all terms of this chapter for as long as any rental dwelling units in the building are occupied. 
(f)  License process after revocation, suspension, denial. After the board of zoning appeals revokes, suspends, denies or declines to renew a license, no license will be issued for the affected rental dwelling unit(s) until the community development department determines that the applicant/licensee has remedied the conditions identified as the basis for the action. An application to obtain a license for a rental dwelling unit after the board of zoning appeals has revoked, suspended, denied or declined to renew a license for the same rental dwelling unit(s) must be accompanied by all fees required by this section. 
(g)  The owner has a right to appeal the board of zoning appeal's decision as outlined in section 2-25 of Fairmont City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-8. - Effect of revocation, suspension, denial, or non-renewal. 
    If a license is revoked, suspended, denied or not renewed, it shall be unlawful for the owner or owner's representative to permit the occupancy of the rental dwelling unit(s), until such time as a valid rental license is obtained. Issuance of a new license after revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal shall be made in the manner provided for in section 27-4. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-9. - Posted to prevent occupancy. 
    Whenever any rental dwelling unit has been denied an initial license, had its license revoked, suspended, denied or not renewed it shall be posted by the community development department to prevent further occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the community development department official to remove or alter any posting. The community development department will post the date the rental dwelling unit shall be vacated and no person shall reside in, occupy or cause to be occupied that rental dwelling unit until the community development department permits it. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-10. - Disorderly behavior. 
(a)  It shall be the licensee's responsibility to assist in correction and/or require lease language that the tenants, the tenants' family members and the guests of any tenant or tenant's family member not engage in disorderly behavior in the rental dwelling unit that negatively impacts the neighborhood. For the purposes of this section, rental dwelling unit shall include common areas in the building where the rental dwelling unit is located. 
(b)  Disorderly behavior. For the purposes of this section, disorderly behavior may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Illegal activity involving controlled substances as defined in MN Stat. § 152.01 in the rental dwelling unit. 
(2)  Acts of violence or threats of violence including but not limited to discharge of firearms, prostitution, intimidation, assault, or any other act that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of the licensee, his agents, tenants or any other person. 
(3)  Violation of Minnesota Statute, Section 609.72 Disorderly Conduct. 
(4)  Violation of Minnesota Statutes 609.74 and 609.745 Public Nuisances. 
(5)  Violation of Minnesota Statutes 609.66, Subd. 1a, 609.67 or 624.713 Unlawful use or possession of a firearm or weapon. 
(6)  Violation of Minnesota Statute 609.50 Obstructing Legal Process. 
(7)  Violation of Fairmont Code article 17, nuisances. 
(c)  First instance. Upon determination by the community development staff or law enforcement that a rental dwelling unit was the location of disorderly behavior, the community development department shall notify by first class mail the licensee to take steps along with community development department to prevent further violations. 
(d)  Second instance. If a second instance of disorderly behavior occurs at a rental dwelling unit within twelve (12) months of the time a notice was sent for previous disorderly behavior at the same unit, the community development department may notify by first class mail the licensee and the tenant of the violation and ask the licensee to submit, within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, a written report of all actions taken by the licensee since the first violation notice and actions the licensee intends to take to assist in the prevention of disorderly behavior. 
(e)  Third instance. If a third instance of disorderly behavior occurs at a rental dwelling unit within twelve (12) months after the first of two (2) previous notices of disorderly behavior at the same unit, the rental dwelling unit license may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the community development department. The owner/representative has the right to appeal the community development department decision as outlined in section 2-25 of the Fairmont City Code. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, second and third instances of disorderly behavior shall be those which: 
(1)  Occur at the same rental dwelling unit; or 
(2)  Involve tenants at the same rental dwelling unit; or 
(3)  Involve guests or invitees at the same rental dwelling unit; or 
(4)  Involve guests or invitees of the same tenant; or 
(5)  Involve the same tenant. 
(g)  No adverse action shall be taken against the rental license when the instance of disorderly behavior occurred during a pending eviction proceedings (unlawful detainer) or within thirty (30) days of notice given by the licensee to a tenant to vacate the rental dwelling unit. However, adverse license action may proceed when the licensee fails to diligently pursue the eviction process. Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon violations of this section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if the licensee has taken appropriate measures which will prevent further instances of disorderly behavior which may include a failed eviction process. 
(h)  Determining disorderly behavior. A determination that the rental dwelling unit has been the location of disorderly behavior shall be made by a preponderance of the evidence to support such a determination. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination of disorderly behavior, nor shall the fact of dismissal or acquittal of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license action under this section. 
(i)  Enforcement. Enforcement actions provided in this section shall not be exclusive, and the community development department may take any action with respect to a licensee, a tenant, or the licensed rental dwelling unit(s) as is authorized by this chapter or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-11. - Fees and penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates the provisions of this article may be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The community development department may post the rental dwelling unit by appropriate signs or notices prohibiting occupancy, and may act to cause the rental dwelling unit to be vacated or remain vacant until the Code violations are corrected. 
(c)  All fees and penalties due and payable by the owner and not paid within thirty (30) days of the due date shall be considered delinquent and may be certified to the county auditor-treasurer for collection with real estate taxes. 
(d)  All fees to be charged under this chapter will be set by an chapter as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-12. - No retaliation. 
    Per Minnesota State Statute Section 504B.205, Subd. 2, Emergency calls permitted. 
(a)  A landlord may not: 
(1)  Bar or limit a residential tenant's right to call for police or emergency assistance in response to domestic abuse or any other conduct; or 
(2)  Impose a penalty on a residential tenant for calling for police or emergency assistance in response to domestic abuse or any other conduct. 
(b)  A residential tenant may not waive and a landlord may not require the residential tenant to waive the residential tenant's right to call for police or emergency assistance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-13. - No warranty by city. 
    By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, the city council, its agents, and employees do not warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the city. Owners and occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interests, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
Sec. 27-14. - Crime free rental housing program. 
    The crime free rental housing program is a voluntary, three-phase certification program for rental properties of all sizes, including single-family rental homes. The program is available to owners and property managers of rental properties located within the corporate limits of the City of Fairmont. Necessary training and support of the program is designed to provide for ease of participation. The program is known to be effective in reducing criminal activity in rental properties. It is the policy of the City of Fairmont to encourage active participation in the program by all rental property owners and property managers. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 4-28-14) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1984 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1984 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1984 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1984 
Code Section Section 
this Code Tit. 1 130 1-1 160, 170 1-11 210 1-7 220 1-8 230 1-10 310, 410, 420, 440 1-2 320 1-4 430 1-3 510-540 1-9 Tit. 2 120 2-20 130 2-23 130, 140 2-22 150 2-21 160 2-19 170 9-1, 9-2 180 2-24 190(1)-(3) 2-16-2-18 210, 230(1)-(6) 2-57 220 2-56 230(7) 2-58 310 2-101 320 2-116 330 2-131 340 2-146 350 2-161 350(1) 10-16-10-18 350(2) 21-16, 21-17 360 2-181 370 2-188 410, 420 2-102 430 2-117 440 2-132 450 2-147 460(1)-(3) 2-71-2-73 470 2-162 480 2-182 510 2-41 520 2-25 530 2-2 540 2-1 2-197 550 2-196 560 2-198 570 2-199 610(2) 2-217 620 2-218 630 2-216 640 2-219 650 2-220 660 2-221 710-730 2-42 Tit. 3 110 2-236 120 2-237 130 2-239 140(1)-(3) 2-241-2-243 150 2-238 160 2-240 210 2-256 220 2-257 230 2-258 310 2-86, 2-271 320 2-272 330(1) 2-87 2-273 340 15-3 710 18-17 720 18-18 730 18-19 810 20-27 820 20-28 830 20-29 930 21-18 1020 25-199 1030(1)-(8), (10) 25-200 1030(13), (14) 25-202 1030(12), (15) 25-201 1030(16) 25-203 1110 2-287 1120 2-288 1130 2-289 Tit. 4 110 25-1 120 25-2 130 25-3 140(1)(2) 25-4 140(3) 25-5 140(4) 25-302 150 25-300 160(1)-(3) 25-301-25-303 170 25-5 210(1) 25-400 310(1) 25-501 310(2) 25-502 410 25-701 420(1) 25-801 420(2), (3) 25-802 420(4)-(7) 25-803-25-806 430(1), (2) 25-821 430(3) 25-824 430(3)(I) 25-827 430(3)(A), (B) 25-822 430(3)(C) 25-823 430(3)(E), (F) 25-825 430(3)(G) 25-826 430(3)(H) 25-828 430(3)(I) 25-827 440(1), (2) 25-841 440(3) 25-842 440(5)-(10) 25-843-25-848 450 25-702 460 25-700 510(2) 25-601 520 25-602 Tit. 5 110 3-1 14-1 14-41 19-1 22-36 120(1)-(4), (6) 14-18 120(4) 14-18 120(5) 14-19 130(2) 14-20 140(1), (2) 14-21, 14-22 140(3) 14-20 14-23, 14-24 150(1) 14-17 150(2) 14-25 210 3-41 220 3-42 230 3-43 250 3-44 260(2) 3-29 260(3) 3-45 260(5) 3-27 260(7) 3-46 260(8) 3-26 260(9) 3-28 270(4) 3-5 610 3-91 620(1) 3-92 620(2) 3-94 620(3) 3-100 630(1), (2) 3-93 640(5) 3-95 650(2) 3-96 650(3) 3-101 650(4) 3-97 660(F)-(Z) 3-96 670(1)-(3) 3-98 680(2) 3-99 680(23), (25) 3-94 680(5) 3-70 680(7) 3-71 680(11), (12), (16) 3-66 680(14) 3-73 680(15) 3-72 680(17), (18), (22) 3-93 680(20) 3-69 680(23), (25) 3-94 680(26) 3-4 680(27) 3-67 690(2) 3-68 690(2), (7) 3-5 690(3) 3-74 690(5) 3-75 710 3-116 3-118 810 19-16 19-20 820 19-17 830 19-18 830(3) 19-3 19-19 19-21 840(1), (4) 19-22 840(2) 19-5 840(3) 19-4 840(5) 19-3 850(1) 19-18 850(2), 860 19-23 870 19-2 1010-1040 22-37 1030 22-38 1050 22-39 1320 3-136 1510-1530 14-42 6110 3-2 Tit. 6 Ch. 11 16-4 Ch. 15 16-23 Ch. 16 16-21 110 16-1 120 16-2 130 16-3 210-240 23-3 310 23-36 320 23-37 330 23-37 340-360 23-38 410 23-21 420 23-22 430 23-24 510 23-66 520 23-67 530 23-68 540 23-69 550-570 23-51 610-630 23-1 690 3-76 710 23-2 720 23-4 730 22-21 910 16-46 910, 920 16-49 930 16-50 940 16-48 950(A) 16-50 950(B), (C) 16-58, 16-59 950(C)(E)(I)(K) 16-53 950(E)(2) 16-52 950(F)-(H) 16-55-16-57 950(I) 16-60 950(J) 16-54 960 16-47 1010-1030 23-23 1210 16-30 1230 16-31 1240 16-26 1250 16-24 1260 16-25 1280(A) 16-27 1280(B) 16-29 1310 16-28 1410-1430 16-32 1710 16-22 1810-1830 23-5 1910-1930 16-5 2010 16-27 2020 16-29 Tit. 7 Ch. 9(D) 18-35 Ch. 11 17-1 Ch. 13 15-2 Ch. 14 2-3 Ch. 15 10-1 210 22-16 220 22-17 230 22-18 240 22-19 250 22-20 310 4-23 320 4-22 330 4-24 340 4-25 350 4-26 360 4-27 370 4-28 380 4-21 380(D) 4-1 410, 420 4-3 440 4-4 450 4-5 460 4-6 470 4-7 480 4-2 510-540 15-1 610, 630 5-3 640 5-4 650 5-5 660 5-1 670 5-2 680 5-6 810, 820 17-2 1210-1240 16-77-16-80 1250(A)(1)-(A)(3) 16-81-16-83 1250(A)(4), (A)(5) 16-84, 16-85 1250(A)(6) 16-86 1250(B), (C) 16-84 1260 16-86 1270 16-76 1330 15-2  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of ordinances adopted since the 1984 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1984 Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 83-3 3-28-83 1, 2, 4 2-200 83-12 11-14-83 3-76 84-5 3-12-84 2-57 84-6 2-27-84 25-200 84-9 4-9-84 I 4-42 II-IV 4-41 V 4-44 VI 4-43 84-12 6-25-84 5-3 84-15 9-10-84 1(1610-1630) 3-6 85-2 4-9-85 9-1, 9-2 86-2 4-14-86 3-96 86-3 4-14-86       Rpld 3-29 86-4 6-30-86 7.01(1)-(4) 26-2-26-5 7.02 26-1 7.03 26-6 7.04 26-153 26-155-26-158 26-161 7.05(1)(I) 26-558 7.05(1)(A)-(D) 26-551-26-554 7.05(1)(E) 26-554-1 7.05(1)(F)-(N) 26-555-26-563 7.05(2)-(5) 26-564-26-567 7.06(I)(I) 26-657 7.06(I)(A)-(C) 26-651 7.06(I)(D)-(I) 26-652-26-657 7.06(II) 26-676 7.06(II)(A)-(F) 26-677-26-682 7.07 26-801 7.07(A) 26-805 7.07(B) 26-802 7.07(C)-(F) 26-806-26-809 7.07(G) 26-804 7.07(H) 26-803 7.08 26-201 7.08(1)-(6) 26-202-26-207 7.09 26-251 7.09(1)(A) 26-276 7.09(1)(B) 26-277 7.09(1)(C) 26-278 7.09(1)(D), (E) 26-279, 26-280 7.09(2)(A), (B) 26-296, 26-297 7.09(3) 26-252 7.09(4)(A) 26-253 7.09(4)(B)(1)-(3) 26-317 7.09(4)(B)(4) 26-318, 26-319 7.09(4)(B)(4), (10) 26-320 7.09(4)(B)(5) 26-321-26-331 7.09(4)(B)(7) 26-332 7.09(4)(B)(8)-(18) 26-333-26-343 7.09(5) 26-254 7.09(6) 26-255 7.09(7)(A)-(E) 26-376-26-380 7.10(1) 26-704 7.10(A) 26-701 7.10(B), (C) 26-726, 26-727 7.10(D) 26-705 7.10(E) 26-728 7.10(F) 26-702 7.10(G) 26-729 7.10(H) 26-703 7.11(I) 26-162 7.11(II)(A) 26-501 7.11(II)(B)(1), (2) 26-502, 26-503 7.11(II)(C)(1)-(5) 26-516-26-520 7.11(II)(D)-(H) 26-521-26-525 7.12(1) 26-26 7.12(2)(A), (B) 26-56, 26-57 7.12(2)(C), (D) 26-101, 26-102 7.12(2)(E), (F) 26-58, 26-59 7.12(2)(G) 26-103 7.12(III) 26-163 7.12(4)(I) 26-84 7.12(4)(A)-(L) 26-76-26-87 7.12(5)(A)-(D) 26-36-26-39 7.12(5)(E), (F) 26-40 7.13(1)-(3) 24-2-24-4 7.13(4) 24-6 7.13(5), (7)(A) 24-1 7.13(6) 24-51 7.13(7)(B) 24-52 7.13(9) 24-67 7.13(10)(A) 24-76 7.13(10(A)) 24-77 7.13(10)(B), (C) 24-78, 24-79 7.13(10)(D)-(G) 24-152-24-155 7.13(11)(A) 24-91 7.13(11)(A), (B) 24-92 7.13(11)(C) 24-93 7.13(12)(I) 24-203 7.13(12)(A) 24-201 7.13(12)(B)-(D) 24-226-24-228 7.13(12)(E)(1)-(8) 24-229-24-236 7.13(12)(F) 24-237 7.13(12)(H) 24-238 7.13(12)(G) 24-202 7.13(12)(J)-(M) 24-204-24-207 7.13(13) 24-156 7.13(14) 24-5 7.14 6-16 7.14(A), (B) 6-17, 6-18 86-6 8-25-86 18-31-18-56 86-7 10-13-86 3-76 87-2 3-23-87 26-157 87-5 4-27-87 26-157 87-7 7-13-87 1-8 25-900-25-907 87-10 8-10-87 26-702 87-12 11-9-87 Adopting Ordinance, p. vii 88-1 1-25-88 26-157(a)(9.5) 88-2 1-25-88 26-157(d)(4) 88-5 2-9-88 1-4 16-28 89-1 1-23-89 26-651(c), 26-652(l) 89-6 4-24-89 1, 2 26-151(d)(5) 89-7 4-24-89 1 26-158(d)(1) 89-9 6-26-89 15-5 89-11 8-14-89 I-III 16-6 89-12 9-11-89 16-6(b)(1)(w) 89-13 9-25-89 I 26-1 II 26-152(d)(5) 89-16 11-27-89 2-16 89-19 12-11-89 1       Rpld 22-39 2 22-37(a) 89-20 12-11-89 1, 2 16-28(note) 3-6 16-28 90-1 1-22-90 2-20 90-3 4-23-90 26-651(c) 26-652(l) 90-5 5-31-90 26-156(b)(11) 90-6 6-11-90 3-95 90-7 6-11-90 14-51-14-66 90-8 8-27-90 11-21-11-25 90-10 8-27-90 26-152(e)(4) b., d. 26-153(e)(4) b., d. 26-154(e)(4) b., e. 26-163(e)(4) b., d. 90-11 10-22-90 16-46, 16-61 90-12 10-22-90 26-6(b)(11) 90-15 12-10-90 1       Rpld 23-36, 23-37 2(1)-(11)       Added 18-61-18-71 90-16 12-10-90 2 16-28(d) 91-3 5-28-91       Rpld 26-205(9) 91-4 5-28-91 2-217(3) 91-6 6-10-91 14-64(b) 91-10 11-25-91 1 3-76 2 3-92 92-4 3-23-92 9-1, 9-2 92-5 4-27-92 14-67 92-6 5-11-92 23-1(c) 92-7 6-22-92 26-652(e) 92-10 8-10-92 1       Rpld 3-96(a) 2       Rnbd 3-96(b), (c)       as 3-96(a), (b) 92-12 11-23-92 26-160(e)(4) b., 26-161(e)(4) b. 92-13 12-14-92 26-1, 26-152(d)(2), 26-502       Added 26-152(b)(7), 26-154(b)(4), 26-208 93-2 4-12-93 17-1 93-7 6-28-93 26-152(d)(4) 93-15 10-25-93 18-47(8) 93-16 10-11-93 15-6 94-1 2-28-94       Added 26-703(12)       Rpld 26-704(14) 94-2 2-14-94 2-20 94-8 8-1-94       Added 26-156(b)(12) 94-10 11-8-94 1       Added 2-26 94-13 12-12-94       Added 2-301-2-305 95-6 1-23-95 22-20 95-7 2-6-95       Added 26-160(b)(18) 95-9 3-20-95 6-16 95-10 6-26-95       Added 26-160(d)(4) 95-11 6-26-95 16-46 95-13 10-2-95       Rpld 2-26 96-1 2-26-96 26-157(d)(5) 96-2 4-22-96 26-803 96-4 4-22-96 26-160(d)(5)-(7) 96-5  6-17-96 18-47(3) 96-6  6- 6-96 2-1, 2-16-2-18, 2-21, 2-24, 2-25, 2-42, 2-57, 2-86, 2-101, 2-102, 2-116, 2-117, 2-131, 2-132, 2-147, 2-161, 2-162, 2-182, 2-188, 2-196, 2-242, 2-289, 3-93, 4-1-4-4, 6-17, 6-18, 15-4, 16-86, 20-27, 20-28, 21-16, 21-17 96-7  9-23-96 26-1, 26-151 96-9  7- 8-96 2-20 96-11  9-23-96 26-521(e)(2) 96-12 10-14-96 15-1(a) 96-16 12-16-96 16-28 97-7 10-27-97 1 26-156(b)(13) 2       Rpld 2-157(b)(6)       Rnbd 2-157(b)(7)-(9.5), (10)-(12)       as 2-157(b)(6)-(12) 98-3  2-23-98 2-4-2-12 98-4  2-23-98 2-401-2-405 98-6  7-27-98 26-156(b)(14) 98-7  8-31-98 3-92(3)a 98-9 10-19-98       Rpld 4-21-4-28, 4-41-4-44       Added 4-21-4-30 98-10 10-19-98 16-76, 16-77 16-80, 16-83, 16-87, 16-88 99-2  2-22-99 1-4 6-16 99-4  3-22-99 1-9 2-501-2-509 99-5  4-12-99 11-21, 11-24 99-6  4-26-99 2-20 99-8  5-24-99 2-101, 2-102, 2-131, 2-132, 2-189 99-10  7-12-99 26-152(b)(8), (d)(6), 26-153(b)(4), 26-297(2) 99-11  9-27-99 26-156(d)(2) 99-14 12-13-99 16-33 2000-01  2-14-00 2-101, 2-102, 2-131, 2-132       Rpld 2-189 2001-3  9-25-00 1, 2 14-67 2001-5 12-11-00 26-205(5) 2002-01  1-28-02 2-403, 2-404 2002-03  6-10-02 1 5-3, 5-4 2002-04  6-10-02 26-152, 26-156 2002-5  7-22-02 26-159 2003-05  4-28-03 1-4 6-16 2004-04 11- 8-04       Added 25-603 2004-07  9-27-04       Added 18-47(9) 2005-01  1-10-05       Added 16-90-16-93 2005-02  2-14-05 1-4 6-16 2005-03  2-28-05 26-156(e)(4)b. 26-158(e)(4)b. 2005-04  2-28-05 26-657(15) 2005-05  2-28-05       Rpld 26-159 2006-01  1- 9-06 26-657(8) 26-657(11), (12) 26-657(17) 26-657(19) 2006-02  1- 9-06       Added 26-152(d)(8)       Added 26-158(d)(5) 2007-02  2-26-07 26-158(e)(2) 2007-03  7-23-07 1 3-76 2007-05  7-23-07 1-4 6-16 2007-06 11-19-07 1       Rpld 15-5 2008-01  3-24-08       Added 22-42-22-46 2008-02  3-24-08 26-158(e)(4)e. 2008-04  6- 9-08 1 2-16 2008-05  8-25-08       Added 26-651(l)       Added 26-652(n)       Added 26-653(4) 2008-06  9- 8-08       Added 22-18(h) 2008-07  8-25-08 17-1 2009-04  5-11-09 26-85 2009-09 11-23-09 26-206(a) 2010-03  2-22-10 26-156(b)(13) 2010-05  6-28-10 16-77-16-79 2010-06  7-26-10       Added 25-1000-25-1002 2011-04  1-10-11 26-160 2011-05  2-28-11 26-161 2011-08  8-22-11 26-156 2011-09  8-22-11 26-101 2012-02  2-27-12 1 26-6(b)(6), (7) 2012-03  3-12-12 1 9-1 9-2 2012-06  6-11-12 14-67 2012-08 10-22-12       Added 26-152(e)(4)e.       Added 26-153(e)(4)e. 2012-09 10-22-12       Added 26-807(6) 2013-01  2-11-13 4-3 2013-04  2-25-13       Added 26-160(d)(8) 2013-06  2-11-13 26-802(3) 2013-07  9-23-13       Added 26-205(14) 2014-02  4-28-14 1       Added 27-1-27-14 2014-04  8-11-14 1-7       Added 10-2 2015-03  3-23-15 26-653(4) 2016-02  3-28-16 18-31 18-40 18-42(2)       Added 18-44(3) 18-45 18-46(3) 18-47(3) 18-49 18-53 2016-03  5- 9-16 2-287 2016-04  8-11-16       Added 26-209 2016-06 10-24-16 26-1       Added 26-205(9)       Added 26-521(e)(2)a.7. 2017-02  5-22-17       Added 26-160(b)(20) 2017-03  5-22-17 3-1       Added 3-44(a)(4) 3-45 3-70 3-92 3-93(c) 2017-04  5-22-17 2-20 2017-07  7-31-17 26-1 26-152(e)(2) 26-153(e)(2) 26-163(e)(2) 26-205 2017-08  8-28-17 26-40(a) 2018-02  2-12-18 26-26 2018-03  2-12-18 26-37 2018-04  2-12-18 26-56 2018-05  2-12-18 26-57 2018-06  2-12-18 26-58 2018-07  2-12-18 26-77 2018-08  2-12-18 26-78 2018-09  2-12-18 26-727 2018-10  2-12-18 26-805 2018-11  3-12-18 25-1000-25-1002       Added 25-1003-25-1006       Added Ch. 25, Apps. A, B 2018-12  3-26-18       Added 26-900-26-907 2018-13  6-11-18 23-1 2018-14  6-25-18 26-1 26-158(b) 26-160(b) 2018-16  8-27-18 2-8       Rpld 2-9       Rnbd 2-10-2-12       as 2-9-2-11 2018-17 10-22-18 26-556 2018-18 12-10-18       Added 3-7 2019-02  1-28-19 26-154(e)(5)b. 2019-08  2-25-19 26-152(d)(3)  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
  This table gives the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Minnesota Constitution 
Article Section  Section 
this Code XIII 7 Ch. 19 XIII 7 Ch. 19, Art. I 
19-2(5)  
Minnesota 
Statutes 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.27 2-42 12.25 2-501 2-504 12.31 2-506 16B.59 et seq. 6-16 16B.59-16B.75 6-16 16B.62, subdiv.1 6-16 16B.65 6-16 16B.69 6-16 16B.70 6-16 35.71 4-23 65B.48 16-92 65B.48, 
Subdiv. 5 16-6(a)(1) 84.81 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV 84.87, 
Subdiv. (1)(a) 16-76 84.87, 
Subdiv. (1)(b)(1)-(5) 16-76 84.87, 
Subdiv. 1(c) 16-84 84.87, 
Subdiv. 1(d) 16-76 87.87, 
Subdiv. 1(f) 16-84 84.87, 
Subdiv. 2(a)-(e) 16-81-16-85 84.84, 
Subdiv. 3 Ch. 16, Art. IV 84.871 16-84 84.872 16-86 84.922-84.929 16-91 86B.005 5-3(a), 5-4 93.44-93.51 26-1 Ch. 103B 25-1000 103F.401 25-1000 103F.441 25-1000 103F.462 25-1000 103G.005, Subdiv. 15 25-1001 103G.245 26-521 26-904 Ch. 105 26-524(4) 105.37, 
Subdiv. 14, 15 26-1 105.42 26-521 116.082 22-20 145.01 2-86 
2-271 Ch. 152 18-31 152.01 27-10 Ch. 168C 16-49(b) 168C.02, 
Subdiv. 2 16-49(a) Ch. 169 Ch. 16 
16-6(c) 
16-50 16-91 169.01, 
Subdiv. 51 16-46 169.04 Ch. 16 169.04(1) Ch. 16, Art. II 169.041 16-28 169.054, 
Subdiv. 7 16-6(c) 169.32 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 169.35, 
Subdiv. 1 16-25 169.35, 
Subdiv. 3 16-24 169.81, 
Subdiv. 5 22-19(c) 169.87 16-4, 16-5 169.222 Ch. 16, Art. III 169.222, 
Subdiv. 1 16-50 169.222, 
Subdiv. 2 16-54 169.222, 
Subdiv. 3 16-58 169.222, 
Subdiv. 4 16-53 169.222, 
Subdiv. 5 16-59 169.222, 
Subdiv. 6 16-51 169.222, 
Subdiv. 8 16-55(1) 169.222, 
Subdiv. 9(b) 16-57 169.222, 
Subdiv. 10 16-60 169.522 16-6(a)(4) 204B.14 Ch. 9 Ch. 205 Ch. 9 Ch. 299F Ch. 10 27-3 299F.75 10-1 307.08 26-1 326B101-194 27-3 Ch. 329 Ch. 19 329.06 Ch. 19 329.15 Ch. 19 340A 3-3 340A.24 3-92 340A.24, 
Subdiv. 2 3-1 340A.26 3-92 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 2 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 4 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 7 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 9 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdivs. 13, 14       3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 14 18-31 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 15a 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 17 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 19       3-1, 18-31 340A.101, 
Subdivs. 20-22 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdivs. 25-27 3-1 340A.101, 
Subdiv. 29 3-1 340A.101 et seq. Ch. 3 340A.301, 
Subdiv. 1 3-45 340A.301, 
Subdiv. 7 3-45 340A.401 3-41 340A.402 3-96 340A.403 3-44 340A.404 3-91 
3-96 340A.404, 
Subdiv. 1 3-92 340A.123 14-16 340A.404, 
Subdiv. 5 3-92 340A.408, 
Subdiv. 1 3-43 340A.408, 
Subdiv. 2 3-94 340A.408, 
Subdiv. 5 3-94 340A.410, 
Subdiv. 5 3-73 340A.410, 
Subdiv. 7 3-46, 3-101 340A.411, 
Subdiv. 2 3-43 340A.412 3-95 340A.412, 
Subdiv. 2 3-93 340A.412, 
Subdiv. 3 3-96 340A.412, 
Subdiv. 4 3-98 340A.412, 
Subdiv. 5 3-96 340A.412, 
Subdiv. 9 3-100, 3-101 340A.412, 
Subdiv. 10 3-71 340A.414 Ch. 3, Art. V 340A.501, 
Subdiv. 5 Ch. 3, Art. V 340A.504 3-76 340A.506 3-72 340A.509 Ch. 3 340A.601 Ch. 3, Art. IV 340A.601, 
Subdiv. 5 3-117 340A.704 3-26 
3-66 340A.906 3-2 346.51 4-22 346.54 4-2 349.12 11-21 Ch. 361 18-51(4) 361.01 et seq. Ch. 5 366.011 10-2 366.012 10-2 Ch. 394 26-1 415.01 10-2 415.021 1-1 Ch. 419 21-18 423A Ch. 21, Art. II Ch. 429 23-21 429.021, 
Subdiv. 1(8) Ch. 17 429.029, 
Subdiv. 1(8) 23-38 429.101 Ch. 17 
22-3 
23-38 429.111 22-3 
23-38 436 Ch. 21, Art. II 436.02 Ch. 19 440.135 23-1 Ch. 444 25-900 444.075 Ch. 25, 
Arts. VI, VII 
25-907 451.09 Ch. 25, Art. V 459.31 2-200(b) 461.12-461.15 14-42 Ch. 462 20-20(5) 462.351 et seq. Ch. 20 462.354, 
Subdiv. 1 Ch. 20, Art. II 462.357 Ch. 26 462.357, Subdivs. 3, 4 Ch. 26, Art. II, 
Div. 2 462.357, Subdiv. 6 Ch. 26, Art. II, 
Div. 3 
Ch. 26, Art. II, 
Div. 5 462.358 Ch. 24 
24-2 462.358, 
Subdiv. 2b 24-156 462.358, 
Subdiv. 3a 24-4 462.358, 
Subdiv. 6 24-5 471.62 2-3 
3-3 
6-16 
16-1 
21-18 471.195 2-217 471.616 2-17 471.705 2-20, 2-21 504B.205, 
Subdiv. 2 27-12 Ch. 505 26-522 505.07, 
Subdiv. 1 26-522 609.034 1-9 609.50 27-10 609.66, 
Subdiv. 1a 27-10 609.67 27-10 609.68 22-21 609.72 27-10 609.74 27-10 609.415 2-8 609.745 27-10 627.713 27-10 645.001 et seq. 1-2 645.13-645.151 1-3 645.35 1-7 1-8 645.36 1-8 645.49 1-4  
