CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 9
AN ORDINANCE LICENSING AND REGULATING THE SALE AND CONSUMPTION
OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR AND PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
Section 1. Provisions of State Law Adopted. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
340A, with reference to the definition of terms, applications for license, granting of license,
conditions of license, restrictions on consumption, provisions on sales, conditions of bonds of
licensees, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance as if
fully set out herein.
Section 2. License Required.
2.1. No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized under state
license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale any intoxicating liquor
without first having received a license to do so as provided in this ordinance.
2.2. "On sale" liquor licenses shall be issued only to restaurants, clubs, and exclusive "on
sale" liquor stores and shall permit "on sale" of liquor o nly.
2.3. On sale wine licenses shall be issued only to restaurants with facilities for seating at
least 25 guests at one time, and shall permit the sale of wine up to 14% alcohol by
volume for consumption with the sale of food.
2.4. Sunday on sale liquor licenses shall be issued only to restaurants or clubs with
seating capacity for at least 30 persons which hold a regular on sale liquor license and
shall permit the sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in
conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 2:00
a.m on Mondays.
2.5. "Off sale" licenses shall be issued only to "off sale" exclusive liquor stores and shall
perm it "off sales" of liquor only.
Section 3. Application for License.
3.1. Every application for a license to sell liquor shall be verified and filed with the City
Clerk. It shall state the name of the applicant, his age, representations as to his character,
with such references as may be required, his citizenship, the type of license applied for,
the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location
and type of building, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how
long he has been in that business at that place, and such other information as the council
may require from time to time. In addition to containing such information, each
application for a license shall be in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of
Public Safety. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
3.2. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by the minimum proof of
financial responsibility required by Minnesota Statutes Section 340A.409 (subd. 1) and
any amendments thereto or substitutes therefor that may from time to time become
effective.
3.3. The proof of financial responsibility offered under Subdivision 2 shall be approved
by the City Council and in the case of applicants for off sale licenses by the State
Commissioner of Public Safety. Liability insurance policies shall be approved as to form
by the City Attorney. The operation of such off-sale or on-sale liquor business without
having on file at all times with the municipality the proof of financial responsibility
required in Subdivision 2 shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license.
Section 4. License Fees.
4.1. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from the City T
reasurer for payment in full of the required fee for the license. All fees shall be paid into
the general fund of the municipality. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the
treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
4.2. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each year. Each license shall
be issued for a period of one year except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed
when the application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a
pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as
one month.
4.3. (Repealed by Ordinance 94, adopted 2/10/2009).
4.4. No refund of any fee shall be permitted except as authorized under Minnesota
Statutes, Section 340A.408.
Section 5. Granting of Licenses.
5.1. The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application. Opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After
such investigation and hearing, the City Council shall grant or refuse the application in its
discretion. N o "off sale" license shall become effective until it, together with the proof of
financial responsibility furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the State
Commissioner of Public Safety.
5.2. An applicant seeking an “on-sale” license shall pay an investigation fee with the
required annual license fee. If investigation outside the State of Minnesota is required by
the city council or the State Commissioner of Public Safety, the applicant shall pay the
actual cost of the investigation, up to $10,000.00, prior to any action to approve or deny
the license.
5.3. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only. Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
person or to another place without the approval of the City Council.
Section 6. Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to or held by any person
made ineligible for such a license by state law. No license shall be issued to an individual who is
a nonresident of the City.
Section 7. Places Ineligible for License.
7.1. No license shall be issued for any place or for any business ineligible for such a
license under state law.
7.2. No license shall be issued to any business, except an exclusive liquor store, until it
has been in operation continuously for six months.
7.3. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
7.4. No license shall be granted within a reasonable distance of any school, church, or
private home at the determination of the City Council.
Section 8. Conditions of License.
8.1. Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the following subdivisions
and all other provisions of this ordinance and of any other applicable ordinance of the
City or state law.
8.2. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his place of business and the
conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises
authorized to sell or serve intoxicating liquor shall be deemed the act of the licensee as
well and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this ordinance equally
with the employee.
8.3. No sale of liquor shall be made to anyone on credit.
8.4. Any peace officer, health officer, or any properly designated officer or employee of
the City shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search the premises of the
licensee during business hours without a warrant.
Section 9. Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption.
9.1. No minor shall misrepresent his age for the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor.
9.2. No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure liquor.
9.3. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place or place of
business not licensed to sell liquor "on sale" and no person shall consume liquor in any
such place.
9.4. No liquor shall be sold or consumed on a public highway or in an automobile.
Section 10. Revocation. The council may suspend or revoke any liquor license for violation of
any provision or condition of this ordinance or any state law regulating the sale of intoxicating
liquor and shall revoke such license if the licensee willfully violates any provision of Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 340A. Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on revocation,
revocation or suspension shall be preceded by written notice to the grantee and a public hearing.
The notice shall give at least eight days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state
the nature of the charges against the licensee. The council may, without any advance notice,
suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for a period of not exceeding thirty (30)
days.
Section 11. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $700.00 or
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days or both plus the costs of
prosecution in either case.
Section 12. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 9 was placed in full force and effect on 17
December 1963 by a unanimous vote of the City Council of the City of Gem Lake.
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 9 LEGEND
The Ordinance licensing and regulating the sale and consumption of intoxicating liquor and
providing a penalty for violation was originally enacted by the City Council as Ordinance
Number 9 on 17 December 1963. Since that time, the City Council has made amendments to the
Ordinance in keeping with changes in State law and the wishes of the community. The
following table indicates the original ordinance and the said amendments.
ORDINANCE DESCRIPTION ENACTMENT
9 An ordinance licensing and regulating the sale of liquor. 12/17/1963
52 An ordinance amending Ordinance No. 9, changing the
Requirements for Liquor License Application and Changing the
Annual Fees for Liquor Licenses
11/20/1989
94 An ordinance establishing procedures for review and revocation
of all City licenses, and amending Ordinance No. 9 by: a)
inserting new sections 2.3 (wine licenses) and 2.4 (Sunday sales
licenses), renumbering off-sale provision as 2.5; b) deleting
Section.4.3, which set fees, in favor of reference to annual fee
schedule; c) inserting new Section 5.2 requiring payment of
investigation fee, and renumbering section now at 5.3; and d)
other language changes to conform with a – c.
2/10/2009
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 19
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE RAMSEY COUNTY AUDITOR AND TREASURER TO ACT AS
AGENTS FOR THE CITY OF GEM LAKE.
Section 1. The City Council of Gem Lake authorizes the Ramsey County Auditor and the Ramsey County T reasurer to
act as agents for the City of Gem Lake in Ramsey County to collect remaining balances of assessments for improvements
in cooperation with the City Clerk and City Treasurer.
Section 2. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 19 was enacted and placed in full force and effect on 15 September 1970
by a unanimous vote of the Gem Lake City Council.
CERTIFIED COPY
ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF GEM LAKE
Ordinance No. 43G
With Amendments through March, 2006
Enacted 20 March 2006
Replaces Zoning Ordinance No. 5 dated 2/19/63 which should be
considered the original effective date of this Ordinance.
$ 16.25 Print Copy
$10.65 Electronic Copy
- 1 -
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 - TITLE
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE
SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
3.1 Rules
3.2 Definitions
SECTION 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.1 Application of this Ordinance
4.2 Separability
4.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
4.4 Lot Provisions
4.5 Accessory Buildings
4.6 Required Yards and Open Space
4.7 Traffic Visibility
4.8 Farming Operations
4.9 Essential Services
4.10 Land Reclamation
4.11 Mining
4.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units
SECTION 5 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5.1 Enforcing Officer
5.2 Building Permits
5.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator
5.4 Variances
5.5 Special Use Permits
5.6 Interim Use Permits
5.7 Amendments
5.8 Appeals
5.9 Fees
5.10 Violations & Penalties
SECTION 6 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
6.1 Districts
6.2 Map
6.3 Boundaries
SECTION 7 - "R-1" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
7.1 Permitted Uses
7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
7.3 Special Uses
7.4 Height Regulations
7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
SECTION 8 - "R-2" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
8.1 Permitted Uses
8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
8.3 Special Uses
8.4 Height Regulations
8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
SECTION 9 - "R-3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
9.1 Permitted Uses
9.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
9.3 Special Uses
9.4 Height Regulations
9.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
SECTION 10 - "R-4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
10.1 Permitted Uses
10.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
10.3 Special Uses
10.4 Height Regulations
10.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
SECTION 11 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS
11.1 General Provisions
11.2 Lake Use Restrictions
11.3 Shoreland Zone 1 Restrictions
11.4 Shoreland Zone 2 Restrictions
11.5 Shoreland Zone 3 Restrictions
11.6 Shoreland Lot Restrictions
11.7 Shoreland Lot Building Restrictions For All Shoreland
11.8 Wetland Uses And Regulations
11.9 Development Alteration Regulations
11.10 Enforcement, Approvals And Appeals
SECTION 12 - "R-B" RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
12.1 Permitted Uses
12.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
- 2 -
12.3 Special Uses
12.4 Height Regulations
12.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
12.6 Rezoning For “R-B” retail Business
SECTION 13 - "G-B" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
13.1 Permitted Uses
13.2 Accessory Uses
13.3 Special Uses
13.4 Height Regulations
13.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
SECTION 14 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
14.1 Requirements for Consideration
14.2 Exterior Storage
14.3 Refuse
14.4 Screening
14.5 Landscaping
14.6 Maintenance
14.7 Lighting and Glare
14.8 Vibration
14.9 Off-Street Loading
14.10 Traffic Control
14.11 Drainage & Lot Flooding
14.12 Architecture
14.13 Explosives
14.14 Radiation and Electrical Emissions
14.15 Other Nuisance Characteristics
14.16 Consistency with Plans and Policies
SECTION 15 - SIGNS
15.1 Signs - General Provisions
15.2 Prohibited Signs
15.3 Real Estate Signs
15.4 Existing Signs
15.5 Method of Calculating Sign Size
15.6 Sign Permits
15.7 Use of Mobile Signs
15.8 Campaign & Election Signs
15.9 Construction Signs
15.10 Temporary Signs
15.11 Entrance/Exit Signs
15.12 Structural Regulations for Signs
15.13 Signs in Residential Districts
15.14 Signs in the Special "LD-B" District
15.15 Signs in the "RB","GB" and "GB II" Districts
SECTION 16 - OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
16.1 General Provisions
16.2 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas
16.3 Required Off-Street Parking
SECTION 17 -
SECTION 18 - "LD-B" LOW DENSITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
18.1 Purpose
18.2 Permitted Principal Uses
18.3 Permitted Accessory Uses
18.4 Special Uses or Interim Uses
18.5 Uses Not Permitted
18.6 Height Regulations
18.7 Area, Setbacks, Frontage and Yard Requirements
18.8 Lot Coverage
18.9 Hours of Operation For Businesses
18.10 Access
18.11 Materials Of Building Construction To Be Used For Commercial Structures
18.12 Reviews And Approvals
SECTION 19 - "G-B II" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT II
19.1 Permitted Uses
19.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
19.3 Special Uses
19.4 Height Regulations
19.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
- 3 -
SECTION 20 - INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.1 Purpose
20.2 Permitted Uses
20.3 Accessory Uses
20.4 Conditional Or Special Uses
20.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements
20.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements
20.7 Landscaping and Screening
20.8 Procedures For Requesting An Overlay
SECTION 21 - BROADCAST / TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
21.1 Purpose
21.2 Zoning Districts For Construction
21.3 Performance Standards
21.4 Proof of Non-Interference
21.5 Tower Set-Backs
21.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review
21.7 Exception
ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
ZONING ORDINANCE LEGEND OF CHANGES
ZONING MAPS (As Attachments From The Comprehensive Municipal Plan)
Existing Land Use Map - Figure 1 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Future Land Use & Planning Area Map - Figure 2 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Roadway System Map - Figure 3 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Sanitary Sewer Plan Map - Figure 4 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Wetland Management Areas Map - Figure 5 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Zoning Map - Figure 6 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
- 4 -
GEM LAKE ORDINANCE NO. 43G
With Amendments
through
24 January 2000
THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE LOCATION, SIZE, USE AND
HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS, THE ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS, AND THE DENSITY OF POPULATION IN THE CITY OF GEM
LAKE, AND FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, ORDER, CONVENIENCE, PROSPERITY AND
GENERAL WELFARE IN SAID CITY, AND FOR SAID PURPOSE, TO DIVIDE THE CITY INTO DISTRICTS, AND MAKE DIFFERENT
REGULATIONS FOR DIFFERENT DISTRICTS.
The City of Gem Lake does ordain as follows:
SECTION 1 - TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the GEM LAKE ZONING ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known
as "this Ordinance".
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE
This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:
. . . protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
. . . dividing the City into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of
structures and land.
. . . promoting orderly development of the residential, business and industrial areas.
. . . providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property.
. . . preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in
relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.
. . . providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section 3.1 Rules
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
3.1 (1) The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
3.1 (2) The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
3.1 (3) The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
3.1 (4) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
3.1 (5) Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such
definition thereof.
3.1 (6) All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.
Section 3.2 Definitions
The following words, and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure or portion of a structure subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental thereto.
ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE ANTENNAS
Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVRO antennas three (3) meters or less in diameter, short wave radio receiving
antennas, those antennas necessary for the operation of a Federally licensed Amateur Radio station, and towers/antennas for radio systems
operated by the City of Gem Lake.
ANTENNA
A device used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications, television or radio signals which is located on the exterior of or outside of any
building or structure. Such antennas include, but are not limited to, broadcast radio or television, wireless communications, cellular,
personal communications systems or any other dispatch type system, microwave or satellite dish, short-wave receiving or Amateur Radio
transmit/receive, and other Accessory and Secondary use antennas.
ALLEY
A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building located partly underground but having less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
BOARDING HOUSE
A building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings are provided
for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed eight (8) persons.
BUILDABLE AREA
A contiguous area of real property within a lot deemed suitable by best engineering practices for construction of a principal use structure
with no part of said area of real property within delineated wetlands, right-of-ways, set-backs, or easements.
BUILDING
Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel, and when said structures are divided by
party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
-5-
BUILDING HEIGHT
A distance to be measured from the mean curb level along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for all of that portion of the
structure having frontage on a public right-of-way, whichever is higher, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard
roof, to a point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the upper-most point on a round or other arch type roof, to the
height of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.
CARPORT
An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
CELLAR
That portion of the building having more than one-half (½) of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
COMMERCIAL BROADCAST SERVICES
Licensed commercial radio or television services transmitting signals for reception by the general public.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile
radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
CONTIGUOUS
Areas of real property actually in contact with one another or touching along a boundary and also touching or connected throughout in an
unbroken sequence. Real property separated by a body of water or designated wet land shall not be considered contiguous regardless of
whether the real property under the body of water or wetland has common ownership. The routing of a driveway through a parcel of real
property shall not be considered as separating same so as to make the portions created by the driveway not contiguous.
CURB LEVEL
The grade elevation as established by the City, of the curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established,
the City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this Ordinance.
DWELLING
A building or one (1) or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purpose, but not including
rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches.
DWELLING-ATTACHED
A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling.
DWELLING-DETACHED
A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN
A plan developed in accordance with the requirements of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Regional, State of MN and Federal guidelines that
includes all proposed alterations to real property and the methods to be employed before undertaking the proposed alterations to prevent
potential erosion and contamination of shorelands, wetlands and watershed areas, streets and by-ways, and adjacent private and public real
property using accepted best practices.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of public utilities or municipal departments of underground or overhead telephone,
gas, electrical, communication, water and/or sewer. Radio and television broadcast, cellular and PCS transmission/reception support
structures shall not be considered an essential service.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES
Structures including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone exchanges, substations, wells, pumping stations and elevated tanks.
FAMILY
An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group
of persons not so related, maintaining a common household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
FLOOR AREA
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached
accessory buildings, but excepting that area primarily devoted to window display, storage, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed
porches, detached accessory buildings utilized for dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space.
Measurements shall be made from the outside of exterior walls.
GARAGE-PRIVATE
A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger
vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated capacity not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds.
HARDSHIP-UNDUE HARDSHIP.
A situation in which real property in question cannot be put to reasonable use under the conditions allowed by official controls; the plight of
the owner of the real property is due to circumstances unique to the owner’s real property that were not created by the owner; the essential
character of the locality will not alter if a variance is granted. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute undue hardship if a
reasonable use for the real property exists under the terms of the official controls.
HOBBY ACTIVITIES
Any activity or interest pursued for pleasure or relaxation and not as a main occupation and meeting all of the following requirements: when
normally engaged in only by the persons residing in the dwelling where the hobby is pursued; when evidence of the hobby is not visible
from the street, or if visible is not offensive or such as to lower neighborhood property values; when pursuit of the hobby does not interfere
with enjoyment of neighboring property by its owners.
HOME OCCUPATION
Any gainful occupation of non-residential nature conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory building and carried on only by the
inhabitants and no more than one (1) non-resident thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes. No articles may be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediate
family residing therein. Home occupations shall not include the repair of internal combustion engines (other than small engine repair), body
shops, machine shops, welding shops, or other objectionable uses as determined by the City Council. The home occupation shall not be
conducted in more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less.
There shall be no outside display of goods or storage of equipment or material used in the "Home Occupation".
KENNEL-ANIMAL
Any place where three (3) or more of any single type of domestic animals, over four (4) months of age, are owned, boarded, bred or offered
for sale.
-6-
LOT
A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or use by a use permitted in this Ordinance.
LOT OF RECORD
Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one (1) unit of an Auditor's Subdivision or a Registered Land
Survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered, for which a Deed, Auditor's Subdivision or Registered Land Survey has
been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Ramsey County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance.
LOT AREA
The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
LOT AREA PER FAMILY
The number of square feet of lot area required per dwelling unit.
LOT-CORNER
A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
LOT DEPTH
The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE
A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way, the line of such
public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Ordinance.
LOT LINE-FRONT
That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, and in the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension on
a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot lines shall be designated by the owner and filed with the City.
LOT LINE-REAR
That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at
the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE-SIDE
Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT-OPEN SALES OR RENTAL LOT
Any land used or occupied for the purposes of buying, selling, or rental for use away from the premises, any goods, materials or
merchandise and for the storing of same in the open prior to sale or rental.
LOT-OPEN STORAGE LOT
Any land used or occupied for storing in the open any materials, equipment, vehicles of any kind or articles of any nature.
LOT-THROUGH
A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot,
both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this Ordinance.
LOT WIDTH
The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the first thirty (30) feet of the lot depth.
MOBILE HOME
Any type of structure or vehicle which can be readily adapted to or does provide facilities for a person or persons to eat or sleep which is
mounted on wheels, has provisions for wheels or may be loaded on any ordinary flat bed truck, such as a house trailer, converted bus or
truck, tent or small building.
MOTOR SERVICE STATION
A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the
public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.
NOXIOUS MATTER MATERIAL(S)
Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or
economic well-being of individuals.
OPEN SPACE
An area of real property on a lot which is not covered by impervious surfaces, structures, unpaved storage, or designated parking areas.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD
Qualitative or quantitative criterion established to control for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare such things as noise, odor,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated or inherent in particular or ordinary uses of land or
buildings.
PERMIT - INTERIM USE.
A permit allowing for the temporary use of real property issued by the City for a fee in accordance with the definitions and provisions
contained in this Ordinance.
PERMIT - SPECIAL USE.
A permit allowing for the special use of real property issued by the City for a fee in accordance with the definitions and provisions
contained in this Ordinance as a flexibility device to enable the assignment of dimensions to or conditions surrounding a proposed use after
consideration of adjacent uses, their functions, and the special problems the proposed use presents.
PUBLIC FACILITIES
Parks, playgrounds and similar uses owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake; or, libraries and other City of Gem Lake owned
facilities.
PRIVATE CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION FACILITIES
Child Care Facilities currently licensed by the State of Minnesota and Education Facilities with:
i) an enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years;
ii) a total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);
iii) a maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) “full-day equivalent” students with a full-day* defined as ten (10) hours.
* The “full-day equivalent” shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during each
hour of the “full-day” of school. This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.
-7-
PUBLIC UTILITY
Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone services to the general
public. For the purposes of this Ordinance, commercial broadcast services and commercial wireless telecommunications services shall not
be considered public utility uses and are defined separately.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT (RESIDENTIAL)
Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides, sand boxes, poles for net games, unoccupied boats and trailers, picnic tables, lawn chairs,
barbecue stands, and similar equipment.
SHORELAND
Real property immediately adjacent to and abutting but not contained within the mean high water mark of any Shoreline.
SHORELAND IMPACT PLAN
A plan detailing current and future use of Shorelands and the potential impact of said uses; an assessment of current and future conditions
and impact on those conditions for: vegetation and trees, soil and water, human and animal habitat, natural aesthetics and environmental
quality.
SHORELAND ZONE 1
All real property located within and waterward of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local
regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 2
All real property located within and landward fifty (50’) feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state,
regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 3
All real property located within and landward fifty (50’) feet to one hundred fifty (150') feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as
determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELINE
The mean high water mark of the body of water known as Gem Lake and any lake, pond, or flowage in the City of Gem Lake as determined
by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations, along with all wetlands attendant to
each body of water.
SIGN-ADVERTISING
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN-BUSINESS
An identification sign which directs attention to a business, profession or corporation or to the commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered on the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
SIGN-CONSTRUCTION
A temporary free standing sign erected on a site denoting proposed or future construction on this particular site. This sign may indicate: 1)
The particulars of the proposed construction, 2) the company, firm or individual for whom it is being constructed, 3) the architect, engineer
and contractor, and 4) rental, sales or lease information.
SIGN-CROSS AREA OF
Shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign, and in no case, passing through or
between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside of such sign and
not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN-ELECTRIC
Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior unattached light source.
SIGN-ENTRANCE/EXIT
A privately owned traffic directional sign erected on private property by the owner of such property for the purpose of guiding vehicles and
pedestrians.
SIGN-FLASHING
Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color during which time such sign
is in use.
SIGN-GENERAL
Any object which indicates a name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity person, institution,
organization or business. However, a "sign" for application of this Ordinance shall not include any display of official court or public office
notices or highway directional signs.
SIGN-GROUND MOUNTED
A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or up from the ground.
SIGN-IDENTIFICATION
In a Residential Zoning District, a nameplate sign identifying a resident (Name, address and profession or occupation), school, church or
other non-business use.
b) In a Business Zoning district, a nameplate or sign identifying the business, industry or occupant of the lot ( Name, address, business(s),
industry or lot occupant).
SIGN-ILLUMINATED
Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign
proper.
SIGN-MOBILE
A free standing sign on wheels, trailers or framework that is capable of being transported from place to place and is not permanently
attached to the ground or any other structure.
SIGN-NAMEPLATE
A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of an occupant therein.
SIGN-REAL ESTATE
A sign offering property (land and/or buildings) for sale, lease or rent.
SIGN-REVOLVING
A sign which has moving structural but does not include flashing signs that blink on and off. It does include signs which produce moving
effects through use of illumination. This definition shall include searchlights.
-8-
SIGN-ROOF
A sign erected upon a roof or parapet of a building.
SIGN-SHOPPING CENTER
A business sign which identifies a group of stores, shops or offices that number three (3) or more.
SIGN-TEMPORARY
A sign that is not solidly affixed to a building, structure or land that announces an event such as a bazaar, garage/rummage and estate sale
and/or a sporting or special event of duration of not greater that ninety (90) days out of a twelve (12) month calendar period. Promotional
and franchise-type banners and pennants, which advertise products or services sold on the site, are also defined as temporary signs.
SIGN-WALL
A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.
STORY
That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above,
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story.
STREET
A public or private right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet in width which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, or fences.
STRUCTURE, NON-CONFORMING
Any structure which is legally existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if
the structure were to be erected under the provisions of this Ordinance.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION
Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams, girders or foundations.
TOWER OR ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Any mast, pole spire, lattice structure or similar structure including any lines, cables, wires or braces supporting the structure intended
primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device or similar apparatus above grade. Towers may be ground or roof
mounted. The term “tower” includes any antenna attached to the tower.
USE.
The purpose or activity for which the land, structure, or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this Ordinance. Uses shall be
classified as principal or accessory and as permitted, special, interim and prohibited.
USE-INTERIM.
A temporary use of real property requiring a permit issued by the City which shall be allowed until a particular date, until the occurrence of
a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer allow for said temporary use.
USE, NON-CONFORMING
A use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance which does not comply with all the
regulations of this Ordinance or any use of land, building or structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption of an amendment which would
not comply with all of the regulations.
USE, PERMITTED
A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and
performance standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL
The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.
USE-SPECIAL.
Either a public or private use as listed which, because of it’s unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district. This includes those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each
zoning district, which for the respective conduct or performance in such designated districts may require reasonable, but special, unusual, or
extraordinary limitations peculiar to the use for the protection, promotion, and preservation of the general public welfare, health, and safety
as well as the integrity of the City’s Comprehensive Municipal Plan. Consideration of each case of special use shall be given to impact of
such use on neighboring real property and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
VARIANCE.
A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance such that deviation will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to physical
conditions unique to the individual real property under consideration and not the results of actions of the owner, a literal enforcement of this
Ordinance would result in an undue hardship.
VEHICLE-MOTOR VEHICLE
Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon railroad tracks and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle, but
excepting snowmobiles and mobile homes.
VEHICLE-JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which is either abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled or legally inoperative, or which is not currently licensed for
operation within the State of Minnesota.
VEHICLE-COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
A motor vehicle exceeding one and one-half ton or equivalent in load capacity or a motor vehicle not displaying passenger car or RV
license plates.
WETLANDS
An area where water stands near, at or above the soil surface during a significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting a
predominantly aquatic form of vegetation, and which may have the following characteristics:
i) Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen, sedge meadow, shrub land, and northern lowland forest
(conifer swamp) communities. (These communities correspond roughly to wetland types 1,2,3,4,6,7, and 8 described by the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Circular 39, "Wetlands of the U.S.").
ii) Mineral soils with grey horizons of organic soils belonging to the Histosol order (peat and muck).
iii) Soil which is water logged or covered with water at least three (3) months of the year.
-9-
iv) Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows, and sloughs are wetlands, and such property may be shallow water
bodies, the waters of which are stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may be at times sufficiently dry to permit
tillage, but would require drainage to be made arable. The edge of a wetland is commonly that point where natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominately terrestrial.
YARD
A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as
expressly permitted in this Ordinance. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified
in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD-FRONT
A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way
line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such a lot is located.
YARD-REAR
A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as
specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD-SIDE
A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
ZONING DISTRICT
An area or areas within the limits of the City for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.
SECTION 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 4.1 Application of this Ordinance
4.1 (1) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
4.1 (2) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose
higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
4.1 (3) Except as in this Ordinance specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no
structure or land shall be used, for any purpose, nor in any manner which is not in conformity with this Ordinance.
4.1 (4) When land is proposed to be annexed to the City of Gem Lake the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing upon the permanent
zoning of said land. The results of the hearing, along with a recommendation, shall be presented to the City Council. In the event of annexation
proceedings becoming final before the permanent zoning is determined, the annexed area shall be placed in the "R-1" District and such
classification shall be considered as an interim step pending permanent classification.
4.1(5) In accordance with the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan, Section 12.1.3, when making application for development of real
property in the City of Gem Lake, the developer shall submit twelve (12) sets of all plans, variance requirements, and permit requirements in
forms acceptable to the Zoning Administrator or City officials including, but not limited to, the following:
A) a Site Plan; and
B) a Grading And Filling Plan; and
C) a Landscape Plan; and
D) a Tree Preservation Plan; and
E) an Erosion Control And Runoff Plan; and
F) a Description of the Project; and
G) a Description of Future Expansion Plans; and
H) all other such plans or information as may be required for specific zoning districts.
4.1(6)In accordance with the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan, Section 12.1.4, when making recommendations and decisions
considering land use, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review and measure the impact of such uses including , but not limited to,
the following as criteria:
A) The impact of the use on adjacent uses; and
B) the impact of the use on air and water quality; and
C) the impact of the use on traffic generation; and
D) the impact of the use on public safety, health and welfare; and
E) the impact of the use on the area economy
Section 4.2 Separability.
4.2(1)It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in
accordance with the following:
A) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgement
shall not affect any other provision of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
Section 4.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
4.3 (1) Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation
existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified.
4.3 (2) Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the City.
4.3 (3) When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a confirming use, it shall not thereafter
be changed to any non- conforming use.
4.3 (4) Whenever a lawful non-conforming building or structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or act of
God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it be reconstructed within twelve (12) months after such calamity, unless the damage to the
building or structure is fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair market value, in which case the reconstruction shall be for a use in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
4.3 (5) Whenever a lawful, non-conforming use of a building or structure or land is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, any future use of
said building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
-10-
4.3 (6) Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including
necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use.
4.3 (7) A lawful non-conforming use may be changed only to a use of the same or more restricted classification.
4.3 (8) Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing lawful non-conforming residential units when they will improve the
livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units.
4.3 (9) Uses Not Provided For Within Zoning Districts.
A) Whenever, in any Zoning District, a use is neither specifically allowed or denied, the use shall be considered as prohibited. In such
cases, the City Council or the Planning Commission may, by their own initiative, or upon request of the property owner, conduct a study to
determine if: 1) the use can be deemed consistent with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 2) the use is acceptable to and will not adversely
affect adjacent property owners; 3) the use is in the public interest and is not determined to be offensive; 4) which defined Zoning District
would be most appropriate for the use; 5) what conditions and standards relating to development of the use should be imposed. Upon
completion and consideration of the study, the City Council or Planning Commission or the real property owner may initiate a request for
an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration in accordance with the definitions and
provisions contained in this Ordinance.
Section 4.4 Lot Provisions
4.4 (1) A lot or parcel of land of record upon the effective date of this Ordinance which is in an "R" District and which does not meet the
requirements of this Ordinance as to area, width, or other open space, may be utilized for single family detached dwelling purposes provided the
measurements of such area, width or open space are within seventy-five percent (75%) of the requirements of this Ordinance; but said lot or
parcel shall not be more intensively developed.
4.4 (2) Land covered by Gem Lake and its contiguous bog area (measured to the mean high water mark) and other ponds and wetlands shown on
applicable section maps covering the area shall not be included in any area calculations required by this Ordinance.
4.4 (3) In all residential districts, a lot must include contiguous buildable area as shown in tables located elsewhere within the ordinance unless
the lot is part of a cluster or planned unit development that has been reviewed and recommended for approval by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council.
Section 4.5 Accessory Buildings
4.5 (1) No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
4.5 (2) No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory building exceed fifteen
(15) feet in height.
4.5 (3) An accessory building shall be considered to be an integral part of the principal building unless it is six (6) feet or more from the principal
building.
4.5 (4) No detached accessory building shall be less than sixty (60) feet from the public right-of-way except on a corner lot, unless it conforms to
the side yard requirements of the principal building. Those accessory buildings located sixty (60) feet or more behind the right-of-way line shall
have a side yard of two (2) feet or more and a rear yard of three (3) feet or more.
4.5 (5) No combinations of accessory buildings shall be allowed to exceed 1000 square feet in size, except by special use permit from the City
Council.
Section 4.6 Required Yards and Open Space
4.6 (1) No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less than the minimum
required by this Ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further
reduced.
4.6 (2) No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for
any other buildings.
4.6 (3) The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on set-back and height requirements:
A) In any yards: posts, off-street open parking spaces, open terraces, awnings, open canopies, steps, chimneys, and flag poles.
B) In front yards: service station pump islands and fences at least 80% open.
C) In side and rear yards: fences or walls six feet in height or less. However, in a corner lot no obstruction higher than three feet above curb
level shall be located within twenty feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets, or within fifteen feet of any street right-of-way.
D) In rear yards: recreational and laundry drying equipment, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breeze ways, porches, detached outdoor
living rooms, barbecue facilities.
E) Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes;
monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public utility facilities; Accessory and Secondary Use antennas and parapet walls
extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the building.
Section 4.7 Traffic Visibility
4.7 (1) No fences, structures or planting exceeding thirty (30) inches in height above the center line grade of the street shall be permitted within
the required front yard set-back on a corner lot.
Section 4.8 Farming Operations
4.8 (1) All farms in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance and all farms which are brought into the City by annexation shall be a
permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations contained herein and other City Ordinances as in
effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in
character.
Section 4.9 Essential Services
4.9 (1) Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the City of Gem Lake.
-11-
Section 4.10 Land Reclamation
4.10 (1) Under this Ordinance, Land Reclamation shall be defined as the reclaiming of land by depositing of material so as to elevate the grade.
In all Zoning districts, Land Reclamation shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special Use permit. Any lot or parcel upon which an
aggregate amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited shall be defined as Land Reclamation. The request for a
Land Reclamation permit shall contain at least the following:
A) Completed Special Use Permit form and necessary fees
B) Survey of the site where Land Reclamation is to occur showing land contours before and after Land Reclamation. This survey shall be
large enough in scale to allow for at least the inclusion of the immediate adjacent parcels of land.
C) A sketch showing current water drainage from/to the site and any modifications of such drainage after Land Reclamation is complete.
D) A description or sketch showing the soil erosion control measures to be used during this Land Reclamation activity.
E) Description of the amount, origin and types of materials to be placed on the land as part of this Land Reclamation.
F) A sketch and/or description of the final cover material to be placed on the fill deposited by this Land Reclamation. The City Council
may require a monetary deposit be placed with the City to insure that the final grading and landscaping be completed per the supplied
sketches and description.
G) Statement of when this Land Reclamation is to occur including the hours of the day and days of the week of such planned activities.
The City might further limit these hours and days of operation.
H) A route map showing the route for the trucks moving to and from the site. Copies of any special permits needed from the county or state
highway departments should be attached.
4.10 (2) Each Land Reclamation Special Use permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year or as described in the Special Use permit issued by
the City.
Section 4.11 Mining
4.11 (1) Under this Ordinance, mining shall be defined as the extraction and incidental processing of sand, gravel, or other materials from the land
in the aggregate amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of removal thereof from a single site. In all zoning districts, the conduct of
Land Mining shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special Use Permit. Each request for a permit for Land Mining shall at least include the
following:
A) Completed Special Use Permit form and necessary fees
B) Survey of the site where Land Mining is to occur showing land contours before and after the Mining. This survey shall be large enough
in scale to allow for at least the inclusion of the immediate adjacent parcels of land.
C) A sketch showing current water drainage from/to the site and any modifications of such drainage after Land Mining is complete.
D) A description or sketch showing the soil erosion control measures to be used during this Land Mining activity.
E) A sketch and/or description of the final cover material to be placed on the land exposed by this Land Mining. The City Council may
require a monetary deposit with the City to insure that the final grading and landscaping be completed per the supplied sketches and
description.
F) Statement of when these Land Mining activities are to occur including the hours of the day and days of the week of such planned
activities. The City might further limit these hours and days of operation.
G) A route map showing the route for trucks moving to and from the site. Copies of any special permits needed from the county or state
highway departments should be attached.
4.11 (2) Each Land Mining Special Use permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year or as described in the Special Use permit issued by the
City.
Section 4.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units
4.12 (1) It shall be the stated policy of the City of Gem Lake to maintain a harmonious and high standard of residential development and to
protect residential areas from deleterious effects through insuring that both new and relocated dwellings from other areas, both within the City of
Gem Lake and from outside, shall meet specified requirements. Such relocation of dwellings as stated above must conform to all regulations of
the Building Code and shall be permitted in the zoning district where all necessary specifications as to lot sizes, setbacks, type of use, height
regulations and all other conditions as laid down in this Ordinance are met.
4.12 (2) In addition, such relocations shall require a special permit from the City Council wherein the following provisions shall be met:
4.12 (3) Application shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk.
4.12 (4) A fee for the Relocation of Dwelling Units shall be required in an amount established by resolution of the City Council at it’s first
meeting in January of each year. Further, the City may impose additional fees including, but not limited to, engineering costs, attorneys fees,
expert opinions and publishing costs payment of which may also be required of the applicant as part of the process. The building mover shall
meet all requirements for licensing and insurance as required by Minnesota Statues 221.81.
4.12 (5) The application shall be referred to the City Council, who shall set a time and place for a public hearing giving at least ten (10) days'
public notice of such hearing.
4.12 (6) At least ten (10) days before such hearing, the Council shall mail a notice of said hearing to property owners within three hundred (300)
feet of the relocation premises. Failure of the Council to mail the notice, or failure of the title holder to receive the notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings.
4.12 (7) The Planning Commission shall make a report to the Council before, or at the public hearing.
4.12 (8) The Council shall make a finding and declare whether or not the structure to be moved is architecturally compatible.
SECTION 5 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 5.1 Enforcing Officer
5.1 (1) The Mayor shall appoint a Zoning Administrator, subject to the approval of the Council, who shall have the duty and responsibility of
enforcing and administering this Ordinance.
-12-
Section 5.2 Building Permit
5.2 (1) No structure shall hereafter be erected, or structurally altered until a building permit shall have been issued indicating that the existing or
proposed structure and the use of land, comply with this Ordinance and all Building Codes. All applications for building permits pertaining to the
erection, or major alteration which will affect the outside dimensions of a structure shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a plat drawn to
scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot, lots or parcel to be built upon, the dimensions of the ground plan and the extensions beyond the
outside wall of the proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their location on the site in relation to the outside boundary and such
other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One copy of the plat is to be approved and is to be
made available on the site.
Section 5.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator
5.3 (1) The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority he shall:
A) Conduct inspections of building and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;
B) Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, all maps, amendments, and conditional uses,
variances, appeals and applications, thereto;
C) Receive, file and forward all applications for amendments, variances, conditional use or other matters to the Planning Commission and
City Council;
D) Institute in the name of the City of Gem Lake any appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as provided by law;
E) Approve all building permits, submitted by the Building Inspector, after determining that the permit is in compliance with this
Ordinance. This approval must be made before the permit is issued.
5.3 (2) The City Council may, on prior recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, empower the Ramsey County Sheriff in specific instances
to perform any of the acts which the Zoning Administrator is directed or authorized to perform by this Section.
Section 5.4 Variances
5.4 (1) Purpose and Intent. The City Council may grant Variances from the strict applications of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and
impose conditions and safeguards in the Variances so granted. These Variances shall be considered in cases where by reason of narrowness,
shallowness, or shape of a lot or where by reason of exceptional topographic or water conditions or where other extraordinary and exceptional
conditions of such lot exist, the strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance would result in an undue hardship upon the owner of such
lot in developing or using such lot in a manner customary and legally permissible within the zoning district in which said lot is located. Economic
considerations alone shall not constitute undue hardship for which a Variance will be considered or issued if a reasonable use for the real property
exists under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
5.4 (2) Application. An application for any Variance from the Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Variance is
to be considered in association with any other building permits, special or interim use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be
submitted simultaneously with the Variance application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied
by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied
upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the Variance as required and
communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all
supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within
sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
5.4 (3) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall
review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s).
To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional
information from the applicant concerning the Variance or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning the application.
5.4 (4) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or the City Council
to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten
(10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application.
5.4 (5) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 B. Of the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as
may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
5.4 (6) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than
thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of
the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date
is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt,
the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. The City Council shall, in the form of a
resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as
may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
5.4 (7) Issuance of Variance. Following a decision by the City Council to approve or deny the application, the Zoning Administrator shall
promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the
US mail.
5.4 (8) Lapse of Variance. Any Variance issued shall lapse if not acted upon within one (1) year of the date of issuance.
Section 5.5 Special Use Permits
5.5 (1) Purpose and Intent. The City Council may, by resolution, grant Special Use Permits for the uses and purposes described elsewhere in this
Ordinance as Special Uses and may, in the granting of such Special Use Permits, impose conditions and safeguards which promote the guidelines
set forth in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
5.5 (2) Application. An application for a Special Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Special Use Permit is to be
considered in association with any other building permits, variances, interim use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be
submitted simultaneously with the Special Use Permit application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be
accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all
facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as
required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and
all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application
within sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
-13-
5.5 (3) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall
review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s).
To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional
information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Special Use on: the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District; conformance with the Performance
Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the Special
Use.
5.5 (4) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public
comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than
thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of
real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the Special Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey
County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within he same time frame.
5.5 (5) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 C. Of the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or
conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5.5 (6) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than
thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of
the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date
is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt,
the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council
shall determine that the proposed Special Use: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of
a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as
may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
5.5 (7) Issuance of Special Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City
Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals, a Special Use Permit shall apply
only to the use stated on the permit and the application.
5.5 (8) Lapse of Special Use Permit. If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and implemented within one (1) year of the
date of issuance, such issued Special Use Permit shall lapse.
Section 5.6 Interim Use Permits
5.6 (1) Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing an Interim Use by providing an Interim Use Permit is to allow a use or activity that
is presently acceptable but that with anticipated development, redevelopment or identifiable change may not be acceptable in the future.
A) Existing Uses. Uses defined as Interim Uses which presently exist and which were legally established within a respective zoning district
and which are in accordance with standards and procedures set forth in this Ordinance shall be considered approved.
B) New Uses. Uses defined as Interim Uses which do not presently exist within a respective zoning district shall be processed as new
applications in accordance with standards and procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
5.6 (2) Application. An application for an Interim Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Interim Use Permit is to be
considered in association with any other building permits, variances, special use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be
submitted simultaneously with the Interim Use Permit application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be
accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all
facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as
required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and
all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application
within sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
5.6 (3) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall
review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s).
To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional
information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Interim Use on: the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District; conformance with the Performance
Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the Interim
Use.
5.6 (4) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public
comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than
thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of
real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey
County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within he same time frame.
5.6(5) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 C. Of the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or
conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5.6 (6) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than
thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of
the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date
is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt,
the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council
shall determine that the proposed Interim Use: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) will not seriously
depreciate adjacent and surrounding property values; 3) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan;
4) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to
approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
-14-
5.6 (7) Issuance of Interim Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City
Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals, a Interim Use Permit shall apply
only to the use stated on the permit and the application.
5.6 (8) Lapse of Interim Use Permit. If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and implemented within one (1) year of the
date of issuance, such issued Interim Use Permit shall lapse.
5.6 (9) Termination of Interim Use Permits. An Interim Use Permit shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever
shall occur first:
A) The date or event stated on the application and the Interim Use Permit; or
B) Upon violation of any condition(s) under which the Interim Use permit was issued; or
C) Upon adoption of any amendment to the City’s zoning regulations which renders the use non-confirming; or
D) The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
5.6 (10) General Standards. All Interim Uses shall comply with the following general standards.
A) Existing Uses. Shall be in accordance with zoning and building standards in effect at the time of initial construction and development
and shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.
B) New Uses. Shall conform as follows: 1) compliance with all zoning and other regulations as may otherwise be applicable; 2) the date or
the event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty; 3) the existence of the Interim Use will not impose additional costs on
the public if it becomes necessary for the public to take the property in the future; 4) the user agrees to any conditions of approval
associated with the approval of the Interim Use Permit by the City Council.
C) Existing and New Uses. Shall conform as follows: 1) shall maintain harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and with the
architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development; 2) shall meet or exceed all Performance Standards contained
elsewhere in this Ordinance; 3) shall not generate such additional traffic associated with the use that would overburden or exceed the
capabilities of streets and other public services and facilities including, but not limited to, parks, schools, and utilities serving the area.
Section 5.7 Amendments
5.7 (1) General. In accordance with provisions of Minnesota Statutes, the City Council may, from time to time, adopt amendments to this
Ordinance providing such amendments are consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
5.7 (2) Initiation. The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district
boundaries and maps of this Ordinance. Any person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) who are the fee title owners of real property in the City or who
have been designated in writing to represent the interests of the fee title owners of real property in the City may initiate a request to amend the
text, tables or district boundaries and maps so as to affect the said real property or such real property adjacent thereto.
5.7 (3) Application. An application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the application to Amend
The Zoning Ordinance is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, special or interim use permits, or subdivision,
all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s)
shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state
fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application
as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and
all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. The City shall act on the application within sixty (60) days
of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
5.7 (4) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall
review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s).
To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional
information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed application on: the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the affected neighborhood(s) and Zoning District(s); conformance with the
Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may
affect the amendment.
5.7 (5) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public
comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than
thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of
real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey
County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within the same time frame.
5.7(6) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 A. Of the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or
conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5.7 (7) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than
thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of
the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date
is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt,
the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council
shall determine that the proposed amendment: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of
a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as
may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
5.7 (8) Adoption of The Amendment and Incorporation of Amendments Into The Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the
applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case
of approvals and unless otherwise specified by the City Council, the Amendment shall be considered in effect on a date specified by the City
Council, but not later than thirty (30) days subsequent to the City Council’s decision.
Section 5.8 Appeals
5.8 (1) All appeals from any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall be brought before the Planning
Commission who shall act in the capacity of Board of Appeals in all matters related to this Ordinance.
-15-
5.8 (2) All appeals shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by any substantiating information and list of experts who
shall may testify on behalf of the appellant. Upon receipt, materials shall be forwarded to the Chairman of the Planning Commission who shall
place the matter on the agenda of the next meeting or a special meeting, provided a notice of the special meeting is appropriately published in the
City’s legal publication. Notice of all hearings for appeals shall be mailed to all appellants.
5.8 (3) Upon review of the appeal and supplemental documentation and testimony related thereto, the Planning Commission shall decide the
matter subject to judicial review or appeal to the City Council.
5.8 (4) In the event the appeal is granted, it shall be published in the City’s legal publication and shall become effective the date of publication.
Section 5.9 Fees
5.9 (1) Application Fees. The fees to be paid to the City for an application for amendment of this Ordinance, a Variance from this Ordinance, a
Special or Interim Use Permit, or any construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other related permit shall be made payable to the City in
an amount established by resolution of the City Council and as amended from time to time.
5.9 (2) Supplemental Fees. In addition to application fees, the City may require payment of supplemental fees related to an action or application
including, but not limited to: attorney’s fees, fees of outside experts; staff time; direct expenses exceptional to the effort and as identified by City
staff.
5.9 (3) Fees shall be payable at the time applications are first filed with the City and are not refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior
to referral of the matter for consideration. There shall be no fee in the case of an application filed in the public interest by members of the
Planning Commission or City Council.
Section 5.10 Violations and Penalties
5.10 (1) Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to a fine of not more than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars and costs
for every offense or to imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
SECTION 6 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Section 6.1 Districts
6.1 (1) In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Ordinance, the City of Gem Lake is hereby divided into the following Zoning
Districts and groups of Districts
A) Residence Districts
1) "R-1" Lake Residence
2) "R-2" Acre Estate Residence
3) "R-3" Low-Density Residence
4) "R-4" Medium-Density Residence
B) Business Districts
1) "R-B" Retail Business
2) "G-B" General Business
3) "LD-B" Low-Density Business
4) "G-B II" General Business II
Section 6.2 Map
6.2 (1) The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established on that certain map entitled "Zoning District Map of Gem Lake, Minnesota,"
dated 24 January 2000, which map is properly approved and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map". This map and all of the notations,
references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and described herein.
Section 6.3 Boundaries
6.3 (1) District boundary lines as indicated on said map follow lot lines, the center lines of streets, alleys, or railroads, the center lines of streets or
alleys projected, the center of water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments
thereto. If district boundary lines do not follow any of the above described lines, the district boundary lines are established as drawn on the
zoning map. Where a District boundary line divides a lot of record which was in single ownership at the time of enactment of this Ordinance and
places portions of such lot of record in two (2) or more Use Districts, any portion of such lot with fifty (50) feet on either side of such a dividing
district boundary line may be used for any use of either Use District; provided, however, if any portion of such lot shall extend beyond the fifty
(50) feet limitation, the District line as shown shall prevail. Appeals from the Zoning Administrator's determination and questions of doubt
concerning the exact location of District boundary lines shall be heard by the Board of Appeals.
SECTION 7 - "R-1" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 7.1 Permitted Uses
Within the "R-1" Residential District, no structures or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:
7.1 (1) One family detached dwellings
7.1 (2) Truck gardening and other horticultural uses provided that only those products produced on the premise be sold or offered for sale.
7.1 (3) Agricultural activities, provided that no building in which farm animals or fowl are to be housed is nearer than one hundred (100) feet of a
lot line.
Section 7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Within any "R-1" Use District, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses.
7.2 (1) Attached or detached housing for domestic servants
7.2 (2) Private garage, car port or parking space
7.2 (3) The keeping of not more than two (2) roomers
7.2 (4) Private swimming pool, tennis court, horse training ring, and other sites necessary to conduct a home sporting event.
7.2 (5) Home occupation
7.2 (6) Signs as regulated by this Ordinance
-16-
7.2 (7) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the site for a period of time not in excess of such construction.
7.2 (8) Conservatories for plants and flowers, not including any business, trade or industry.
7.2 (9) Decorative landscape features including but not limited to pools, arbors, hedges, walls, shrubs, trees, etc.
7.2(10) Essential services
Section 7.3 Special Uses
Within any "R-1" Residential District, no structures or land shall be used for the following uses except by Special Use Permit:
7.3 (1) Country clubs, golf courses and other private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities, including swimming pools; provided that any
principal building or swimming pool shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any other lot in an "R" District.
7.3 (2) Essential Service Structures
Section 7.4 Height Regulations
7.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is the lesser, and no
accessory structure shall exceed two stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, whichever is lesser.
Section 7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
7.5 (1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed TABLE 7.5 (1)
TOTAL AREA
BUILDABLE AREA
FRONTAGE*
3.0 acres
50% total area
200 feet
FRONT YARD**
SIDE YARD
REAR YARD***
50 foot set-back
30 foot set-back
50 foot set-back
* All lots located on the lake shore shall be considered as having two frontages; that portion of the lot which abuts on the lake and such
other lot line as determined by the City Council.
** That portion of a lot considered as the front yard shall be as determined by the City Council.
*** All Residential structures shall be set back at least 100' from the ordinary high water level of the lake. The ordinary high water level of
the lake shall be as determined by the City Council.
SECTION 8 - "R-2" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 8.1 Permitted Uses
8.1 (1) Within any "R-2" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 7,1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
8.2 (1) Within any "R-2" Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 7.2 and as regulated therein shall be a permitted accessory use, except as herein amended.
Section 8.3 Special Uses
8.3 (1) Within any "R-2" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as special uses in Section 7.3 and as regulated therein, except as herein amended.
Section 8.4 Height Regulations
8.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height whichever is lesser, and no accessory structure shall
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
Section 8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
8.5 (1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed TABLE 8.5 (1)
TOTAL AREA
BUILDABLE AREA
FRONTAGE*
1.0 acres
75% total area
150 feet
FRONT YARD**
SIDE YARD*
REAR YARD***
40 foot set-back
15 foot set-back
35 foot set-back
* A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
SECTION 9 - "R-3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 9.1 Permitted Uses
9.1 (1) Within any "R-3" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 8.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 9.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
9.2 (1) Within any "R-3" Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 8.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B) Swimming pools provided such pool is fenced so as to control access and is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any other lot in
an "R" District, and subject to Council approval.
-17-
Section 9.3 Special Uses
9.3 (1) Within any "R-3" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as special uses in Section 8.3 as regulated therein, except as herein amended.
B) Two-family dwellings
Section 9.4 Height Regulations
9.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height whichever is lesser, and no accessory structure shall
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
Section 9.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
9.5 (1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed TABLE 9.5 (1)
TOTAL AREA
BUILDABLE AREA
FRONTAGE*
36,000 square feet
75% total area
100 feet
FRONT YARD
SIDE YARD*
REAR YARD
35 foot set-back
15 foot set-back
25 foot set-back
* A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
SECTION 10 - "R-4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 10.1 Permitted Uses
10.1 (1) Within the "R-4" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 9.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 10.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
10.2 (1) Within any "R-4" Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 9.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 10.3 Special Uses
10.3 (1) Within any "R-4" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as special uses in Section 9.3 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B) Off-street parking for adjacent non-residential uses.
Section 10.4 Height Regulations
10.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height whichever is lesser, and no accessory structure shall
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
Section 10.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
10.5 (1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A) When on-site septic systems will be used for structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following appliesTABLE 10.5(1)
a)
TOTAL AREA
BUILDABLE AREA
FRONTAGE*
36,000 square feet
75% total area
100 feet
FRONT YARD
SIDE YARD*
REAR YARD
35 foot set-back
15 foot set-back
25 foot set-back
B) When city sewer is currently available and will be used for the structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following
applies: TABLE 10.5 (1) b)
TOTAL AREA
BUILDABLE AREA
FRONTAGE*
24,000 square feet
100% total area
100 feet
FRONT YARD
SIDE YARD*
REAR YARD
35 foot set-back
15 foot set-back
25 foot set-back
*A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
SECTION 11. REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS
Section 11.1 General Provisions.
11.1(1) Descriptions Of Gem Lake Waters, Wetlands and Shorelands. For purposes of application of the provisions of this Section, the following
classifications shall be based upon those found in Section 2, Table 2 and Figure 4 of the Local Water Management Plan section of the Gem Lake
Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
A) WWS Class I. Waters, wetlands and shorelands identified as Class I shall be those contained within Wetland No 9 (DNR Protected
Water/Wetland No. 62-0037P, the body of water known as Gem Lake and it’s attendant wetlands) and No. 10 (DNR Protected
Water/Wetland No. 62-0128W).
-18-
B) WWS Class II. Waters, wetlands and shorelands identified as Class II shall be those contained within Wetland No. 23 (DNR Protected
Water/Wetland No. 62-0035W) and No. 24.
-19-
C) WWS Class III. Waters, wetlands and shorelands identified as Class II shall be those contained within all remaining Wetlands numbered
1 - 8, 11 - 22, and 25 - 26.
11.1 (2) Aesthetics of Gem Lake. Gem Lake is a small body of water as well as an adjoining marsh area that, by informal agreement of the
riparian owners, has been used and enjoyed as a passive nature preserve. Only canoes, row boats, and small sailboats have been used on the lake
in the past. Gem Lake is a unique urban wildlife wetland and forest refuge and is home to an abundance of birds, animals, amphibians, and fish.
It’s highest and best use is as a nature area and visual amenity that is graced by occasional swimmers, canoeists, sail boaters, snow skiers, and
walkers. It is not suited for motorized or other more intense uses. The shorelands of Gem Lake and it’s attendant wetlands presents a pleasing
balance of open spaces as well as groves of woodlands with trees and shrubs of a range of age and sizes which, in turn, provide ideal natural
screening of man-made structures. The islands located within the area of Gem Lake and it’s attendant wetlands are wooded with no man-made
structures and the presence of such structures would adversely affect the natural appearances to be preserved.
11.1(3) Application Of This Section.
A) Unless otherwise specified, the various provisions of this Section 11 of this Ordinance No. 43 shall be applied only to WWS Class I.
11.1(4) Additional Provisions.
A) In addition to the Gem Lake Watershed Management Plan section of the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan and this Ordinance,
additional regulations may apply to all WWS Class I, WWS Class II and WWS Class III including, but not limited to, other Ordinances of
the City of Gem Lake, agencies of the United States, the State of MN, and Ramsey County as well as Regional Watershed Districts.
11.1(5) Standards For Review
A) For purposes of this section, all viewing criteria will be based upon viewing from the opposite shore and natural or vegetation screening
shall be determined based upon summer growth.
11.1(6) Existing Non-Conforming Uses, Structures And Placements. Subject to compliance with all other provisions of all City Ordinances, the
following provisions shall apply:
A) Uses which are prohibited by this Ordinance but which are in existence prior to the effective adoption of these regulations shall be
considered as non-conforming uses and may continue as lawful, non-conforming uses. Such uses shall not be intensified, enlarged or
expanded upon beyond the permitted or delineated boundaries of the use, activity or reclamation plan as stipulated in the most current
permit issued prior to the adoption of this section of the Ordinance.
B) All structures and uses in existence prior to the adoption of this section of the Ordinance which do not meet structure set-back
requirements or other dimensional standards of this section of this Ordinance shall be considered as lawful non-conforming structures or
uses.
C) Extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure, use or sanitary facility shall meet the set-back
standards of this section of this Ordinance.
D) An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure or sanitary facility may be permitted on the side
of the structure or facility facing away from the lake.
E) An improvement to an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be allowed to extend laterally (parallel to the shoreline)
when the improvement is otherwise in compliance with the dimensional and set-back standards of this Ordinance.
F) Exterior decks attached to an existing lawful non-conforming structure which do not extend any roof or foundation may be permitted to
extend laterally (parallel to the shoreline) and shall be constructed to be visually inconspicuous in summer months when viewed from the
lake or opposite shore.
G) Existing lawful non-conforming structures which do not meet the set-backs of the various shoreland zones shall not be raised in
elevation or roof line.
H) Reconstruction of an existing historic lawful non-conforming, it’s appurtenances and site development to preserve it’s historic character
shall be allowed if the structure is recognized as an historic site on the National Register of Historic Places.
I) Any existing lawful non-conforming structure that needs replacing due to destruction, deterioration or obsolescence may be replaced,
restored or rebuilt as necessary to remain the same as they existed on the date of enactment of this section of this Ordinance except that any
change beyond established structural dimensions of each such structure shall be in compliance with the set-back requirements of this
Ordinance or any variance that may be obtained or issued due to such increase in dimension.
11.1 (7) Application. All real property currently and in the future delineated as Shoreland shall be subject to these use and alteration regulations.
These regulations and requirements shall be in addition to those imposed by federal, state, regional wetland conservation district agencies, and all
local ordinances governing land use, all of which shall jointly apply. Under joint application, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
Section 11.2 Lake Use Restrictions
11.2 (1) No Motorized Use. Gem Lake shall not be used by any motorized craft or traffic including, but not limited to, motorized boats,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and excluding equipment used for cleaning, plowing snow or other occasional maintenance uses.
11.2 (2) Controlled Access Lots. Riparian lots or parcels of real property intended to provide owners of non-riparian lots or parcels of real
property with access to the body of water known as Gem Lake are permissible provided each of the following standards are met or exceeded:
A) The riparian access lot or parcel of real property must meet the minimum area, buildable area, frontage, depth, width and other such
requirements for residential lots and must be suitable for the intended use of a riparian access lot or parcel of real property.
B) The riparian access lot or parcel of real property must be jointly owned by all purchasers of non-riparian lots or parcels of real property
in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights.
C) Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments in form acceptable to the Gem Lake City Attorney and approved by the City
Council must be developed and recorded with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles of Ramsey County, Minnesota, specifying, among
other items, which non-riparian lot or real property parcel owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed and
what restrictions are imposed.
D) The riparian access lot or parcel of real property and it’s use shall comply with the Zoning and Building Codes of the City of Gem Lake
in the same manner as a single contiguous riparian lot or parcel of real property containing a principal structure.
E) Except for riparian lots or parcels of real property which meet the foregoing standards, no other riparian lot or parcel of real property
shall be utilized to provide access to non-riparian lot or real property parcel owners whether by direct conveyance, easement, license or the
like.
11.2 (3) No Wet Storage Of Boats. Boats shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage
of boats shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring properties and Gem
Lake while not in use.
11.2(4)Docks.
A) Docks are seasonal and temporary in nature and, therefore, shall not be permanently affixed to the shore or lake bottom.
-20-
B) Docks shall not be greater than four (4'0") feet in width, two (2'0") feet in height above the water and twenty (20'0") feet in length from
the lake shore.
C) Docks shall not be covered with any roof structure, awnings or any other type of enclosure.
D) Only one (1) dock shall be allowed for each parcel of real property defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with the
Zoning and Building codes of the City of Gem Lake and containing a principal structure.
11.2(5) Swimming Rafts
A) Swimming rafts are seasonal and temporary in nature and therefore shall not be permanently affixed to the lake bottom.
B) Swimming rafts shall not exceed one hundred (100s.f.) square feet in total area and shall not be more than two (2'0) feet higher than the
water surface.
C) Swimming rafts shall not be located more than fifty (50') feet from the lakeshore.
D) Swimming rafts shall not be covered with a roof structure, awning or any other type of enclosure.
E) Only one (1) raft shall be allowed for each parcel of real property defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with the
Zoning and Building codes of the City of Gem Lake and containing a principal structure.
F) Swimming rafts shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of swimming
rafts shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring properties and Gem
Lake while not in use.
11.2(6) Irrigation Equipment
A) If used solely for the purpose of irrigation, a pipe not to exceed two (2") inches in diameter and forty (40') feet in length may be placed
along the lake shore bottom.
B) During times of drought, the City of Gem Lake may, by resolution and at the recommendation of competent authority, temporarily
suspend or restrict the amount of water drawn from Gem Lake for irrigation.
C) Housing and placement of irrigation equipment shall be restricted as set-forth in Section 11.4(2)e).
11.3 Shoreland Zone 1 Restrictions (0' to 50' waterward of Shoreline). Within Shoreline Zone 1, the following restrictions shall apply:
11.3(1) No material, fill, debris or any other materials shall be deposited anywhere in this zone except for the depositing of clean beach type sand
in accordance with state regulations for the sole purpose of establishing a beach of limited size.
11.3(2) No structures shall be erected except for those listed in Section 11.2.
11.3(3) No removal of vegetation without written approval of the Zoning Administrator.
11.3(4) No lighting or other electrical appurtenances of any kind shall be permitted.
Section 11.4 Shoreland Zone 2 Restrictions (0' to 50' landward of Shoreline):Within Shoreline Zone 2, the following restrictions shall apply:
11.4(1) No cutting or removal of vegetation unless appropriate written approval is first obtained from the Zoning Administrator for purposes
including, but not limited to:
A) as minimally necessary to construct an approved structure, roadway or utility easement; or
B) as may be necessary for maintenance trimming to aid in the health of the vegetation and which does not result in a substantial reduction
of the vegetative screen.
C) Removal of buckthorn and other vegetation identified by the State of MN Department of Natural Resources as invasive and for which
abatement plans have been encouraged shall be allowed, presuming proper disposal of materials in accordance with accepted best practices
is employed.
11.4(2) No storage of materials of any type intended for the creation of compost including, but not limited to, garbage, debris, or lawn and garden
waste, shall be allowed.
11.4(3) No structures except walkways, stairways, decks or irrigation housings are allowed except as follows:
A) A permanent deck or combination of decks containing not more than two hundred (200 s.f.) square feet, not more than two (2'0") feet in
height determined by the average distance from the ground surrounding the deck to the highest platform and for which a Gem Lake
Building Permit has been issued shall be allowed if located more than thirty-five (35') feet from the shoreline.
B) A deck or combination of decks may be sited in such a manner that they are unobtrusive to the natural topography, vegetation and
shoreland.
C) A deck or combination of decks shall not be covered with roof structures, awnings or any other type of enclosure and shall only contain
railings as required by Gem Lake Building Codes.
D) A deck or combination of decks may be required to be screened with natural vegetation.
E) A housing for irrigation equipment not greater than four (4'0") feet wide, four (4'0") feet deep, and three (3'0") feet high and for which a
Gem Lake Building Permit has been issued shall be allowed if located more than five (5'0") feet from the shoreland and fully screened from
Shoreland Zone 1 by natural vegetation.
F) A permanent deck, combination of decks or irrigation housing may be constructed of wood, metal, fiberglass, plastic, or any combination
thereof provided they are visually unobtrusive and limited to color(s) that blend with the environment.
G) No manicured lawns or the use of fertilizers attendant to the maintenance of such lawns shall be allowed except that those lawns in
existence at the time of passage of these provisions may be retained, but not increased in total area within this shoreland zone.
H) Stairways, landings and lifts are preferred as alternatives to major topographical alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs or
steep slopes to shoreland areas. Stairways and walkways shall not exceed four (4'0") in width, landings shall not exceed thirty-two (32 s.f.)
square feet, and all should be located on the site in visually inconspicuous locations with natural screening as possible.
I) No lighting shall have it’s source directly visible from the opposite shore except for lights located inside a structure. The use of reflected
light may be acceptable providing the effect is subtle and does not contaminate the scene.
J)No driveway or parking areas shall be allowed.
Section 11.5 Shoreland Zone 3 Restrictions (50' to 150' landward of Shoreline): Within Shoreline Zone 3, the following restrictions shall apply:
11.5(1) No Building Permit shall be issued for any structure nor shall any structure be built within Zone 3 if said structure constitutes a
substantial feature of the landscape when viewed from the opposite shore or less than fifty (50%) percent of said structure is screened by natural
vegetation.
11.5(2) No driveway or parking areas are allowed.
11.5(3) No cutting of vegetation if:
A) the general density of a grove when viewed from the opposite shore will be visibly reduced so that man made structures are more
obvious when viewed from the opposite shore except that the Zoning Administrator may allow such cutting if a replacement vegetation
plan is submitted for approval, approved in writing and scheduled for completion within a predetermined acceptable period of time.
-21-
B) such cutting involves the removal of live trees with a diameter of over five (5") inches measured at a point five (5') feet above the ground
except that the Zoning Administrator may allow such cutting if a reforestation plan is submitted for approval, approved in writing and
scheduled for completion within a predetermined acceptable period of time.
Section 11.6 Shoreland Lot Restrictions
11.6(1) The following standards shall apply to all Shoreland lots defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with the Zoning and
Building codes of the City of Gem Lake:
A) a minimum buildable area above the shoreline of not less than two (2.0) acres; and
B) the lot has minimum frontage on an improved private way or public street of two hundred (200') feet; and
C) the minimum lot width at the building set back line of two hundred (200') feet; and
D) the minimum lot width at the shoreline of two hundred (200') feet;
E) the minimum set back from the shoreline of structures and uses of one hundred (100') feet; and
F) the minimum set-back for on-site individual sewage treatment system (ISTS) is two hundred (200') feet from the Shoreline; and
G) the maximum total lot coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces of twenty-five (25%) percent; and
11.6(2) Removal or alteration of any vegetation or trees for development of any shoreland lot shall not be conducted without first submitting a
tree and vegetation inventory for each building site submitted for review and approval by the City Forester and Zoning Administrator and until
receipt of a Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permit from the City. Criteria for issuance of a Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permit shall
include, but not be limited to:
A) a detailed inventory of existing trees and vegetation by type and size, details of trees and vegetation to be removed, and details of
reforestation and vegetation replacement plans to be implemented within twelve (12) months of final building inspector approval;
B) verification that vegetation cutting areas shall be set-back five (5') feet on slopes less than twelve (12%) percent; and
C) verification that vegetation cutting shall not be allowed within fifty (50') feet of the shoreland or on slopes greater than twelve (12%)
percent unless specifically allowed by a Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permit.
D) all cutting, including topping, involves trees less than five (5") inches in diameter measured at a point five (5') above the ground; and
E) verification that all cutting, including topping, involves only vegetation which is not currently providing or proposed to provide
screening of any structure from view from the lake; and
F) verification that the essential character, quality, health and density of existing growths will be preserved and a continuous canopy cover
will be maintained; and
G) verification that all diseased trees or nuisance species of vegetation such as buckthorn that require removal will be removed and that
their removal is in the public interest; and
H) verification that the cutting is necessary for the maintenance or installation of transportation or utility rights-of-way or an otherwise
specifically approved structure for which a Gem Lake Building Permit has been issued.
I) verification that the various provisions of Ordinance No. 66 shall be jointly applied.
11.6(3) Grading, filling and excavating or changing the topography landward from Shoreline shall not be conducted without review and approval
of a Grading and Filling Plan by the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator and issuance of a Grading And Filling Permit by the City.
A) Criteria for issuance of a Grading And Filling Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
1) slopes greater than twelve (12%) percent shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible; and
2) earth moving, erosion, vegetation removal, drainage, filling of wetlands, and destruction of natural amenities is minimized; and
3) the smallest amount of ground shall be disturbed for the shortest amount of time; and
4) temporary ground cover is provided for and which shall remain in place until final landscape cover is installed; and
5) best practices suitable to the City Engineer are demonstrated and shall be employed to generally prevent and control erosion and
trap sediment and specifically to prevent pollution of the lake by said erosion and leaching; and
6) best practices suitable to the City Engineer are demonstrated and shall be employed to stabilize all filling to accepted engineering
standards; and
7) all areas on the property to be disturbed including, but not limited to, areas for structures, roads and driveways, and ISTS’s are
identified and the work is to be undertaken subject to the issuance of a Gem Lake Building Permit.
B) All work and disturbance of the vegetative cover within one hundred fifty (150') feet of the shoreland shall be done as quickly as
possible employing best practices to prevent erosion.
11.6(4) Placement and design of public and private roads, driveways and parking areas on all Shoreland shall:
A) be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from the lakes waters and
the opposite shore; and
B) include for purposes of Site Plan approval by the City Engineer, Building Official and/or Zoning Administrator that all roads, driveways
and parking areas have been designed so that when constructed they will minimize and control erosion to the lakes waters consistent with
the guidelines of the local soil and water conservation district or other applicable technical guidelines; and
C) for purposes of Site Plan approval by the Zoning Administrator shall be subject to structural set backs from property lines and shoreland
and shall not be placed within Shoreland Zones 1, 2 and 3 unless no alternative exists at which time they may be placed within these areas
employing designs that minimize adverse effects.
D) Access ramps, approach roads and parking areas for purposes of launching private water craft are prohibited.
E) Controlled pedestrian or water craft access lots for use by non-riparian lot owners or the public is prohibited.
Section 11.7 Shoreland Lot Building Restrictions For All Shoreland
11.7(1) Each building site must be served by city sewer constructed in accordance with Ordinance No. 64 or be capable of supporting an on-site
individual sewage treatment system (ISTS) providing each such ISTS is designed by a qualified engineer, approved by the City’s Building
Official, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 67; and
11.7(2) No lighting shall have their source directly visible from the opposite shore except for lights located inside a structure. The use of reflected
light may be acceptable providing the effect is subtle and does not dominate the scene.
11.7(3) Parking areas shall have vegetative screens so that vehicles are not visible from the opposite shore. Parking areas and roads/driveways to
parking areas shall be oriented so that lights from vehicles do not shine on the lake when cars are parked.
11.7(4) Water Supply. Any private water supply for domestic purposes shall be placed up slope from any source of contamination and in areas
not subject to flooding. Water shall not be drawn from any lake, pond or flowage for any purpose except for the purposes of irrigation and fire
protection for the benefit of the fee title owner of real property defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with all Zoning Codes
of the City of Gem Lake.
-22-
Section 11.8 Wetland Uses And Regulations
11.8 (1) Purpose and Intent. The City Council finds that wetlands within the City, as part of the natural ecosystem, are critical to the present and
future health, safety, and general welfare of the land, wildlife, and people of the City. These wetlands conserve surface waters, provide flood
water retention, and improve water quality in accordance with Federal, State, Regional and City objectives. Wetland protection through use and
alteration regulation also improve subsoil moisture and serve to recharge the aquifers critical to the community. The City Council recognizes that
wetlands and their natural functions, when properly maintained, provide important ecological, educational, and recreational assets as well as
enhancing property value and preserving the natural beauty of the landscape.
11.8 (2) Authorization. The City recognizes its statutory obligation to comply with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103 A-G, MN Rules 8420
“Wetland Conservation Act of 1991”, Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, NPDES Phase II, the goals and policies of the City of Gem
Lake Local Water Management Plan, and policies established by VLAWMO and RWMWD all as adopted and, from time to time, amended.
11.8 (3) Application. All real property currently and in the future delineated as wetland in the Gem Lake Watershed Management Plan and other
federal, state and regional delineations shall be subject to these use and alteration regulations. These regulations and requirements shall be in
addition to those imposed by federal, state, and regional wetland conservation district agencies, all of which shall jointly apply. Under joint
application, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
11.8 (4) Wetland Alteration. Any wetland alteration shall be in accordance with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103 A-G, MN Rules 8420 “Wetland
Conservation Act of 1991”, Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, goals and policies established in the City of Gem Lake Local Water
Management Plan, and policies established by VLAWMO and RWMWD each as adopted and, from time to time, amended. Each of the
aforementioned is by reference incorporated as if the full text and regulations were set forth herein.
A) In addition to all other regulations, the City encourages retention or installation of a natural buffer around all wetlands where practical.
11.8 (5) Permits Required. No wetland shall be altered or developed in any manner without first obtaining all necessary permits and written
approvals from the City of Gem Lake and such watershed management organizations with jurisdiction of the area. For purposes of this section, all
requirements of Sections 11.2 through 11.7 inclusive of this ordinance shall apply as if fully restated here.
Section 11.9 Development and Alteration Regulations. In addition to the provisions of all other City Ordinances, all proposals for development or
alteration of Shorelands shall include:
11.9(1) Erosion Control Plan. All plans for development of real property which includes shoreland zones shall include an “Erosion Control Plan”
which shall set forth proposed provisions for sediment control, water management, maintenance of landscaped features, and any additional
matters intended to improve or maintain the quality of the environment. Such a plan shall set forth proposed changes requested by the applicant
and disclose what, if any, change will be made in the natural condition of the earth, including loss or change of ground cover, destruction of trees,
grade courses, and marshes. The plan shall minimize ground cover alteration, loss of natural vegetation, and grade changes as much as possible.
The purpose of the Erosion Control Plan is to eliminate, to the greatest extent possible, the potential pollution, erosion, and siltation attendant to
development and maintain the natural environment. The Erosion Control Plan shall demonstrate currently accepted “best practices” and shall be
presented to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Gem Lake Planning Commission and City Engineer.
A) The “Ramsey County Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook” with all amendments as of the time of application accepted as best
practices and is by reference incorporated as if the full text and regulations were set forth herein.
B) The provisions of the Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance are hereby incorporated as if the full text and regulations were set forth herein.
11.9(2) Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plan. In addition to the provisions of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 66, all plans for development of real
property which includes shoreland zones shall include a Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plan which includes a tree inventory, tree removal
plan, and a relocation or replanting plan for all trees to be removed from and vegetation alteration upon the real property. The Tree And
Vegetation Preservation Plan shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Gem Lake Planning Commission, the
City Forester, and the City Engineer.
11.9(3) Shoreland Impact Plan. All plans for development or alteration of real property which includes Shoreland zones shall include an
approved “Shoreland Impact Plan” which shall set forth proposed results of the alterations proposed. The Shoreland Impact Plan shall be
presented to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Gem Lake Planning Commission, the City Forester, and the City Engineer.
Each Shoreland Impact Plan shall include, but not be limited to:
A) How the removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent erosion into the water and to preserve shoreland aesthetics and how
natural vegetation shall be restored to the greatest extent feasible after any construction project.
B) Grading and filling activities shall be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity will affect sediment and pollutant
trapping and retention, storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage, fish and wildlife habitat, recreational use, and shoreland
or bank stabilization.
C) Grading and filling which are consistent with the City of Gem Lake Local Water Management Plan. Fill or excavated material shall not
be placed in areas prone to erosion or where they could run off into the shoreland area.
D) Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest
time possible. Mulches or similar material shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage. A permanent vegetation cover
shall be established as soon as possible.
E) Clear cutting of trees and shrubs is prohibited. Invasive non-natural vegetation is excepted.
11.9(4) Subdivision. In addition to the requirements of Gem Lake Subdivision Regulations, no Shoreland shall be subdivided if it is determined
by the City or agency of competent jurisdiction to be unsuitable for subdivision by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage
treatment capabilities, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or general welfare of the future residents of the proposed
subdivision or the community and the environment.
11.9(5) Administration. No building permits shall be issued without proof of conformance to all requirements of this Ordinance including, but
not limited to, Grading Permits, Erosion Control Plans, and Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plans reviewed and approved in writing by a
competent authority.
Section 11.10 Enforcement, Approvals And Appeals
11.10(1) The Zoning Administrator appointed by the Gem Lake City Council will, in concert with other City officials and consultants as
necessary, enforce the various provisions of Section 11 and will also cooperate with county, regional, state and federal authorities authorized to
carry out enforcement of the regulations established to protect bodies of water, shorelands and wetlands.
11.10(2) All plans submitted in accordance with this section shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission who, in turn, shall recommend
approval of, amendment to, or denial of all plans to the City Council.
11.10(3) All plans submitted in accordance with this section shall require City Council approval.
11.10(4) All appeals regarding approval, denial, or amendment of plans submitted shall be addressed by the City Council.
-23-
SECTION 12 - "R-B" RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 12.1 Permitted Uses
12.1 (1) Within the "R-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A) The following retail sales or service businesses: Appliance store, auto accessory store, banks, beauty shop, office supplies, photo
supplies, drug store, furniture store, grocery, hardware store, jewelry store, laundromat, clinic, offices, tavern, liquor stores, restaurants,
shoe store and repair, theater, variety store, wearing apparel and similar uses.
B) Hotels & Motels, Hospital or Clinic for human beings, Dental Services, Medical Services, Funeral Home or Mortuary, Private Clubs.
12.1 (2) Single Family dwelling
12.1 (3) Churches
Section 12.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
12.2 (1) Within any "R-B" Use District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal use, however, such accessary use shall not occupy more
than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area nor require more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross man hours required to conduct the permitted
use.
B) Essential Services
Section 12.3 Special Uses
12.3 (1) Within any "R-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A) Auto Repair
B) Motor service station
C) Essential service structures
D) Commercial recreation such as bowling alleys, jump centers, and live entertainment
E) Commercial Broadcast/telecommunication towers and/or antennas
Section 12.4 Height Regulations
12.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and no accessary structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
Section 12.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
12.5 (1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed TABLE 12.5 (1)
AREA
FRONTAGE
FRONT YARD*
SIDE YARD**
REAR YARD***
1,000 sq. ft.
25 feet
10 foot set-back
None
20 foot set-back
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
** Except 15 feet when abutting an “R” District and 30 feet when abutting a street.
*** Except 30 feet when abutting an “R” District.
Section 12.6 Rezoning for "R-B" Retail Business
12.6 (1) No area shall be rezoned for retail business by amendment to this Ordinance unless such area is an extension of an existing "R-B"
District or contains at least two (2) acres of land.
SECTION 13 - "G-B" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 13.1 Permitted Uses
13.1 (1) Within the "G-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A) Those uses permitted in Section 12.1 and as regulated therein except as hereinafter modified shall be a permitted use.
B) The following retail sales and service businesses: Auto sales and repair, boat and marine sales, bakery, business and trade school,
bottling of soft drinks and creameries, building material yard, provided it is conducted within a building or within a fence of such
construction as to prevent view from the public right-of-way, cabinet and carpentry shops, electrical service, heating/plumbing, commercial
greenhouse, dry cleaning plant, farm machinery sales and supplies, dairy farm and milk products processing, packaging and storage, garden
supply store, motels, motor hotels and hotels provided the site shall contain not less than four hundred (400) square feet of lot area per unit,
printing shops, upholstery shop, warehousing, except the storage of inflammable fluids, wholesale offices and showrooms, and similar uses.
C) Open sales or rental lots, subject to the lot being surfaced or landscaped to control the dust, and all materials located on said lot shall
meet front yard requirements. Should the lot be lighted, such lights shall be so located as not to have a direct source visible from the public
right-of-way. Permitted uses include model homes and garage display.
D) Veterinary clinic or animal hospital.
E) Miniature golf course, driving ranges, archery ranges, trampoline centers.
F) Car wash, provided off-street parking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a
maximum fifteen (15) minute period.
G) Essential service structures
H) Lumber yards
Section 13.2 Accessory Uses
13.2 (1) Within any "G-B" Use District, those uses or structures subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental thereto shall be permitted.
A) Essential Services
Section 13.3 Special Uses
13.3 (1) Within any "G-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
-24-
A) Service and light industries which manufacture, process, store, and distribute foods and materials not likely to create offensive noise,
odors, vibrations, dust, smoke, heat, glare or other objectionable influences and are in general dependent upon raw materials defined
elsewhere.
B) Truck and motor freight terminal
C) Inflammable materials sales and storage
D) Commercial Broadcast/telecommunications towers and/or antennas
Section 13.4 Height Regulations
13.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and no accessary structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
Section 13.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
13.5 (1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed TABLE 13.5 (1)
AREA
FRONTAGE
FRONT YARD*
SIDE YARD**
REAR YARD***
12,500 sq. ft.
100 feet
20 foot set-back
10 foot set-back
None
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
** Except 20 feet when abutting a street or residential district.
*** When abutting an “R” District, then it shall be 20 feet.
SECTION 14 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage high quality development by providing assurance that neighboring
land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are also designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause urban and rural blight.
The Zoning Administrator, assisted by the Building Inspector, shall be responsible for enforcing these standards and may require the submission of
information showing compliance or non- compliance with the standards.
Section 14.1 Requirements for Consideration
14.1 (1) Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or structure in any district, other
than a Residential District (R1, R2, R3 and R4), or for construction or remodeling of any structure(s) allowed by a Special Use Permit in the
Residential Districts, three (3) copies of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator. This information will be presented for
review by the Planning Commission and if the Planning Commission deems necessary the City Engineer, as well as for final approval by the City
Council. All data required by this section must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission before a building permit can be issued.
A) Copies of a Registered Surveyors report for the lot where these structure(s) will be constructed, which shall have marked on it the
location(s) of the planned structure(s), driveways, sidewalks and parking spaces. The dimension of the lot area, all building setback lines
and dimensions of the front, back and side yards as required shall also be shown.
B) Preliminary architectural floor plans and elevations of the proposed structure(s) complete with details of the exterior wall finishes.
C) A complete site plan which shall include:
1) A topographical survey of the proposed site including existing and proposed topography and natural features with a minimum scale
of one (1) inch equaling 20 feet. The location of the planned structure(s) should also be indicated on this survey.
2) Landscape plans showing size, quantity and species of shrubs and trees to be included. All fences, walls or other screening devices
shall also be shown including identification of the materials of construction.
3) Suggested plans for a storm water drainage system sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulation within the
proposed development area. This plan will need to be approved by the City Engineer.
4) Details showing the entrances and exits from the development area, including an indication that they have been reviewed by
Ramsey County, if they will connect to a County road.
5) Interior driveway and road details showing traffic flow, fire department access, etc.
6) Lighting plans for all exterior and parking, display and storage lot lighting. Location and type of lighting fixtures shall be given.
7) Locations and dimensions of planned signs for the development.
D) Any additional information which may be requested by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council due to
conditions peculiar to a particular site.
14.1 (2) Cost of data review
A) All costs incurred by the City in the review of the data supplied, such as City Engineer plan review costs, shall be paid by the person
presenting the plans, prior to any review. The final approval of these plans will not be voted on by the City Council until all costs have
been paid.
B) Whenever the proposal may involve a potential for significant environmental impact, or if an Environmental Impact Statement or an
Environmental Assessment Worksheet may be needed by state law or applicable regulation, the City will require the applicant to prepare or
pay for the professional assistance needed in the preparation of these statements or worksheets.
14.1 (3) Procedures for review
A) The Zoning Administrator will forward one copy of this data to the Planning Commission for their review and approval. The second
copy shall be sent to the City Engineer, if the engineer's review is found necessary by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall review this information and the City Engineer's comments on this project at their next meeting. The details
of this review, as well as a copy of the data supplied by the applicant and the Engineer (if needed), shall be forwarded to the City Council
for final approval before the proposed project shall to allowed to start.
B) All of parts of this review may be waived by the City Council after consideration of the recommendations of the Planning Commission
or the Zoning Administrator.
Section 14.2 Exterior Storage
14.2 (1) Residential Districts
-25-
A) In Residential Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from
adjoining properties or a street, except for the following; laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials
and equipment currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the
premises, off-street parking of passenger automobiles and pick-up trucks, except inoperative automobiles and trucks may be parked once
for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
14.2 (2) Business Districts
A) In business districts all materials, equipment and vehicles shall be stored in a building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from
adjoining properties or a street except for:
1) Temporary storage of construction and landscaping materials currently being used on the premises.
2) Open Storage Lots where screening but not a building shall be required.
3) Open Sales or Rental Lots where merchandise for retail sales or rental may be displayed in areas designated by the required Site
Plan or Special Use Permit.
Section 14.3 Refuse
14.3 (1) In All Districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed
container designed for such purposes. Farms may be excluded from this requirement providing the waste material is that commonly associated
and incidental to normal farm operations. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse, and weeds.
14.3 (2) In All Districts, no person shall store, park or permit the parking or storage of any junked vehicle, external to any structure, on any
property within the city.
Section 14.4 Screening
14.4 (1) Screening shall be required in all zones where:
A) any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential use or zone; and,
B) where the driveway to a parking area of more than six parking spaces is within 15 feet of an adjoining residential use or zone.
14.4 (2) Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential use, that
business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or
industry is across the street from a developed residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as
determined by the Building Inspector).
14.4 (3) In all districts all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
A) retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure;
B) materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises;
C) merchandise located on service station pump islands.
14.4 (4) The screening in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than 5 feet high, but shall not extend within 15 feet of any
street, right-of-way or driveway. The screening shall be placed along property lines or in case of screening along a street, 15 feet from the street
right-of-way with landscaping between the screening and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered "solid" if it blocks direct vision.
Planting of a type approved by the Council may also be used as a screening.
Section 14.5 Landscaping
14.5 (1) In All Districts, all developed uses shall provide a landscaped yard along all streets. This yard shall be kept clear of all structures,
storage, and off-street parking. This yard shall be at least 20 feet in depth along all streets, measured from the street right-of-way. Except for
driveways, the yard shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot, and along both streets in the case of a corner lot.
Section 14.6 Maintenance
14.6 (1) In All Districts, all structures, landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health and safety
conditions to the adjoining areas.
Section 14.7 Lighting and Glare
14.7 (1) In All Districts, any lighting shall be arranged as to deflect light from all adjoining property, and from the public streets and highways.
Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from lighting or from high temperature processes such as welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining
property.
14.7 (2) Glare or Heat - Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary
shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located.
14.7 (3) Outdoor lighting - All outdoor lighting shall be so designed and installed so that light will not be directed onto adjoining property or
public streets and highways. Lighting units shall be properly shielded to give no upward component of light to create a sky-glow.
A) Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be mounted at the lowest possible level above ground, but in no case shall any pole or structure for
mounting such fixtures exceed the maximum principal structure height restrictions.
B) Prior to installing or remodeling any outdoor lighting, a site plan showing type, location and configuration details and proposed area of
direct illumination must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his approval.
C) After completion of any outdoor lighting system the property owner may be required to submit an affidavit, by a registered lighting
engineer, that the completed project does not exceed the requirements of this section.
14.7 (4) Lighting used to illuminate sales lots - Lighting used to illuminate sales lots for new or used cars shall be arranged and designed so as to
comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the lot, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not exceed 120
foot candles.
B) Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured 30 feet out from the property line with the meter directed toward the lot, shall be 5
foot candles.
C) The maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point 30 feet out from the property line, shall be no greater
than 600 foot Lamberts.
14.7 (5) Lighting for outdoor storage areas - Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the area, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not exceed 15 foot-candles.
B) Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured five feet out from the property line with the meter directed toward the area in
question, shall be two foot-candles.
-26-
C) Maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point 5 feet out from the property line, shall be no greater than 300
foot Lamberts.
14.7 (6) Lighting for off street parking - Lighting for off street parking lots shall comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the parking area, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not
exceed 2 foot- candles.
B) Limitations on the hours of lighting operation may be imposed by the City Council.
Section 14.8 Vibration
14.8 (1) Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge, shall be prohibited if such vibrations are
perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. This standard shall not apply to vibrations created during the process of
construction.
Section 14.9 Off-Street Loading
14.9 (1) In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials
or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading space on the basis of adequate space for loading and
unloading all vehicles used incidental to the operation of the use.
A) No loading berth of vehicles over two-tons capacity shall be closer than 100 feet to any residence district unless completely enclosed by
building walls not less than eight (8) feet in height.
b) Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7 a.m.
Section 14.10 Traffic Control
14.10 (1) The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid:
A) congestion on the public streets; and,
B) traffic hazards; and,
C) additional truck traffic through residential areas.
14.10(1) Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe and orderly flow.
14.10(2) Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall avoid residential areas and in all cases be forward-moving with no backing
into streets.
Section 14.11 Drainage and Lot Flooding
14.11 (1) No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off, flooding, or erosion on adjacent properties. Such
run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area or other public facility, and shall be consistent with overall city
drainage plans.
14.11 (2) Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width as required to assure that
building sites are not subject to flooding.
Section 14.12 Architecture
14.12 (1) It is hereby affirmed as public policy that the appearance of this community is a proper matter for public concern and that all developed
open spaces, and all buildings, signs, plantings, surfaces and structures which may be seen from the public ways are subject to the provisions of
this Ordinance.
14.12 (2) In All Districts, all principal buildings other than one-family dwellings must be designed or approved by a registered architect and
certified in accordance with the appropriate Minnesota State statutes.
14.12 (3) In All Business Districts, a building permit shall not be issued unless the proposed use is designed, sited, oriented and landscapeplanned
to produce a harmonious relationship of building and grounds with adjacent buildings and grounds and with the environment of the
neighborhood.
14.12 (4) In All Residential Districts, a building permit shall not be issued if the proposed building is so similar or dissimilar to the other homes in
the area as to result in depreciation of property values in the neighborhood.
Section 14.13 Explosives
14.13 (1) No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products, such as TNT or dynamite, which could
decompose by detonation shall be permitted except such as are licensed by the Council.
Section 14.14 Radiation and Electrical Emissions
14.14 (1) No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radio-activity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance
(except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of
such disturbance.
Section 14.15 Other Nuisance Characteristics
14.15 (1) No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, dangerous wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other such adverse influences shall be permitted
in any district that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property.
14.15 (2) All wastes shall be disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to public health and safety.
Section 14.16 Consistency with Plans and Policies
14.16 (1) The proposed use shall preserve the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and shall be consistent with the goals, plans and policies of the
City's Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 15 - SIGNS
Section 15.1 Signs - General Provisions
15.1 (1) Signs are a permitted accessory use in all use Districts, subject to the following regulations:
A) A sign is a structure or a part of a structure for the purpose of applying yard and height regulations.
-27-
B) Signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way or easements except that the City Council may grant a conditional permit to locate
signs and decorations on or within the right-of-way for a specified time not to exceed sixty (60) days.
C) Signs and parts of the super structure may not extend into the yards required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 15.2 Prohibited Signs
15.2 (1) No illuminated signs (either interior of external illumination) are permitted within the "R" Zoning Districts.
15.2 (2) Illuminated signs or other devices rotating or otherwise, giving off an intermittent, or rotating beam consisting of a collection or
concentration of rays of light shall not be permitted in any Zoning District.
15.2 (3) Any sign that obstructs the vision of drivers, obstructs or detracts from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on the public
streets and roads by reason of the size, location, coloring or illumination of the sign shall not be permitted in any Zoning District.
15.2 (4) Any sign unlawfully installed, erected and maintained.
15.2 (5) Any sign that now or hereafter exists which identifies a discontinued business, activity, campaign, service or product at any location.
15.2 (6) Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way.
15.2 (7) Advertising signs are not permitted in any Zoning District in the City of Gem Lake.
Section 15.3 Real Estate Signs
15.3 (1) For purpose of selling or leasing property, in the Residential Zoned areas of the City, a sign not in excess of ten (10) square feet total
surface area may be placed within the front yard of the property to be sold or leased.
15.3 (2) For purpose of selling or leasing property in the Business Zoned areas of the City, a sign not in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet total
surface area may be placed within the front yard of the property to be sold or leased.
15.3 (3) Such signs shall not be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line, unless mounted flat against the structure. Such
property identified as for rent, sale or lease by a real-estate sign must be in conformance with City Ordinances.
Section 15.4 Existing Signs
15.4 (1) Signs existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which do not conform to the regulations set forth in this Ordinance are a
non-conforming use.
Section 15.5 Method of Calculating Sign Size
15.5 (1) The square footage of a sign shall be calculated by measuring the area within the frame. If the width of a frame exceeds twelve (12)
inches it shall constitute sign space. If letters or graphics are mounted directly on a wall or fascia or in such a way as to be without a frame, the
dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six (6) inches beyond the periphery formed around such letters or
graphics in a plane figure, bound by straight lines connecting the outer most points.
15.5 (2) Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign. Any symbols, flags, pictures,
wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walks, awnings, free standing structures, suspended by balloons or
kites or on persons, animals or vehicles shall be considered as a sign.
Section 15.6 Sign Permits
15.6 (1) A Sign Permit shall be required for construction, alteration, rebuilding or relocating of all signs within the City of Gem Lake, except for
certain types of signs identified in the Ordinance. All requests for signs shall be made on the approved "Sign Permit Form" available from the
City's Zoning Administrator. The Sign Permit may be approved by the Zoning Administrator, without the approval of the Planning Commission,
except for any Permit that would require a Variance or Special Use permit.
15.6 (2) A fee made payable to the City in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and as amended from time to time for issuance
of Sign Permits shall accompany all applications. This fee shall be non-refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior to consideration and
approval by the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk.
15.6 (3) The following signs ARE EXEMPT from obtaining a sign permit:
A) Nameplate signs on residential property stating only the name, address and profession of the occupant.
B) Real Estate signs with ten (10) square feet or less of display surface.
C) Street, hazard and other official non-advertising signs erected by a government body or others where regulated pursuant to a legal
authority.
D) Campaign and election signs
E) Newspaper boxes
F) Construction signs with under ten (10) square feet of display surface.
15.6 (4) A temporary sign, including banner and pennants, is exempt from obtaining a Sign Permit, but the Zoning administrator must be notified
, in writing, when each temporary sign, banners or pennants will be erected and when they will be taken down.
15.6 (5) The exemptions permitted by the preceding paragraphs shall apply only to the requirement for obtaining a Sign Permit. This exception of
not requiring a Sign Permit shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility for its construction and erection in
accordance with the other requirements of these Sign regulations and for the requirement for the maintenance of this sign to keep it in a state of
good and safe condition.
Section 15.7 Use of Mobile Signs
15.7 (1) Mobile signs with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet of display surface may be used NOT MORE THAN two (2) times within a
calendar year on the same lot within the City of Gem Lake. Display of such a sign shall be allowed for not greater than thirty (30) consecutive
days or for the duration of the event, whichever is less. These signs do require a Sign Permit. This permit must be prominently displayed during
the period of validity. The sign, supports and portable stand (trailer) shall be removed from public view at the end of the display period, No such
sign will be allowed that interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent land or constitutes a hazard or endangerment to the public.
15.7 (2) Mobile signs of larger dimensions than fifty (50) square feet of display surface are not allowed in any Zoning District.
Section 15.8 Campaign and Election Signs
15.8 (1) Campaign or Election signs are permitted in any District on private property when owner approval has been given. Such signs shall be
removed within ten (10) days following any public election. Election signs are regulated in the size to a maximum provided by Minnesota State
Statues. Election signs are exempted from any other regulations in this Ordinance.
-28-
15.8 (2) The volunteer or political committee, however organized and required by law or ordinance to identify itself in support of a candidate or
issue, shall be the responsible entity for conformance to this section of this Ordinance regarding size, display and removal of temporary
Campaign and Election signs.
Section 15.9 Construction Signs
15.9 (1) One temporary free-standing single or double faced sign, with a total height no higher than eight (8) feet and with a total display area no
larger than sixteen (16) square feet in size, denoting proposed or future construction on a particular site, will be allowed for a period not to exceed
one (1) year prior to construction, with a right of renewal for an additional six (6) months. Said sign may indicate: 1) the particulars of the
proposed construction, 2) the company, firm or individual instrumental in its creation, 3) the architect, engineer and contractor, and 4) rental,
sale or lease information.
15.9 (2) If construction commences, said sign will be allowed to remain in place until seven (7) days after completion of the project, which will
be determined from the day of the occupancy permit. If construction does not start, the sign must be removed immediately after such a decision is
made.
Section 15.10 Temporary Signs
15.10 (1) Temporary signs, as well as banners or pennants, are permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for any one display, but not to
exceed ninety (90) days of advertising by this type of display per year. Such signs, banners or pennants shall be kept in a neat and maintained
state and shall not be counted as a portion of the allowable sign area for the structure.
Section 15.11 Entrance/Exit Signs
15.11 (1) One entrance/exit signs shall be allowed at each entrance or exit to a site. This sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height or be over
twelve (12) square feet in size.
Section 15.12 Structural Regulations For Signs
15.12 (1) Ground Mounted signs - All ground mounted signs shall meet the following requirements:
A) No ground mounted sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuild or relocated to a height exceeding thirty-five (35) feet above the
ground.
B) The uprights and basic sign structure of all ground mounted signs shall be of metal or other weather resistance material construction.
C) The soil replaced after an anchor or post for these signs has been placed in the ground shall be thoroughly compacted. The anchors or
posts shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line.
D) Signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases shall be so proportioned that the width and size of the bases are adequate to
resist the wind pressure specified in the Uniform Building Code.
15.12 (2) Free Standing electrical signs
A) All free standing electrical signs shall have electrical power fed to them with underground electrical wiring, in compliance with all
building and electrical codes.
15.12 (3) Attachment to Building
A) All signs attached to a building or other structure shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured in a manner approved by the Building
Inspector, and shall be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep them secure, safe and free from danger.
15.12 (4) Unsafe and Unlawful signs
A) Written notice will be given to the owner or permittee of any sign, found by the City's Building Inspector, that is unsafe or loose from its
mounting, or has been constructed or erected in violation of the safety or structural provision of this Ordinance.
B) If the sign owner or permittee fails to remove or alter the sign and related structure so as to comply with the standards herein, within
thirty (30) days after such notice, such sign shall be removed or altered by the City to comply with the Building Inspector's notes. This
work will be done at the expense of the permittee or owner or the property upon which it is located.
C) If a sign is found to be an immediate peril to persons or property, such sign shall be subject to removal without notice, with the costs of
such removal billed to the sign owner or permittee.
Section 15.13 Signs in Residential Zoning Districts
15.13 (1) Within Residential Districts only the following types of signs are permitted:
A) One (1) nameplate sign for each dwelling and such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area per surface and no sign shall be so
constructed as to have more than two surfaces.
B) One (1) nameplate sign for each dwelling group of three (3) or more units, and such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per
surface and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2) surfaces.
C) Real Estate signs
D) Election and Campaign signs
E) Constructions signs
Section 15.14 Signs in the Special "LD-B" Zoning District
15.14 (1) Within the "LD-B" District, which is a transitional business district located close to nearby residential areas, only the following signs
are permitted:
A) One nameplate sign for each major use of each structure not to exceed twenty (20) square feet per surface. No building shall have more
than one hundred (100) square feet total of nameplate signs.
B) One office park or similar area sign not to exceed six (6) square feet in size at each entrance to the office park or similar area.
C) Real Estate Signs
D) Construction Signs
E) Temporary signs
F) Entrance/Exit sign
15.14 (2) No sign in an "LD-B" District shall be placed in or face a required yard area abutting a Residential Zoning District.
15.14 (3) No ground mounted freestanding signs in the "LD-B" District shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. This height limit supersedes all
other height limitation given in the Ordinance.
15.14 (4) Illuminated signs are not permitted in this Zoning District.
-29-
Section 15.15 Signs in the "RB, GB and GB-II" Business Districts
15.15 (1) Within the above listed Business Zoning Districts only the following signs are permitted:
A) There shall be no more than one (1) business sign per principal entrance or frontage on road or parking area plus one over-all shopping
center sign. Total sign area per principal entrance shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet plus one (1) square foot for each one hundred (100)
square feet of building over 3,000 square feet.
B) Business signs may not be over six (6) feet above the highest wall or parapet except that a over-all shopping center sign may extend
thirty (30) feet above said wall or parapet. An over-all shopping center sign shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from a street right-of-way.
Wall or projection signs may project two (2) feet into required set-back area.
C) The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of two (2) square feet per front foot of building, plus one (1)
square foot per front foot of property not occupied by a building. No individual sign surface shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
size. Each business is limited to a maximum of three (3) signs.
D) Real Estate Signs
E) Construction Signs
F) Temporary signs
G) Mobile signs
H) Entrance/Exit signs
SECTION 16 - OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land
and/or structures.
When applying for a building permit in all Districts for a new structure, the enlarging of a structure or a new or enlarged use of a parcel of land, the
application shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension indicating the location of off-street parking spaces in compliance with the
following requirements:
Section 16.1 General Provisions
16.1 (1) Existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in number unless said
number exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
16.1 (2) Should a building, structure or use in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance be damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause,
it may be re-established except that in doing so any off-street parking or loading which existed must be retained and should plans be effected for
enlarging the floor area, seating capacity or other facilities which would affect the parking or loading requirements, the parking or loading spaces
shall be enlarged accordingly.
16.1 (3) Floor Area - The term "Floor Area" shall mean the sum of all floor areas in a building as calculated from the outside dimensions of the
building. It shall not include areas used primarily for non-public purposes such as storage, incidental repair, office of building management or
maintenance, toilets, or rest rooms, utilities, or dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.
16.1 (4) Parking Spaces - Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length exclusive of an adequately
designed system of access drives.
16.1 (5) Use of Parking Facilities - Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles and/or one truck not to exceed one and one-half (½) ton capacity for each dwelling unit except by Special Use permit. Required
parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles
belonging to the employees, owners, tenants or customers of business or manufacturing establishments except by Special Use permit. Required
parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage or repair of commercial vehicles.
16.1 (6) Required off-street parking space in the Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
16.1 (7) Joint Parking Facilities - Off-street parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures or uses may be provided
collectively in any "District" in which separate parking facilities for each separate building, structure or use would be required, provided that the
total number of spaces provided shall equal the sum of the separate requirements of each use.
16.1 (8) Use of Parking Area - Required off-street parking space in any District shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage
of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or rent.
Section 16.2 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas
16.2 (1) Parking Areas - shall be designed so as to provide adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such driveway access shall not
exceed twenty-two (22) feet in width and shall be so located as to cause the least interference with traffic movement.
16.2 (2) Calculating Space - When calculating the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (½) or more
shall constitute another space. One parking space shall equal 300 square feet of parking and moving area.
16.2 (3) Signs - No signs shall be located in any parking area except as necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.
16.2 (4) Surfacing - All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and
drainage. Parking area for less than three (3) vehicle spaces shall be exempt. Plans for surfacing and drainage shall be subject to approval of the
City Council.
16.2 (5) Lighting - Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining
property, and shall comply with Section 14.7.
16.2 (6) Curbing and Landscaping - All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a
bumper curb not less than three (3) feet from the side property line or guard of normal bumper height no less than one (1) foot from the side
property line. When said area is for six (6) spaces or more, a curb or fence not over six (6) feet in height shall be erected along the front yard
set-back line with grass or planting occupying the space between the sidewalk and curb or fence.
16.2 (7) When a required off-street parking space for six (6) cars or more is located adjacent to an "R" District, a solid fence of adequate design,
not over six (6) feet in height nor less than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height shall be erected along the "R" District property line. Screen
planting may also be required.
16.2 (8) Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces - It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use,
uses and/or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space, access ways, landscaping and required fences.
-30-
Section 16.3 Required Off-Street Parking - shall be as follows:
16.3 (1) Single Family Dwellings - At least one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional parking space for each two (2)
roomers accommodated. A garage will fulfill this requirement. However, a building permit shall not be granted to convert a garage to living
space unless other acceptable provisions are made to provide the required parking space.
16.3 (2) Two-Family Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit, but not more than two (2) per unit.
16.3 (3) Boarding and Rooming Houses - At least two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) persons for which accommodations are provided for
sleeping.
16.3 (4) Multiple Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for each four (4) two-bedroom units
and one (1) additional space for each two (2) three-bedroom units.
16.3 (5) Hotel or Apartment Hotel - At least one (1) parking space for each rental unit provided in the design of the building.
16.3 (6) Motel, Tourist Home, Motor Hotel - At least one (1) space for each dwelling unit or lodging room.
16.3 (7) Church, Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each three and one-half (3-1/2) seats based on the design capacity of the main
assembly hall.
16.3 (8) Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Rest Home, Nursing Home or Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each six (6) beds for which
accommodations are offered, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on maximum shift.
16.3 (9) Medical or Dental Clinic - At least three (3) parking spaces for each staff doctor or dentist.
16.3 (10) Drive-in Food Establishments - At least one (1) parking space for each fifteen (15) square feet of gross floor space in building allocated
to drive-in operation.
16.3 (11) Bowling Alley - At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as
a restaurant.
16.3 (12) Motor Fuel Station - At least one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on maximum shift, plus two (2) off-street parking
spaces for each service stall.
16.3 (13) Retail Store - At least seven (7) off-street parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor space.
16.3 (14) Restaurants, Cafes, Bars, Taverns, Night Clubs - At least one (1) space for each three (3) seats based on capacity design.
16.3 (15) Banks, Offices and/or Public Office Building - At least four (4) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
space.
16.3 (16) Undertaking Establishments - At least five (5) parking spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral
vehicle maintained on premises. Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral procession.
16.3 (17) Furniture Store, Wholesale, Auto Sales, Repair Shops At least three (3) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area. Open sales lots shall provide one and one-half (1-1/2) parking spaces for each employee on maximum shift, but not less than
three (3) spaces.
16.3 (18) Warehouse, Storage, Handling of Bulk Goods - At least one (1) space for each two (2) employees on maximum shift or one (1) for each
two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is the larger.
SECTION 17 - (Left Blank Intentionally)
SECTION 18 - “LDB” LOW DENSITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 18.1 Purpose
18.1(1) The purpose of an “LDB” Zoned District is to provide a means by which a land area of limited size interposed between districts of widely
divergent permitted uses may be developed to provide a rational and reasonable transition from the more intense uses allowed in General
Business or Retail Business Districts to the less intense uses allowed in residential districts. The properties created in an Office Park would
provide a rational and reasonable transition from a General Business District to a Residential District. Any development shall be designed and
operated in a manner that is orderly, environmentally acceptable, and in conformity with the goals, policies and plans of the Comprehensive Plan
of the City of Gem Lake.
18.1(2) The City of Gem Lake has designated all “LDB” Zoned Districts for “Office Park” type development for business or professional offices
that primarily have regular working daytime hours of operation. Office buildings, office-condominium buildings, office-showroom buildings,
related service businesses and other businesses that complement the appearance of the office environment and also use regular daytime working
hours, are also deemed suitable for this area.
18.1(3) As an alternate, development consisting of “life-cycle housing” type residential uses with a density not exceeding one (1) unit per acre
(equal to “R2" Residential Zoning) would also be considered. Use of the Density Zoning or Density Transfer System including clustering, as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance is encouraged in any consideration of this type of residential use.
18.1(4) A mixed use development with office, office-condominium or office-showroom use on the more intense use side of the development
parcel and residential use in the balance of the parcel will also be considered as long as the “lot coverage” requirements in an “LDB” Zoned
District are followed. Clustering of the business and the residential uses is encouraged to provide best use of the land parcel, provide maximum
open space and to utilize the possible cost reductions of the infrastructure and the services that would serve this area.
Section 18.2 Permitted Principal Uses
18.2(1) Within any “LDB” Zoned District, the following uses shall be permitted uses:
A) Small office buildings;
B) Office-condominium buildings;
C) Business, professional, medical or institutional offices;
D) Banks and savings and loan association offices;
E) Research laboratories, providing no hazardous waste is produced as part of the research;
F) Insurance company buildings.
Section 18.3 Permitted Accessory Uses
18.3(1) Within any “LDB” Zoned District, the following use(s) shall be permitted accessory use(s):
A) Any incidental repair, storage or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal or special/interim use, however, such accessory
use shall not occupy more than twenty (20%) percent of the floor area.
-31-
Section 18.4 Special Uses or Interim Uses
18.4(1) Within any “LDB” Zoned District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by Special Use Permit or Interim Use
Permit:
A) Private clubs, including athletic or tennis clubs;
B) Office-showroom buildings;
C) Cemetery;
D) Churches and synagogues as provided for in the Institutional Overlay Process in this Ordinance;
E) Government buildings and libraries as provided for in the Institutional Overlay Process in this Ordinance;
F) Nursery or day schools as provided for in the Institutional Overlay Process in this Ordinance;
G) Any supplemental retail use within the structure and related directly to a Permitted Principal Use, Special Use or Interim Use and
conducted solely for the convenience of and use by the employees or clients of the Permitted Principal Use, Special Use or Interim Use.
Such usage shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25%) percent of the ground floor area or four hundred (400sf) square feet,
whichever is less. No signage shall be displayed outside the building advertising this as a retail service to the public;
H) Those uses and structures permitted in Section 8.1 of this Zoning Ordinance (“R2" Residential District).
Section 18.5 Uses Not Permitted
18.5(1) The following list of uses, while not intended to be complete, provides examples of principal uses NOT PERMITTED in any “LDB”
Zoned District and that WILL NOT generally be permitted as Special Uses or Interim Uses in any “LDB” Zoned District:
A) Uses requiring excessive parking, which is defined as such parking which cannot be screened by bermings, plantings or the like;
B) Uses resulting in excessive vehicle traffic which is defined as such traffic which is generally incompatible with the lands and roadways
adjacent to the district;
C) Uses requiring excessive exterior building lighting which is defined as lighting that cannot be screened from view by adjacent properties
by bermings, plantings or the like;
D) Commercial manufacturing, processing or repairing of the type which emits noises or fumes inconsistent with abutting land uses or
zones;
E) Businesses that operate continuously during any 24 hour period;
F) Light Manufacturing;
G) Warehouse;
H) Shopping Center;
I) Retail except as permitted by Section 18.4 (l);
J) Restaurants or convenience food uses.
Section 18.6 Height Regulations
18.6(1) No principal business structure shall exceed thirty-six (36') feet in height and no principal structure, any part of which is within threehundred
(300') feet of any residential district or a roadway bordering any residential district, shall exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.
18.6(2) No accessory business structure shall exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height and no accessory structure any part of which is within three
hundred (300') feet of any residential district or a roadway bordering any residential district shall exceed fifteen (15') feet in height.
18.6(3) All principal residential and accessory structures shall meet the height restrictions defined in an “R2" Residential Zoning District.
Section 18.7 Requirements for Area, Setbacks, Frontage and Yard Requirements
18.7(1) The minimum lot area for business uses in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be twenty-four thousand (24,000 sf) square feet. The
maximum lot area shall be the maximum size of an entire “LDB” Zoned District.
18.7(2) The minimum lot size for residential use in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be as described in the “R2" Residential Zoning District
section of this ordinance.
18.7(3) The minimum business building setback from any lot line, public street right-of-way, parking lot or circulation drive shall be as set forth
below or be equal to the average height of the nearest or tallest building, whichever is greater:
A) Building Setbacks TABLE 18.7.3 a)
Interior Lot Lines
Front Yard
35 foot set-back
Interior Lot Lines
Side Yard
10 foot set-back
Interior Lot Lines
Rear Yard
20 foot set-back
Adjacent R Zoning
50 foot set-back
1) Yards identified as the front yard will be determined by the Gem Lake City Council.
2) Set-backs measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
3) Side yard set-back thirty-five (35') feet when abutting any street or private way.
B) Access Ways & Parking Lots TABLE 18.7.3b)
Public Street Width
35 foot width
Service Road Width
20 foot width
Circulation Drive Width
10 foot width
Parking Lot
20 foot width
18.7(4) All setbacks, frontage, yards and other requirements for residential uses in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be as described in the R2
Residential Zoning District section of this ordinance..
Section 18.8 Lot Coverage
18.8(10 The maximum allowable Lot Coverage for any “LDB” Zoned District shall be seventy-five (75%) percent of the total area of the “LDB”
Zoned District area being considered.
18.8(2) Calculation of Lot Coverage shall be the sum of the areas of: 1) all buildings (Principal and Accessory, business and residential)
determined by the foundation plan; 2) the parking areas and driveways; 3) the access roads; 4) the loading, storage and trash areas; and, 5) all
other areas covered by impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. The total calculated area shall then be divided by the total area of
the LDB Zoning District to calculate the percent of lot coverage. The calculated area coverage shall not exceed the maximum allowable lot
coverage. Wetland areas and storm water ponds, in any “LDB” Zoned District, may be defined as “open” area in these calculations.
-32-
18.8(3) Use of the Density Zoning or Density Transfer System, defined in this Zoning Ordinance, is encouraged to “cluster” business type
buildings in any “LDB” Zoned District in areas further away form any adjacent Residential Districts. Bonuses for additional density may be
provided for by the City Council, if clustering is used.
Section 18.9 Hours of Operation for Businesses
18.9(1) Any business uses in any “LDB” Zoned District shall restrict their hours of operation to 7 AM to 10 PM daily. No twenty-four (24) hour
per day business operation shall be allowed anywhere in any “LDB” Zoned District.
18.9.2 Other restrictions on hours of operation may be imposed, in the Special or Interim Use Permit, on uses in
any “LDB” Zoned District allowed by a Special or Interim Use Permit.
Section 18.10 Access
18.10(1) All traffic to and from any “LDB” Zoned District must be channeled to a primary public roadway through driveways and internal roads
developed specifically for the uses to be developed and shall be shown on an approved traffic plan utilizing curb cuts to create one or more
accesses onto a primary public roadway.
A) All traffic plans shall require approval by the city and the governmental subdivision responsible for the primary public roadway onto
which development traffic will be directed.
18.10(2) For all business uses in any “LDB” Zoned District, internal service roads should be designed and constructed to facilitate and direct
internal traffic flow, type and volume to a primary public roadway via the access created in 18.10.1.
18.10(3) The creation or use of an authorized private way in any “LDB” Zoned District shall require approval by the City Council. Use of any
existing authorized private ways for access to commercial or business development in any district shall not be allowed.
Section 18.11 Material Of Building Construction To Be Used For A Commercial Structures
18.11(1) All commercial structures constructed in any “LDB” Zoned District must be finished on all sides with permanent finished materials of
consistent quality. Exterior wall surfaces shall be face brick, glass or stone, or other approved materials. Architecturally treated concrete, cast in
place, precast panels or decorative block may be acceptable if incorporated in a building design that is compatible with other developments
throughout the planning area.
18.11(2) No building, in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be constructed of sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel or corrugated aluminum.
18.11(3) Commercial structures with wood frame construction may be allowed if specifically designed to compliment structures on the site or in
adjacent residential areas.
Section 18.12 Reviews and Approvals Required For Development
18.12(1) In consideration of the sensitivity required in creating a transitional district to be developed between divergent uses, all plans for specific
developments within any “LDB” Zoned District must be reviewed by the City of Gem Lake Planning Commission whose findings and
recommendations to approve or deny the plans shall be presented to the City Council. The City Council shall review the recommendations of the
Planning Commission and shall approve or deny the plans as presented.
18.12(2) Development plans for any “LDB” Zoned District shall be presented in the form of a sketch plan with all components of this plan as
described in this ordinance and the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance including, but not limited to, all Variances, Special Uses, Interim
Uses and the like to be included in the development. In addition to the other provisions of this section and ordinance, the following general
criteria will be considered when this plan is reviewed:
A) All uses must be generally compatible with the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, and building
construction must meet the provisions of the building material uses as described in this section of the Zoning Ordinance and as required by
the Building Code;
B) Use must be environmentally sound, compatible with adjacent land uses and zones, including sound, sight and smell, and compatible
with the type of volume of traffic upon adjacent roadways;
C) Overall density of strictures including parking areas, walls and roadways, front, side, and rear yards, must reflect the transitional nature
of an “LDB” Zoned District from the intense uses in adjacent business districts to the less intense uses in adjacent residential districts;
D) Signs in this district should be minimized. Sign design shall be required and shown as part of the initial site plan design reviewed by the
Planning Commission for approval by the City Council. All signs in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be consistent in both design and
appearance;
E) No outdoor lighting should be allowed in this district. Parking lots may be lighted only when necessary during business hours. Only
“security type” lighting around the structures should be used.
F) A Landscaping Plan for the entire development site shall be provided for review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City
Council to insure that adequate landscaping is provided by means of berms, trees, shrubs or other methods to buffer the commercial
buildings, parking facilities and other site areas from the adjacent residential districts. The Landscaping Plan, including installation and
maintenance protocols, shall be in keeping with an upscale “Office Park” or, as necessary, a residential neighborhood.
G) All buildings in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be served by the City of Gem Lake Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. City water shall
be supplied from a water distribution system owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake.
H) An engineered storm water collection system shall be provided in any “LDB” Zoned District to be developed. Storm water ponds and
storm sewers to serve the entire Zoning District shall be shown on the plans submitted for approval.
SECTION 19 - "G-B II" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT II
Section 19.1 Permitted Uses
19.1 (1) Within the "G-B II" Use District, no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
A) Those uses permitted in Section 12.1 and as regulated therein except as hereinafter modified shall be a permitted use.
B) The following retail sales and service businesses: Auto sales and repair including painting and body work, boat and marine sales, bakery,
business and trade school, cabinet and carpentry shops, electrical service, heating/plumbing, commercial greenhouse, farm and general
equipment rental providing it is conducted within a building, dairy products processing, packaging and storage, garden supply store,
printing shops, upholstery shop, warehousing, except the storage of inflammable fluids, wholesale offices and show rooms, and similar
uses.
C) Veterinary clinic or animal hospital.
D) Single family dwelling.
-33-
E) Car wash, provided off-street parking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a
maximum fifteen (15) minute period.
F) Business offices.
G) Funeral Home or Mortuary.
Section 19.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
19.2 (1) Within any "G-B II" District, those uses or structures subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental thereto shall be permitted subject to Section 4.5.
A) Essential services.
Section 19.3 Special Uses
19.3 (1) Within any "G-B II" Use District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit:
A) Essential service structures.
B) Commercial recreation such as bowling alleys, miniature golf course, archery range, trampoline center.
C) Dwelling for watchman and family.
D) Open sales (or rental) lot.
E) Open storage lot.
F) Commercial Broadcast/telecommunications towers and/or antennas
Section 19.4 Height Regulations
19.4 (1) No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
Section 19.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
19.5 (1) The following minimum and maximum requirements shall be observed TABLE 19.5 (1)
AREA*
FRONTAGE**
FRONT YARD
SIDE YARD*
REAR YARD**
15,000 sq. ft.
80 feet
20 foot set-back
10 foot set-back
10 foot set-back
* 75,000 sq. ft. maximum
**Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
19.5 (2) The minimum open space requirement shall be 50%. For purposes of this section only, this includes all areas not covered by buildings.
SECTION 20 INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 20.1 Purpose
20.1 (1) The Institutional Overlay District is intended to provide a means of overlaying an existing Zoning district, located in the City of Gem
Lake, for facilities devoted to serving the public. This District is unique in that the primary objective of uses within this district is for the
providing of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than for the sale of goods or services. It is intended that all uses within such an
overlay area will be compatible with all adjoining uses.
20.1 (2) This Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning Ordinance,
as existing or amended by this Section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. This overlay district will remain in effect as long as the use
and the user remains the same. If an overlay area is no longer used, changes uses or is rescinded the parcel will revert back to its original
underlying zoning classification.
Section 20.2 Permitted Uses
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the Institutional Overlay District:
20.2 (1) Religious institutions, such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, but with activities limited to worship and related social
activities.
20.2 (2) Private Child Care and Education facilities as defined in the definitions section of this Ordinance, but with activities limited to
school/educational activities.
Section 20.3 Accessory Uses
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the Institutional Overlay District:
20.3 (1) Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the uses permitted as a permitted or special use (if a special use is allowed), will be permitted.
20.3 (2) Off-street parking and loading areas.
20.3 (3) Accessory buildings as described in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
Section 20.4 Conditional or Special Uses
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are Conditional or Special Uses in the Institutional Overlay District. (These uses
require a Special Use Permit as described in Section 5.6):
20.4 (1) Living quarters (such as a parsonage, rectory or care-takers house) that are supplied as an accessory use to a principal use provided that:
A) The use shall not be used as rental property.
B) The maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.
C) There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility.
20.4 (2) Governmental and public regulated buildings and essential service structures as defined in this Ordinance and necessary for the health,
safety and general welfare of the City, excluding public works facilities and uses provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural
standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the
Landscape Ordinance.
-34-
20.4 (3) Public recreational facilities provided that:
A) The site is landscaped.
B) The use is available to the "public"
C) The land area of the property containing such uses or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
D) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the
Landscape Ordinance.
20.4 (4) Publicly owned or cultural buildings, such as libraries, city offices, auditoriums, public administration offices and historical
developments, but excluding public works type facilities and uses, provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural
standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B) All equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the
Landscape Ordinance.
20.4 (5) Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship activities, as an accessory use within a religious building, provided
that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B) All equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the
Landscape Ordinance.
20.4 (6) Accessory buildings with a cumulative total of greater than 1000 square feet.
Section 20.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an Institutional Overlay District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance:
20.5 (1) The minimum land area for an Institutional Overlay shall be two and three quarter (2.75) acres of buildable area. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, buildable area means 2.75 acres of land, not including wetlands, land seasonally flooded on a annual basis, land containing
drainage ways or surface water or land containing aquatic vegetation, and land in excess of twelve (12) percent slope.
20.5 (2) Lot width:
A) Two-Hundred (200) feet of frontage which must be located on a County or State maintained roadway.
20.5 (3) Setbacks TABLE 20.5 (3)
FRONT YARD
SIDE YARD
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back
50 foot set-back
50 foot set-back
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
20.5 (4) Accessory Structure(s) Setbacks TABLE 20.5 (4)
FRONT YARD*
SIDE YARD
REAR YARD
100 foot set-back
50 foot set-back
50 foot set-back
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
Section 20.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in the Institutional Overlay district:
20.6 (1) The total lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent.
20.6 (2) The minimum open space requirement for any proposed use shall be forty-five (45) percent, including green areas not covered by
buildings, parking lots, access roads, storage areas or other areas covered by impervious surfaces
20.6 (3) No building structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is lesser in height. For the
purpose of this Section, building height means the height of a building measured from the average existing ground level prior to construction at
any point on the perimeter of the building line to the top of the cornice of a flat or mansard roof and to the highest gable on a pitched or hipped
roof.
20.6 (4) No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, whatever is lesser and no accessory structure any
part of which is within three hundred (300) feet of an "R" district or a roadway bordering an "R" district shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height..
Section 20.7 Landscaping and Screening
As most Institutional Overlays will occur in Residential areas or closely adjacent to Residential areas, landscaping and screening shall be provided to
isolate all light and noise from the Institutional Overlay use from entering the adjacent Residential areas. This landscaping and screening must be done
in accordance with the procedures in this Ordinance and the Landscaping Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
Section 20.8 Procedures for Requesting An Overlay
20.8 (1) Application for re-zoning for an overlay.
An Institutional Overlay shall be considered a rezoning for a specific parcel of land. This overlay may occur in any zoning district in the City of
Gem Lake. The application for an Institutional Overlay shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk. The fee for an Institutional Overlay
shall be the same as the rezoning fee, defined in the Zoning Ordinance. This application for rezoning will only be deemed to be complete when
the following are received:
A) A properly completed application and payment in full is received;
B) A registered property surveyors report is provided properly identifying the parcel to be rezoned;
C) All requirements of the Plan Review described in Section 14.1 of this Ordinance have been met. These plans must be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and City Council before any overlay shall be granted. If this is a rezoning to
initially define an overlay, the rezoning activities and the Plan Review shall occur at the same time;
-35-
D) Proof of ownership or authorization shall be provided. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property
for which the Institutional Overlay is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified together
with unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written
authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested Institutional Overlay.
E) A list of all the property owners within three-hundred fifty (350) feet of the proposed site. This certified list shall be obtained from the
County Assessor and supplied to the City Clerk.
20.8 (2) Procedures
Pursuant to Minnesota Statues 15.99 as may from time-to-time be amended, an application for an Institutional Overlay shall be approved or
denied within sixty (60) days of its official and complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is
granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state and federal agencies shall extend the review and
decision making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional City requirements are as
follows:
A) Applications for rezoning for an Overlay District shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form available
from the City Clerk. Such applications shall also be accompanied by five (5) large scale copies and one (1) reduced scale copy of detailed
written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The request for an Institutional Overlay shall be
placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring thirty (30) days after the date of submission of the
application. The request shall only be considered officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied with.
B) Upon receipt of such application the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification as applicable. The Planning
Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist
of a legal property description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to
this hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty
(350) feet of the property in question. The City Clerk shall have the right to provide additional property owners notification beyond the
three hundred fifty (350) foot distance if it is judged that the request will have an impact upon additional properties. The records of the
County Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a
list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice is sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding.
C) Failure of a property owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this Ordinance provided a
bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this section.
D) The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed rezoning. Its judgment shall be based upon (but not
limited) to the following factors:
1) The proposed action in relation to specific policies and provisions of the Official City Comprehensive Plan.
2) The proposed use's conformity with present and future land uses in the area.
3) The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained herein.
4) The proposed use's effect on the area in which it is proposed.
5) The proposed use's impact upon property value in the area in which it is proposed.
6) Traffic generation by the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets and roads serving the property.
7) The proposed use's impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks, schools, streets and utilities and the City's
service capacity.
E) The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to
retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, said information to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and /or to establish
performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary
supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
F) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer question concerning the
proposed request.
G) The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.
H) The City Council shall not act upon such an Overlay request until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request after sixty (60) days from the first regular meeting at
which the request was considered. the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action of the request.
I) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendation on the
agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered into and made part of the permanent
written record of the City Council meeting,
J) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall have the option to hold another
public hearing if deemed advisable.
K) If, upon receiving such reports and recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies
exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the
City Council may before taking any final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City
Council shall provide a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a
singular request.
20.8 (3) Approvals
A) Approval of the Overlay request shall require passage by a two-thirds (2/3) vote (four of the five (4 of 5) votes) of the entire City
Council.
B) The Institutional Overlay zoning shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves the overlay and after said
approval is published in the official newspaper.
C) Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or structure, in the Institutional
Overlay Zone, a plan review, in accordance with section 14.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be made. No building permits shall be issued
until this plan review is complete.
20.8 (4) Denials
A) If the City Council finds that a proposed use contemplated for the parcel which is the subject of an application for rezoning to
Institutional Overlay Classification is likely to have a material adverse effect on the public health, safety of general welfare after
considering possible adverse effects which man include , but no be limited to, those delineated in Section 20.7.2D (1-7) above, then such
application shall be denied.
-36-
20.8 (5) Recording of actions taken
A) If a request for an Institutional Overlay receives approval by the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County
Recorder within thirty (30) days of the approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible,
furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is
furnished to the City.
20.8 (6) Actions if the overlay is denied
Whenever an application for an overlay district has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for an
overlay affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or the City Council for at least one (1) year from
the date of its denial except as follows:
A) Applications for an overlay are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter
B) If the City Council determines by a vote of not less than four of five (4 of 5) that the circumstances surrounding a previous application
have changed significantly.
20.8 (7) Time period (duration) of this Institutional Overlay approvals. An Institutional Overlay shall remain in effect until one of the following
occurs:
A) Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request, the re-zoning for an
Institutional Overlay shall become null and void twelve (12) months after the date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has
substantially started construction of any building, structure, addition or alternation, or use requested for this overlay. The property owner or
applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section.
B) If any one of the following occur the overlay shall expire:
1) The use of the property is changed to not be in accordance with the uses outlined in this section of this Ordinance,
2) The organization to which the permit for an Overlay District has been given is no longer the occupant of the building or facilities
on the site. No leases or subletting of the building or facilities operating on an Institutional Overlay shall be permitted.
C) If an institutional overlay is allowed to expire or is revoked for cause, the parcel of property shall revert back to the underlying zoning
of the parcel.
SECTION 21 - BROADCAST/TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND ANTENNAS
Section 21.1 Purpose and Intent
21.1 (1) The purpose of this section is to establish predictable standards for siting and installing of wireless telephone, radio broadcast, television
broadcast and communications antenna towers or supporting structures within the City of Gem Lake. It is the intent of this section to
accommodate the communications needed of the residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community.
21.1 (2) Specifically, the City Council finds the regulations set forth in this section necessary to:
A) Facilitate the provisions for wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City.
B) Restrict the location of towers and antennas to designated areas of the City and impose design standards to minimize adverse visual
effects of towers and antennas,
C) Require evidence of structural integrity and impose setback requirements to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or
antenna failure,
D) Require applicants for towers and antenna to prove their need and to apply for permits for their construction,
E) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new antennas and reduce the number of towers needed
to serve the community.
Section 21.2 Zoning Districts For Construction
21.2 (1) The following Zoning district preferences shall be followed when selecting potential commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower
sites in the City of Gem Lake:
A) General Business (GB)
B) General Business II (GBII)
C) Retail Business (RB)
21.2 (2) The following Zoning districts shall not be used for commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower/antenna SITES IN THE City of
Gem Lake:
A) Any R1, R2, R3, R4 or LD-B district
B) Any Overlay district
Section 21.3 Performance Standards
21.3 (1) All stand alone towers or antennas and/or supporting structures for the same must meet the design and performance standards identified
in this section.
21.3 (2) A proposal for a new tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the Broadcast/ telecommunications equipment
planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one (1) mile search radius of the
proposed tower due to one of the following reasons:
A) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building as documented by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned
or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost.
B) The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower
or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
C) Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
D) Other unforseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower
or building.
21.3 (3) Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunications service tower shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to
accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred (100)
feet in height or for at least one (1) additional user if the tower is over sixty (60) feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
-37-
21.3 (4) Structural design, mounting and installation of any tower or antenna shall be in compliance with the manufacturer’s specifications and as
may be necessary or as determined by the City Council. All such designs and installations shall be verified and approved by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer employed by the applicant.
21.3 (5) All towers and antennas and related structures shall be designed and built in compliance with all City of Gem Lake building codes and
electrical code requirements, and as applicable shall require related permits. Existing towers may continue in use but may not be structurally
altered.
21.3 (6) The height and style of the tower and antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified by a communications
engineer or other appropriate professional. However, no towers erected for Broadcast or Telecommunications service shall exceed 180 feet and
no tower and accompanying antenna combined shall exceed 200 feet.
21.3 (7) All obsolete and unused towers and antennas shall be removed within six (6) months of cessation of operation at the site, unless an
exemption is granted by the City Council. The City reserves the right to remove an unused tower/antenna at it’s expense then back charge the
property owner to recover costs.
21.3 (8) Damaged existing towers and antennas may be rebuilt to the same physical dimensions and at the same location. Repairs and rebuilding
shall be complete within one (1) year after receiving the building permit from the City. However, if the tower is destroyed due to any reason or
cause whatsoever, so that repairs would be forty (40) percent or more of a new tower, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full
compliance with this Ordinance.
21.3 (9) No advertising message shall be affixed to any tower and/or antenna structure.
21.3 (10) No tower or antenna shall be illuminated by artificial means and must not display strobe lights, unless such lighting is required by the
Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal or state authority for that particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design, the
tower may support light fixtures used to illuminate parking lights, ball fields, or similar areas.
21.3 (11) Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through use of color and camouflaging architectural
treatment, except in instances where color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. Antenna support
structures shall be painted light blue, gray, or silver or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact. All towers must be finished with a
corrosion resistant material.
21.3 (12) Towers located closer to a property line than the distance equal to the height of the tower shall be designed and engineered to collapse
progressively within the distance between the tower and property line. The applicant for any tower shall submit written documentation
explaining tower construction and possible failure and provide assurance that blowing or falling ice from the tower/antenna can be contained on
the subject property. At a minimum, the tower shall comply with the minimum setback requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located.
21.3 (13) A tower shall be located on a parcel of land so as to have the least impact on adjoining properties and any negative impact of the tower
shall be confined onto the property on which it is located, to the greatest extent possible.
21.3 (14) The tower location shall provide the maximum amount of screening for off site views of the tower and/or antenna and related structure.
Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
21.3 (15) All utility buildings, structures, and equipment accessory to the tower or antenna must be architecturally designed to blend in with
surrounding environment and must meet the minimum design requirements of the Zoning District in which they are located.
21.3 (16) No change in the use or ownership of an approved tower or antenna may be made without the written consent of the City Council.
21.3 (17) Co-location of antennas upon overhead power line poles or street light poles is encouraged provided the said antenna meets all
applicable federal and state spacing requirements and interference regulations.
Section 21.4 Proof of Non-Interference
21.4 (1) Each application for construction of a commercial Broadcast or Wireless telecommunication facility shall include either a certified
statement that the construction of the tower/antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the radio, television,
or other service enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If interference is found after the facility has been erected, the
applicant has to solve any problems his equipment has caused, at his cost.
Section 21.5 Tower Setbacks
21.5 (1) Where adjacent parcels are zoned for commercial or industrial uses, setbacks equivalent to those established for the principle structure
shall be provided for any tower/antenna. Setbacks equal to the height of the tower shall be established on sites that are adjacent to parcels
developed or able to be developed for residential use.
Section 21.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review
21.6 (1) Special Use Permit. Applicants for a tower/antenna Special Use Permit must file a Special Use Permit application with the City of Gem
Lake and pay any and all associated fees.
21.6 (2) Planning Commission/City Council review. All applications for a Broadcast/Telecommunications tower must first be sent to the
Planning Commission which shall review the application and may recommend to City Council approval or denial. The City Council will hold the
necessary Public hearing(s) on this matter and will then approve or deny the request. The applicant is responsible for supplying a certified list of
all of the property owners within 350 feet of the proposed tower/antenna site and pay all costs for notifying all such parties of the public
hearing(s) needed.
Section 21.7 Exceptions
21.7 (1) The following towers and/or antenna supporting structures and antennas are not subject to the restrictions of Section 21 of this
Ordinance:
A) Towers and/or antennas identified as “Accessory and Secondary Antennas” in this Ordinance are exempt. All Amateur Radio
“Accessory and Secondary” antennas and/or towers must be installed in accordance with instructions furnished by the manufacturer of the
tower/antenna.
B) Towers and antennas that are located entirely with a structure that complies with the height, bulk and density and area requirements of
the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance and are not visible from the exterior of the structure are also exempt.
C) Towers/antennas for radio/telecommunications equipment owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake are also exempt.
-38-
ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
The Ordinance changes contained herein will take affect immediately upon adoption by the City Council and publication of a summary of this
document, but not later than thirty (30) days from the date below.
This Ordinance No. 43G as unanimously adopted with amendments defined in Resolution No. 2006-09 by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on
the 20th day of March in year 2006 and ordered for summary publication in the City’s official newspaper and incorporation into this Ordinance No.
43G.
CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C.
Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Updated: 03 / 20 / 2006 Updated: 03 / 20 / 2006
-39-
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 43 LEGEND
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the City Council as City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 5 on 19 February
1963. Since that time, the Planning Commission has recommended and the City Council has adopted several changes in keeping with the changing
times and needs and wishes of the community. The following table is added to Ordinance No. 43 as an historic reference to those changes. All changes
shown have been incorporated into Ordinance No. 43, the City Zoning Ordinance.
ORDINANCE
NO.
TITLE & DESCRIPTION
ENACTED
05
The City Zoning Ordinance
02/19/63
14
An Ordinance Amending The Official Zoning Map Of Gem Lake
07/18/67
17B
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Zoning Ordinance
03/24/70
21
An Ordinance Amending The Zoning Ordinance
09/15/70
29
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As General Business
12/16/74
30
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As General Business
04/18/77
31
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing Minimum Area Of Certain Property In An
R-4 Residential District
06/20/77
33
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As Residential
11/20/78
34A
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As Retail Business
11/30/78
35
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As Retail Business
12/27/79
36
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance
01/21/80
38
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance
05/18/81
40
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance
09/22/81
41
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As Retail Business
10/19/81
42
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District
Designated As LD-B Low Density Business District
10/19/81
43
An Ordinance Restating The Zoning Ordinance Of Gem Lake With All Amendments Thereto
Enacted Through December 31, 1982
12/20/82
49
An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43
09/19/88
51
An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43, Including The Establishment Of A New
District Known As GB II, General Business II
02/20/89
63
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43 And Replacing Ordinance No. 5
03/28/94
72
An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43 Including Changes, Additions Or
Deletions To The Zoning Ordinance No. 43 Of The City Of Gem Lake, MN Providing For An
Institutional Overlay District Rezoning.
05/18/98
74
An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake,
regarding: 1) the addition of Section 21 establishing Commercial Broadcast/Telecommunication
tower and antenna regulations and definitions and amendments attendant thereto; and, 2) the removal
of all fee schedules from the Zoning Ordinance; and 3) the revision of Section 4.10 Land
Reclamation and Section 4.11 Land Mining of the Zoning Ordinance.
11/15/99
75
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake,
regarding the rezoning of lands bordered on the west by Scheuneman Road and the East by the
City’s common boundary with White Bear Lake and on the South by State Highway 61 and on the
02/02/2000
-40-
North by lot identified as PIN Number
76
An Ordinance amending City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 43, hereinafter the “Zoning Ordinance”,
regarding: 1) adding provisions for minimum “buildable area” as Section 4.4 (3), definition for
“buildable area” as Section 3.2 (4A), and amending Tables 7.5 (1), 8.5 (1), 9.5 (1), 10.5 (1) a), and
10.5 (1) b) to reflect said provisions; 2) amending definitions of and related to Variances and Special
Use Permits and adding definitions for Interim Use Permits; 3) providing amended or additional
provisions for the City’s consideration of applications for Variances, Special Use Permits, Interim
Use Permits, Redistricting or other Amendments to Ordinance No. 43; 4) modification of the
lakeshore restrictions on the water body identified as Gem Lake. Now known as Ordinance No.
43E01.
02/20/2001
79
An Ordinance providing for amendment of Ordinance Number 43, the “Zoning Ordinance” as
follows: 1) adding definitions to Section 3.2; and, 2) deleting Section 22, Regulation Of The Body
Of Water Called Gem Lake, in it’s entirety; and, 3) adding new Section 11, Regulation of Bodies Of
Water, Wetlands, And Shoreland Zones to establish local controls that consistently reflect the
purpose and intent stated in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and it’s attendant Watershed
Management Plan; and, 4) amending tables for all districts defining Area, Frontage and Yard
Requirements to include the term “foot set back”; and, 5) adding provisions for Vegetation Removal
And Alteration Permits; and, 6) adding Sections 4.1(5) and 4.1(6); and, 7) amending Sections 5.4(5),
5.7(6), 5.5(5), 5.6(5); and 8) deleting Section 17 in it’s entirety and copying the text of Section 17.1
to Section 12 as Section12.6; and 9) amending the Legend of Ordinance No. 43 to record the date of
all changes contained herein.
12/15/2003
43G
Resolution No. 2006-09, a Resolution adopting amendments to Ordinance No. 43F, The Zoning
Ordinance, last amended 15 December 2003 with said amendments to include: 1) Deletion of Section
18 in it’s entirety; and 2) addition of new Section 18 as developed by the Gem Lake Planning
Commission and Zoning Administrators, reviewed at multiple public hearings before the Planning
Commission during 2004 and 2005, and recommended for adoption in August, 2005 by the Gem
Lake Planning Commission and adopted by the Gem Lake City Council on 20 March 2006.
03/20/2006
-41-
NOTES:
1) This version Zoning Ordinance (43G) needs a Variance in order to measure the “Building Height”
of structures in the Hillary Farm Subdivision from other than the: 1) Curb level along the front lot
line, and 2) the mean ground level for all that portion of the structure having frontage on a public
right-of-way, whichever is higher.
The variance changes the text of the “Building height” definition in Section 3.2 to:
Building Height – A distance to be measured from the mean curb level along the front lot line
or from the mean ground level for all that portion of the structure having frontage on a public rightof
-way, whichever is higher vertical distance measured from the ground level within 5 feet of the
front entrance of the structure to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard
roof, to the point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof , to the upper-most point
on a round or other arch type roof, to the height of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.
Strike-thru is deleted text
Italiacs is new text
2) This Variance has been granted with a “blanket approval” for all construction in Hillary Farm, per
a resolution authorized by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake.
March 2006






















Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 18
SECTION 7 - “R3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 7.1 Permitted Uses
7.1.1 Within any “R3" Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 6.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B) The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots less than one (1.0) acre shall not be allowed.
Section 7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
7.2.1 Within any “R3" Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 6.2, excluding and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B) Swimming pools provided such pool is fenced so as to control access and is located not less than fifteen (15') feet
from any other lot in an “R’ District, and subject to Council approval.
Section 7.3 Conditional & Interim Uses
7.3.1 Within any “R3" Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
Conditional Use Permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 6.3 as regulated therein, except as herein amended.
B) Two-family dwellings.
C) The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots greater than one (1.0) acre.
7.3.2 Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.
7.3.3 Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm
animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the
following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:
A) the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be existing
or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and with the amount
of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;
B) the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;
C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall not
cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;
D) the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on the
property;
E) such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.
7.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
7.3.5 Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.
7.3.6 Family Day Care Home
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 19
Section 7.4 Height Regulations
7.4.1 No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15'0")
feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of the roof
structure.
7.4.2 Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject to
a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A) The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of the
neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the
natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in
the summer season; and,
B) the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or other
such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical plane of
greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,
C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure for
height measurements; and,
D) lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides for the
design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively is required or
created; and
E) whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further set back
from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one (1'0") foot above
the standard front height; and,
F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances of the
lot and it’s surroundings.
Section 7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
7.5.1 The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
TABLE 7.5.1
A) A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
7.5.2 The following structures can be erected within set backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front of
the lot than the rear of the principal structure:
A) Fences, patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
1) Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent property
owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2) All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide for owner
maintenance; and
3) All fences installed within the set back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent property.
B) Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
TOTAL AREA
36,000 square feet
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area
FRONTAGE
100 feet
FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
40% total area
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 20
SECTION 8 - “R4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 8.1 Permitted Uses
8.1.1 Within any “R4" Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 7.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
8.2.1 Within any “R4" Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 7.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 8.3 28.3 Conditional & Interim Uses
8.3.1 Within any "R4" Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
Conditional Use Permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 7.3 and as regulated therein except as herein
amended.
8.3.2 Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.
8.3.3 Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm
animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the
following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:
A) the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be existing
or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and with the amount
of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;
B) the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;
C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall not
cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;
D) the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on the
property;
E) such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.
8.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
8.3.5 Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.
8.3.6 Family Day Care Home
Section 8.4 Height Regulations
8.4.1 No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15'0")
feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of the roof
structure.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 21
8.4.2 Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject to
a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A) The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of the
neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the
natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in
the summer season; and,
B) the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or other
such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical plane of
greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,
C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure for
height measurements; and,
D) lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides for the
design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively is required or
created; and
E) whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further set back
from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one (1'0") foot above
the standard front height; and,
F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances of the
lot and it’s surroundings.
Section 8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
8.5.1 The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A) When on-site septic systems will be used for structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following
applies:
TABLE 8.5.1 A
TOTAL AREA
36,000 square feet
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area
FRONTAGE
100 feet
FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
40% total area
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 22
B) When city sewer is currently available and will be used for the structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the
following applies:
TABLE 8.5.1 B
C) A side yard set-back for property abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
8.5.2 The following structures can be erected within set backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front of
the lot than the rear of the principal structure:
A) Fences
1) Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent property
owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2) All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide for owner
maintenance; and
3) All fences installed within the set back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent property.
B) Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
TOTAL AREA
24,000 square feet
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area
FRONTAGE
100 feet
FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
40% total area
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 23
SECTION 9 – GEM LAKE GATEWAY DISTRICT
9.1. The intent of the Gem Lake Gateway District (“Gateway” or “G”) is intended to allow for development and
redevelopment of the real property associated with Hoffman Corner and points westward along Ramsey County Road E
extending northward to the border with the zoning districts identified in Sections 5 and 6 of this Ordinance. This area has
been the subject of a visioning study and includes both commercial and residential opportunities as described in the City of
Gem Lake Comprehensive Plan and other city documents. As introduced by the visioning plan and envisioned by the
Comprehensive Plan, the Gateway will emphasize commercial development and/or redevelopment in the Hoffman Corner
intersection which traditionally has been the location of the Gem Lake commercial district. As one moves westward along
County Road E the intent of the Gateway is to transition into more residential type neighborhoods becoming less dense until
it transitions to either the Estate Residential district or the Executive Residential district.
9.1.1 Purposes. Specifically, the Gateway zoning district will attempt to:
A) Promote development and redevelopment consistent with the visioning plan for the Gateway area by encouraging
residential uses in conjunction with commercial and expanded recreational activities which in turn will create an active
street life, while enhancing the vitality of businesses and reducing vehicular traffic.
B) Provide for mixed-use development(s) that are carefully planned to promote efficient use of land, parking and
roadway systems.
C) Provide enhanced oversight through conditional use permit provisions, to ensure compatibility of mixed uses and
consistency with the approved master plan for the site.
D) Ensure compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.
E) Provide significant incentives to promote mixed-use redevelopment projects.
F) Encourage sustainable architectural, engineering and landscape design that is implemented by responsive green
construction practices.
G) Preserve natural resources, minimize the carbon footprint of the City, and establish a key zone within Gem Lake
that is respectful of neighboring areas and is instructive for future generations.
H) Encourage pedestrian and bicycle use.
I) Ensure that commercial and residential uses in a development are designed to be compatible with each other.
J) Ensure high standards of site design, spatial relationships, architectural design, building materials and landscape
design.
K) Seek to put in place those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan (as supported by the master plan) that
includes four “sub-zones”:
1. Neighborhood Edge: Intended for lower density single-family residential housing development to act as a
transition between new mixed-use construction and existing single-family detached structures on adjacent
lands. This subzone in its basic form will accommodate single-family dwellings on larger lots, or with
application of incentives, more compact homes on common larger lots or on compact lots with enhanced
buffers (used in clustering), shared with accessory buildings and generally served from a front or side
driveway.
2. Neighborhood General: Intended to begin the transition from purely residential use at low densities to
more intensive mixed-use development at the district’s center. This subzone will accommodate a variety of
residential structures at varying densities, and also begin to integrate lower-impact office or retail activities
which complement the residential setting.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 24
3. Neighborhood Mixed Use: Intended to establish a neighborhood focus that is distinguished by mixed use
buildings, together with denser residential options and smaller-scale commercial and office buildings without
residential components. This subzone will accommodate a variety of activities and services within easy
walking distance from homes throughout the District, supporting daily convenience shopping and personal
service needs, and also providing opportunities for public gathering and social contact.
4. Neighborhood Center: Intended for the most urban conditions within all of the shown mixed use areas.
The mixture of land uses emphasizes ground-floor retail with offices and residential/rental above (as market
acceptance matures) and structures providing commercial space for medium and large–sized retailers. Street
frontages throughout this subzone should be pedestrian-oriented, and the public space should be defined by
placing building facades at the edge of the sidewalk. Neighborhood Center land that abuts other subzones on
the north and west sides will be carefully planned to ensure lower-density buildings.
9.1.2 Definitions specific to this Section. The terms listed below have the meaning given to them here for
purposes of this Section. An effort has been made to define other key terms as they appear within the applicable parts
of this Section, and should be given the explicit or contextual meaning given to them within the remainder of this
Section. If a term is not defined in the Section, terms used herein have the meaning given to them in the Definitions
in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance, or its common-usage meaning if not defined within the Ordinance.
Applicant. The owner of land, or the owner of a leasehold interest therein, or the owner’s authorized
representative, or a governmental entity proposing an action or development requiring City development
review and approval or the issuance of a permit for the development of land.
Application. Any application for a development permit or development approval pursuant to this Ordinance
and which application was not complete and filed on or before the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
Encroachment. A porch, deck, balcony, patio or similar unenclosed space, or an awning, that extends into
space that is otherwise reserved for setbacks or public right-of-way. Permitted encroachments are indicated
on the Building Type Templates.
Garage. A structure intended for the parking and storage of passenger cars and light-duty trucks. A garage
may be attached to a building or a separate structure, where allowed by Building Type Template.
Open Hours (also “Operation”). The time within the day in which a business invites customers, clients or
the general public to the property or business location in order to conduct the purpose of the business.
These hours will not begin earlier than 7 A.M., and will not extend beyond 8 P.M. unless approved by
conditional use permit (see Figure 17).
Shed. A structure on a property that is not a primary building nor a structure intended to house parked cars
or trucks. Generally a smaller building intended for the storage of home maintenance equipment and other
personal belongings. When allowed, a shed with a footprint of 200 square feet or less may be built and
maintained without a permit from the City.
9.2 Generally Applicable Regulations
9.2.1 Relationship to other portions of this Ordinance and other City Ordinances. The requirements of this
Section may conflict with or duplicate some portions of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance of Gem
Lake. Any such conflict, when it relates to the use of land in the Gateway District, shall be resolved in favor of the
language in this Section. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance apply within the
Gateway District, including provisions for Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Institutional Overlay. PUD or
institutional overlay proposals may be used in combination with or in place of the regulations and procedures set forth
in this Section. All other Gem Lake ordinances which relate to the construction of buildings and use of land
(including but not limited to the Landscaping Ordinance, Adult Use Ordinance, Tree Preservation Ordinance,
Building Code Adoption, and Pawnbroker Ordinance) apply within the Gateway District.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 25
9.2.2 Administration, Conditional Uses, Variance, and Appeal.
A) The Building Type standards are intended to be employed and used to entitle the construction of a
building upon land in the same manner that listing a use as “permitted” entitled land in other Zones defined
by this Ordinance. The processing of conditional use permits, variances, amendments, platted subdivisions
and other land use applications which may necessarily accompany an application for building approval in the
Gateway District shall be processed simultaneously with the review of the Gateway District proposal,
whenever possible.
B) All new construction, remodeling or expansion (except for the remodeling or expansion of single-family
detached dwellings) within the Gateway District requires a Zoning Compliance Permit. The Zoning
Compliance Permit is indefinite in duration and the entitlements stated on the permit shall run with the land.
A Zoning Compliance Permit is granted after determination that the proposal complies with all applicable
standards set forth within this Section (Thoroughfare Standards, Civic Space Standards, Building Type
Standards, Parking, and Design Standards). As set forth below, the final approval for the Zoning Compliance
Permit will come from the City Council for proposals which require Council approval in some form (such as
a platted subdivision or conditional use permit), and the Zoning Administrator for proposals which do not
otherwise require Council review (such as single buildings or minor subdivisions without variances).
C) For the purpose of providing administrative review and processing of development proposals within the
Gateway District, the City Council hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to serve as the primary point of
contact between the City and applicants for zoning approval. Upon receipt of an application for land use in
the Gateway District, the Zoning Administrator shall ensure that the application is complete within five (5)
business days of receipt. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall return all
materials with an explanation of what is required to make the application complete. When the application is
determined to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of all submitted documents to
the City’s appointed consultants in architecture, engineering and planning. The Zoning Administrator shall
obtain written comment on the application from each consultant before the scheduled Planning Commission
review of the application, or before making an administrative approval where authorized.
D) If a City consultant identifies a failure to meet the standards of this Section, the Zoning Administrator
may not administratively approve a permit for the proposal. The Zoning Administrator shall meet with the
applicant to attempt to resolve the deficiency, and re-submit any revised or clarified proposal to the
consulting professional who identified the problem for review. If the consultant agrees that the deficiency is
corrected, the Administrator may issue the permit.
E) For applications on a City Council approval track, the Zoning Administrator shall also attempt to resolve
any deficiencies noted in consultant review with the applicant prior to the final Council action on the
proposal. The Planning Commission and City Council may choose to act on the proposal within their
reasonably used discretion, even if the matter is not resolved prior to final action.
F) All applicants seeking a Zoning Compliance Permit must submit a development plan with their
application.
G) Conditional Uses. All elements of a development plan which require conditional use permit approval
may be combined into a single conditional use permit application for the proposal, with a single applicable
CUP fee for review and processing in addition to other required application fees. Portions of proposed
buildings which may be used for permitted or conditional uses need not apply for conditional use approval as
part of the development application, unless the tenant, occupant or owner of the space is known at the time
of application and will need a conditional use permit. All applications for conditional use permit approval
shall otherwise be processed in the same manner as other applications for conditional use permit approval,
using the procedures and criteria stated in Section 17.5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
H) Any variances requested in connection with a Gateway District development proposal shall be processed
in the same manner as variances from other Sections of the Zoning Ordinance, using the procedures and
criteria stated in Section 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 26
I) Any applicant aggrieved by a decision, mandate or other action of the Zoning Administrator may appeal
the matter in the manner provided by Section 17.7 of the Zoning Ordinance.
9.2.3 Existing Uses and Structures at Adoption of Chapter. The standards generally applicable under Section 16.3 of
the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to existing structures and uses located within the Gateway District upon the
adoption of this Section, or existing on land later added to the Gateway District by re-mapping on the date a new
zoning map becomes effective. An applicant seeking a building permit to materially alter or expand a legally
nonconforming structure within the Gateway District shall submit a partial development plan, containing information
as requested by the Zoning Administrator to allow review of the alteration or expansion’s compliance with Design
Review requirements set forth at 9.8 and the Connectivity Requirements set forth at 9.5.3.
9.2.4 Incentives. The City Council may establish incentives which apply to encourage certain types of land use or
preservation activity within the Gateway District. The Council may set the incentives by adopting a separate
ordinance which identifies clearly the item or items the Council seeks to encourage, the allowance or allowances which
the Council is willing to offer applicants, and sufficient criteria to allow the Zoning Administrator and City
consultants to evaluate and score applications seeking to apply the incentives and allowances. The following text is an
example only:
The City of Gem Lake seeks to improve transit options within the City. Proposals which incorporating public transit
options into an overall development plan will receive enhanced civic space credit for the space dedicated to the public
transit option. Space bonuses will apply as follows:
Bus waiting area, uncovered: 2% bonus
Bus waiting area, covered: 4%
Bus waiting area, integrated w/ building: 8%
Bus Rapid Transit access: 10%
Rail access or access to station: 10%
Rail transit station: 30%
Intermodal transit center: 50%
Proposed spaces must meet the criteria for public transit facilities established by the Metropolitan Council in order to
qualify for space bonuses. The City Council shall approve all requests for transit incentive bonuses. The Zoning
Administrator shall consult with the City Engineer to review and make recommendations on the request for incentive
treatment within an application.
The ability to alter or change incentives may not be used to allow a variance from the standards of this Section or the
Zoning Ordinance overall. An ordinance establishing or modifying available incentives shall not take effect until 45
days after adoption and publication, and shall not apply to any applications filed with the City prior to the effective
date. The ordinance creating incentives may, at the City Council’s discretion, provide a method for an applicant to
propose an incentive as part of a development application in lieu of only seeking a modification of dimension or
placement standards through amendment or variance.
9.3 Placement of Subzones and Integration with Neighboring Zones
9.3.1 The Gateway district is composed of four sub-zones:
A) Neighborhood Edge
B) Neighborhood General
C) Neighborhood Mixed-Use
D) Neighborhood Center
9.3.2 Mapping requirements. The City Council shall assign the sub-zones to land included within the Gateway
District. The Council shall assign land to each sub-zone without reference to existing lot lines or tax parcels
contained within the Gateway District. In assigning land to sub-zones, the Council shall at a minimum:
A) assign all land lying within 200 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or Executive
Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Edge; and
B) not assign any land lying within 450 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or Executive
Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Center.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 27
Figure 1: Gateway District Sub-Zone Map
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 28
9.4 Thoroughfare standards. Streets, sidewalks and other pedestrian or bicycle ways within dedicated rights-of-way shall be
considered and designed together as “thoroughfares.” The street and pedestrian circulation system in any development plan
shall be used to organize and define the community, acting as functional and visual links between neighborhoods, the
neighborhood center, civic and commercial areas and open space. The circulation system shall be based on a defined,
interconnected network to provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes, control
through traffic, limit lot access to streets of lower traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the
community.
9.4.1 General street design principles. The following principles should be followed in street layout and design:
A) Local street lengths should be short.
B) Streets should be designed with gentle curves and changes in grade to break the sight line of the
road into smaller visual elements and cause drivers to slow down.
C) Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians should be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds.
9.4.2 Thoroughfare Types Permitted by Subzone. The thoroughfare design in a given area of the Gateway District
is determined in part by the subzone to which the land is assigned. Right-of-way dedication and the use of the rightof-
way is set forth in the Thoroughfare Type diagrams at Figures 2 and 3. The presence of trees within a diagram
indicates a requirement to plant “street trees” within the indicated area. A development plan’s thoroughfares shall
comply with the dimensional and layout standards applicable to each thoroughfare type. The following
Thoroughfare Types are allowed in each sub-zone:
i) Neighborhood Edge: A, B, Alley;
ii) Neighborhood General: A, B, C*, Alley, Boulevard
(Type C only allowed within 250’ of Mixed-Use sub-zone boundary);
iii) Neighborhood Mixed-Use: C, D, Alley, Boulevard;
iv) Neighborhood Center: D, Alley, Boulevard; Scheuneman Road and Hoffman Road should be treated as
Type D thoroughfares in plans.
(May also propose a Plaza with a thoroughfare as regulated by Figure 5).
NOTE: County Road E and Highway 61 are not included within these Thoroughfare Types and should not
be used or depicted as “frontage” for any Building Type when using this Code.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 29
Figure 2: Light-Use Thoroughfare Types
Type A: Residential Access Lane
Average Daily Traffic: Less than 250
Travel Lanes: 1, 14’ - 16’
Parking: Parallel, one or both sides
Sidewalks: One or both sides, 5’ minimum
May not cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: None.
Type B: Low-Volume Residential Street
Average Daily Traffic: 250—750
Travel Lanes: 2, 8’ - 10’
Parking: Parallel, both sides
Sidewalks: Both sides, 5’ minimum
May not cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: None required.
Type: Alley
Runs behind lots and buildings to provide off-street
parking, loading, utility and waste-hauling access.
Travel Lane: 12’ to 16’
ROW: 20’
Curb/Gutter: Inverted curb for asphalt;
None for concrete
Overall ROW: 41’ to 43’
Sidewalk
5’ min
Parking
7’
Travel Lane
14’ to 16’
Roadside ROW
10’ minimum
Overall ROW: 20’
Side ROW
10’ minimum
Parking
7’
Parking
7’
Sidewalk
5’ min
Travel Lane
Min: 8’
Travel Lane
Max: 10’
Overall ROW: 50’ to 54’
Travel Lane: 12’ to 16’
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 30
Figure 3: Medium-Use Thoroughfare Types
Type C: Medium Volume Residential Street
Average Daily Traffic: 750—1500
Travel Lanes: 2, 10’ - 12’
Parking: Both sides, parallel or angle
Sidewalks: Both sides, 6’ minimum
May cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: Required for fully paved side ROW, optional
if grass or permeable surface used
for parking lane and/or side ROW.
Type D: Medium-Volume Commercial Street
Average Daily Traffic: 750+
Travel Lanes: 2-3, 12’ - 16’ with optional
10’ center turn lane
Parking: Both sides, angle
Sidewalks: Both sides, 12’ minimum
Must cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: Required; pedestrian bump-outs required
at intersections (see Boulevard diagram)
Type: Boulevard
Non-roadway portions considered Civic Space.
Average Daily Traffic: 750+
Travel Lanes: 2-3, 12’ - 16’ with optional
10’ center turn lane
Parking: Both sides, angle
Sidewalks: Both sides, 12’ minimum
Must cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: Required only when side ROW more
than 50% impervious surface. Pedestrian
bump-out required at intersections
and every 150’ for angle parking.
Overall ROW: 54’ to 82’
Walk
6’ min
Parking
7’
Lane min
10’
Side ROW
10’ - 13’
Overall ROW: 93’ - 129’
Side ROW
12’ minimum
Parking
16’
Parking
16’
Sidewalk
12’ min
Travel Lane
Min: 12’
Travel Lane
Max: 14’
Overall ROW: 80’ to 94’
Greenway:
15’ min
Lane max
12’
Angled parking
16’
Minimum Alignment Maximum Alignment
Center
10’(opt.)
Side ROW 20’
Walkway min.
8’
Park.
7’
Lane min.
12’
Lane max.
16’
Parking
16’
Side ROW 20’
Planting Strip
Min. 6’
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 31
9.5 Civic space standards. The City of Gem Lake’s visioning plan requires well-planned and functional open spaces,
preservation areas, parks and gathering places, which are generally referred to in this Section as “civic space.” An application’s
development plan shall dedicate or otherwise set aside sufficient land for public civic space. At a minimum, 10% of the total
acreage in development shall be identified on the plans as Civic Space. The acreage of wetlands protected by state statute and
any wetland buffer required by a governing watershed district shall be excluded from calculations of “total acreage in
development” and from the calculation of the 10% dedication to civic space. A Civic Space shall conform to one or more of
the Civic Space Templates at Figures 4 and 5. The Civic Space Type used to design a given Civic Space shall be indicated on
any plan or diagram intended to show compliance with this section.
Figure 4: Civic Spaces
A. Passive Open Space
B. Preserved Tree Line
C. Green/Small Park
A
C
B
A. Passive Open Space. The concentration of open
spaces which separates more urbanized areas from
less dense residential and naturalized areas. This
open space has no required features but may contain
environmental preserves, paths and trails, and open
shelters, all naturalistically disposed.
B. Preserved Tree Line. Area used to preserve tree
lines indicated on the City’s Existing Land Use Plan
or areas with pre-existing tree screening of 50% opacity
or greater.
C. Green/Small Park. An open space available for
recreation and neighborhood gathering. Area may be
unimproved or used for playground, community garden,
pergola, picnic areas, or similar park activities.
The civic space is defined by at least one through
street and should be accessible via sidewalk or path.
Park Type
Area (acres)
Min.
Streets
Fronting
Min. Max Park
Green 0.1 1 1 A, B
Type
Streets
Fronting
Park
Passive N/A N/A 1 Any
Treeline N/A N/A 0 Any
D. Neighborhood Park
Park Type
Area (acres)
Min.
Streets
Fronting
Min. Max Park
N’hd Park .3 5 2 B, C, Blvd
Type
Streets
Fronting
Park
A larger open area available for recreation, which may
include facilities for structured activities such as athletic
fields or courts (limited to 40% of space). The landscape
shall provide paved paths and trails, and some combination
of open lawn, trees, and open shelters.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 32
9.5.1 No cash payment in lieu of civic space may be approved for applications within the Gateway District.
9.5.2 The minimum width required for any Building Type under Figures 6 through 15 may be reduced by up to
30% if the area which would have been contained within that building lot before the reduction is transferred to a
Civic Space located within 1/4 mile of the lot.
9.5.3 For Civic Spaces which include at least one automotive traffic lane or access, the area of the traffic lane or
access is not applied toward the 10% minimum requirement. Areas within the Civic Space, areas within a thoroughfare
adjacent to the Civic Space, or approved areas in lots adjacent to the Civic Space, which are dedicated for public
or shared parking can apply toward the requirement if designed in conformity with applicable Thoroughfare or
Building Type templates and the Parking regulations in Section 9.9.
Figure 5: Civic Spaces
E. Square
Park
Type
Area (acres)
Min.
Streets
Fronting
Min. Max Park
Square 0.4 1 3 C, D,
Blvd.
Type
Streets
Fronting
Park
An open space, available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes.
A square is spatially defined by roadway and building frontages.
Its landscape shall consist of paved paths, lawns and formally
arranged trees. The paved paths within the square shall be distinguishable
from surrounding sidewalks and streets by choice of materials
and design.
Improvements such as fountains, pergolas, bandshells, kiosks and
pedestrian amenities such as benches may be installed within the
square.
Buildings adjacent to or across the street from the square shall treat
the square (or street shared with the square) as the building’s primary
frontage.
Angle parking on at least two of the streets fronting the square is
encouraged to provide additional on-street parking for nearby
buildings.
Park
Type
Area (acres)
Min.
Streets
Fronting
Min. Max Park
Plaza 0.1 1 1 D, Blvd.
Type
Streets
Fronting
Park
F. Plaza
An open space, available for civic purposes and commercial activities.
A plaza shall be spatially defined by building frontages. Its
landscape shall consist primarily of pavement and formally arranged
trees. Materials used to pave the plaza shall be different
than the adjacent sidewalk and street, and should complement the
colors used in nearby buildings. It shall be located near the intersection
of important streets. The plaza itself may be configured as
a street, with a single travel lane no wider than 14’ placed between
pedestrian-only walkways of at least equal width..
Improvements such as bandshells or similar public gathering
spaces are permitted. Benches and similar pedestrian amenities
shall be installed.
Adjacent buildings shall treat the plaza as the primary frontage.
When approved as part of a Development Plan, a portion of the
plaza shall be designated as available to commercial uses which
front the plaza(such as outdoor seating for restaurants).
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 33
9.6 Building Type Standards.
9.6.1 New construction in the Gateway District shall conform to one of the following Building Types:
A) Single Family Detached House (Figure 6)
B) Single-Family Attached Housing
1. Twin Home (Figure 7)
2. Townhouse/Rowhouse (Figure 8)
C) Apartment/Condominium (Figure 9)
D) Bungalow Court (Figure 10)
E) Live/Work Unit (Figure 11)
E) Mixed Use Building (Figure 12)
F) Commercial
1. Retail/Office Building (Figure 13)
2. Single Use Building (Figure 14)
a. With Liner Building (Figure 14a)
b. With Collar Uses (Figure 14b)
3. Auto-Oriented Layout (Figure 15)
9.6.2 Use of Building Type Templates. Figures 6 through 15 contain all regulatory information governing the
dimensions of lots and the dimensions, setbacks, height, mass, placement and use of buildings in the District. The
City’s review of a development application shall primarily apply the information contained in the applicable Building
Type Templates. Terms and concepts used within the Building Type Templates are further defined as follows:
A) Frontage Street. The Thoroughfare Type on which the Building Type may be placed. The building must
be oriented toward the frontage street and have its primary entrance on the permitted frontage street, unless
an alternative is allowed by the terms of the Building Type chosen. “Width” is measured along frontage
street; “depth” measured perpendicular to the frontage street. For purposes of placing buildings, Highway 61
and County Road E are not frontage streets, and the property boundary with those roads’ rights-of-way
should be aligned as the rear lot line to the greatest extent possible. Parking lots may abut the Highway 61 or
County Road E rights-of-way, subject to the landscaping requirements of the Gem Lake Landscaping
Ordinance.
B) Height by Story. The permitted height of any building is determined by the number of stories
allowed and built. The height of each story is determined by the space between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or the ceiling (peaked roof) or roof (flat roof) above for
top stories. A story must have a minimum height of 12 feet and a maximum height of 15 feet; buildings with
assigned ground-floor retail and commercial shall have a ground-floor height of at least 15 feet and no more
than 20 feet. The top of a peaked roof is limited to the average story height of the building, measured from
the ceiling of the topmost floor to the highest gable of the roof. Half-stories (finishing the space, if any,
between the roof and the topmost full-story ceiling) are permitted for all building types in all subzones.
C) Building types with specified height limits shall be measured from the average elevation of the sidewalk
on which the building’s primary entrance is located and the coping of a flat roof or the deck line of a mansard
roof.
D) Basements. All building types are permitted to have basements if it is technically feasible to build
basements on the chosen building site. A walk-out basement is considered a “story” for height regulation,
but other kinds of basements are not counted against the height of the building.
E) Footprint. The building footprint is the area occupied by the horizontal projection of the building’s first
floor, excluding the floor area of attached garages and porches or decks built as allowed encroachments into
setbacks. Within the building envelope defined in the Building Type Template, the horizontal projection of
upper floors may not extend more than ten feet in any direction over the footprint, except for portions of the
upper floor built directly over an attached garage.
F) Mass, Ratio. When used on a Building Type Template, the percentages listed in the Mass table define the
maximum area allowed the horizontal projection of one floor in relation to the area of the horizontal
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 34
projection of the building footprint and attached garage, if any.
G) Building Placement Diagram. The diagram on each Building Type Template provides regulatory
information on the setbacks, build-to lines (lines on which some or all of the building façade must be placed),
the “building envelope” in which the footprint may be placed, frontage types, permitted encroachments of
porches, decks and balconies, placement of accessory structures, and other items which regulate the built
environment on a given lot.
9.6.3 Combination of Building Types on Single Lot. The Building Type templates regulate lot size, but it is not
required that each building be on a separately conveyed lot. If multiple building types are proposed, the dimensional
standards should be applied as though the lot were being divided. Any total surface coverage or building footprint
standards may be combined among all of the buildings included on a particular lot.
9.6.4 New Building Types. New building types may be proposed in the manner of other amendments to the
Zoning Code using the procedure in Section 17.6 of the Zoning Ordinance. A proposal must contain all information
included in existing analogous Building Types, including but not limited to the dimensional standards, use
designations, and frontage requirements.
9.6.5 Use Regulation in the Gateway District. The Gateway District’s regulatory focus is first upon the form of
each building and its relation to the surrounding environment. This section regulates the use of space within
buildings, except to the extent that any structure or land use existed as a legally nonconforming use prior to the
adoption of this Section, as a matter secondary to the built form. The use of land in the District is regulated by the
Building Type Templates and is directly related to the building form.
A) General Terms and Permitted Uses. The Building Type Templates assign categories of uses to certain
floors of a building. When multiple use categories are listed and separated by a slash (such as “office/retail”),
the uses may be combined on the floor at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. When
multiple use categories are stated as alternatives (such as “office or residential”) the floor may only be
assigned one category of use, at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. Building Type
Templates may also contain specific exclusions or limitations which modify the application of a use category
to the particular building. The categorical terms are defined as follows:
Residential. Premises for long-term human dwelling.
Office. Non-residential premises used for administrative, clerical, professional or similar
activities. Office as used in this section includes medical and dental offices used by five (5) or fewer
medical principals (doctor, dentist, chiropractor or similar professional).
Retail. Premises for the sale of merchandise and food service. For purposes of this Section,
banks with teller service are considered “retail” instead of “office.” Athletic clubs and fitness centers that
are not the primary use of the building space are considered a “retail” use. Certain personal service
businesses are considered “retail” if not the primary use of a building: barbershop/beauty salon; clothing
rental and dry cleaning pickup (but not on-site processing); and tailor shops.
Commercial. Premises for the conduct of the following activities, which are not included within the
meaning of “office” or “retail” for purposes of this Section: Athletic club/fitness center (when primary
or only use of building space); business school or trade school; veterinary clinic; funeral home; hotel;
recreational primary use (such as a bowling alley); cabinet and carpentry shops, heating, plumbing or
electrical sales and service; printing shop, upholstery shop, warehousing. Conditional uses of space
assigned as “commercial” are: automotive repair and service (including gas stations); car wash; light
industrial uses which manufacture, process, store and distribute foods and materials not likely to create
offensive noise, odors, vibrations, dust smoke, heat, glare or other objectionable influences and are in
general dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 35
Figure 6: Single Family Detached House
Definition: One dwelling unit on its own lot, detached from other
adjoining lots. It may have an attached or detached garage, and an accessory
unit to the rear of the property.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 200’ minimum, no maximum
Width/Depth: 1:1 minimum, no maximum
Frontage Street:: Type A or Type B
Alley: Permitted, not required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces
(street parking not applicable)
Total impervious
Surface coverage: 40%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint:
Footprint: lesser of 10% of lot or 2,500 sf
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 1 story
Maximum Height: 2 stories
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Residential/
Parking
Residential
25’ Build-to line
STREET
Lot line
Encroachments allowed
(15’ front, 10’ corner side)
Sidewalk
Building Envelope
No rear
setback with
alley
1/6 of lot
depth (max.
50’) rear
setback
without alley
Driveway may be located in side setback
15’ sideyard on corner street
10’ interior sideyard
Alley Modifications and Exclusions:
Building may have attached or detached garage
of up to 800 sf as part of initial proposal
or by separate building permit approval. Larger
garages may be approved by CUP. Lots
for this type may have a separate shed in addition
to any garage, up to 200 sf, without
need for any permit approval. Larger sheds
(up to 1,000 sf) may be approved by CUP.
May apply to use building for Bed & Breakfast
as a conditional use in Neighborhood
General subzone.
See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and
conditional uses associated with this Building
Type.
Primary building
located in front 40%
of lot
1
2
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 36
Figure 7: Twin Home
Definition: A structure with two dwelling units sharing a common
wall or stacked one over the other, architecturally presented as a larger
single-family house in a typical neighborhood setting.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 150’ minimum, no maximum
Width/Depth: 1:1 minimum, no maximum
Frontage Street: Type B or Type C
Alley: Permitted, not required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces per unit
(street parking not applicable)
Total impervious
Surface coverage: 40%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint:
Footprint: lesser of 15% of lot or 3,000 sf
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 1 story
Maximum Height: 2 stories
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Residential
Residential/
Parking
Modifications and Exclusions:
Not authorized in Neighborhood Edge.
Building may have attached or detached garage
of up to 800 sf as part of initial proposal
or by separate building permit approval. No
larger garage is permitted with this type.
Property may have a separate shed of up to
200 sf without need for any permit approval.
A larger shed may be approved by CUP in the
Neighborhood General subzone only.
May apply to use building for Bed & Breakfast
or for unassisted Senior Housing as a
conditional use.
See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and
conditional uses associated with this Building
Type.
STREET
Sidewalk
Encroachments allowed
(15’ front, 10’ corner side)
Lot line 25’ Build-to line
Alley
Building Envelope
Primary building
located in front 50%
of lot
No rear
setback with
alley
1/6 of lot
depth (max.
50’) rear
setback
without alley
Driveway may be located in side setback
10’ interior sideyard
15’ sideyard on corner street
1
2
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 37
Figure 8: Townhouse/Rowhouse
Definition: An individual structure on a parcel with a rear yard and
individual (standalone or tuckunder) garage accessed from an alley, occupied
by one primary residence in an array of at least three such structures
side by side along the common frontage.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 30’ minimum, 80’ maximum
(see below for courtyard lot)
Width/Depth: No set ratio
Frontage Street: Type B or Type C
Alley: Required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces per unit
(street parking not applicable)
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 75%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint:
Footprint: limited to of 70% of lot
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 2 stories
Maximum Height: B: 2 stories
C: 3 stories
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
(C only) Residential
Residential
Modifications and Exclusions:
Not authorized in Neighborhood Edge
subzone.
Building may have attached or detached
garage of up to 800 sf as part of initial
proposal or by separate building permit
approval. Property may have a separate
shed of up to 200 sf without need for
any permit approval.
May apply to use building for Bed &
Breakfast or for unassisted Senior
Housing as a conditional use.
See Figure 16 for full list of accessory
and conditional uses associated with
this Building Type
Residential/Parking
Common Yard Arrangement Separate Lot Arrangement
STREET
Sidewalk
5’ front and
corner lot
setback/
build-to
line
Corner lot
must build
to rear lot
line
Allowed
Encroachments:
Front: To sidewalk
Rear: 10’
Building
Envelope
No sideyard or
setback between
townhouse/
rowhouse units
10’ setback to nontownhouse
lot
Separate or
tuck-under
garage
Encroachments
permitted up to
sidewalk;
buildings
required to
address public
right-of way
Common
landscape
feature
May have combined lot width equal to maximum x 50% of units
Total building footprint limited to 60% of lot area
(excl. accessory bldgs.)
1
2
3
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 38
Figure 9: Apartment/Condominium
Definition: A structure with more than two dwelling units on a single
lot.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 125’ minimum, 200’ maximum
Width/Depth: 4:1 minimum, 1:4 maximum
Frontage Street: Type C or Type D
Alley: Required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces per unit
(street parking not applicable)
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 70%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: limited to 65% of lot
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 2 stories
Maximum Height: C: 3 stories
D: 4 stories
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Residential
Residential
Modifications and Exclusions:
Building in Neighborhood General subzone
may have additional residential
features such as separate sheds for residents.
May use building for unassisted Senior
Housing without city approval, or as an
assisted-living facility as a conditional
use.
See Figure 16 for full list of accessory
and conditional uses associated with
this Building Type
Residential/Parking
Mass
Scenarios
(In Stories)
Max. Ratio of Each Story (see 9.6.2(F))
2 3 3.5
3.5 or less 100% 100% 55%
4 100% 100% —
4
85%
4.5
4.5 100% 100% — 95% 55%
ST
Sidewalk
Doorway
Dooryard/Terrace
Forecourt
12’ Build-To Line, Side Setback
12’ Side setbacks
12’ Side setbacks
Building in corner lot condition
must build to rear lot line
20’ max setback
Garden wall
42” high min.
54” high max
25’ max setback
5’ build-to line
Parking
attached,
tuck-under or
detached
Min. 1/6 of
lot left open
Encroachment allowed on sideyard of corner
lot, bldg. must address street
(D only) Residential
1
2
3
4
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 39
Figure 10: Bungalow Court
Definition: Four or more smaller standalone homes around a shared
central court or walk on a single lot, with pedestrian access to the
street.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Size: .1 acre minimum per unit
Lot Width: 100’ minimum, no maximum
Depth/Width: no set ratio required
Frontage Street: Type C, Boulevard
Alley: Required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces per unit
(street parking not applicable)
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 50%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint:
Footprint: min 750 sf, max 1,500 sf per unit.
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 1 stories
Maximum Height: 2 stories
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Residential
Residential
Modifications and Exclusions:
Building may provide detached garage of
up to 800 sf per unit as part of initial proposal
or by separate building permit approval.
Larger garages may be approved as
part of initial development proposal. Lots
in Neighborhood General may have a
separate shed in addition to any garage, up
to 200 sf, without need for any permit approval.
May apply to use one or more units for
Bed & Breakfast (mixed-use subzone only)
or as an assisted-living facility as a conditional
use.
See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and
conditional uses associated with this Building
Type.
Encroachments
permitted up
to sidewalk;
buildings
required to
address
public right-
Common of way
landscape
feature
Total building footprint limited to 40% of lot
area (excl. accessory bldgs.)
Alley
10’ front build-to line
1
2
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 40
Figure 11: Live/Work Unit
Definition: Integrated rowhouse-style dwelling unit and ground floor
working space, consisting of at least 3 units arrayed side-by side along
the primary frontage.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 30’ minimum, 80’ maximum
Width/Depth: No set ratio
Frontage Street: Type B, Type C, Boulevard
Alley: Required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces per dwelling
(street parking not applicable)
2 spaces per 1000 sf office uses
4 spaces per 1000 sf retail uses
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 75%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint:
Footprint: limited to 70% of lot
Height and Use
Min. Height: 2 stories
Max. Height: B: 2 stories
C/Blvd: 3 stories
Office/Retail: 400 sf min., entry from
street frontage req’d.
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Residential
(C/Blvd Only)
Residential
Modifications and Exclusions:
Not authorized in Neighborhood Edge subzone.
Retail use of first floor space is only allowed
with building frontage on a Type C street or
Boulevard in the Neighborhood Mixed-Use
subzone.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type
Res./Retail/Office/
Parking
STREET
ALLEY
5’ corner lot
setback on Type
B street; no
setback on Type
C
Arcade Dooryard Gallery Storefront
Tuck-under, attached, or detached
garages accessed from
alley.
Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over
sidewalk
Entrance façade of building
set back maximum 9’ from lot
line; type limited to 15% of
block frontage
Continuous, unoccupied
cover (i.e.
awning) at least 9’
over sidewalk
May have entryway
encroach up to 6’ onto
sidewalk, max. 30% of
bldg. frontage.
Lot line =
Build-to line
Corner lot
building must
build to rear lot
line.
Units may have deck
or patio encroachments
up to 10’ into
rear yard, or over
attached/tuckunder
parking.
No setback if similar type
(rowhouse, live/work) in
adjacent lot.
5’ max. setback if
adjacent lot not built
or built with dissimilar
building with residential
use.
1
2
3
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 41
Figure 12: Mixed Use Building
Definition: A structure with a vertical mixture of uses. The upper
floors may be used for office or residential uses and the ground floor
may be used for office or retail.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 150’ minimum
Width/Depth: 4:1 minimum, 1:4 maximum
Frontage Street: Type C, Type D, Boulevard
Alley: Required
Parking: 2 off-street spaces per dwelling
(street parking not applicable)
2 spaces per 1000 sf office uses
4 spaces per 1000 sf retail uses
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 80%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: limited to 65% of the lot.
Height and Use
Min. Height: 3 stories
Max. Height: C/Blvd: 3 stories
D: 4 stories
Office/retail: 400 sf min.
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
(D only) Residential
Residential
Modifications and Exclusions:
Residential component may be used as an
assisted living facility as a conditional use, and
restricted to senior housing community without
permit.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type.
Residential or
Office
Retail/Office/
Parking
Mass
Scenarios
(In Stories)
Ratio of Each Story
(see 9.6.2(F))
3 3.5 4 4.5
3 or 3.5 100% 55%
4 100% — 85%
4.5 100% — 95% 55%
Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over
sidewalk
Entrance façade of
building set back maximum
9’ from lot line; type
limited to 15% of block
frontage
Continuous,
unoccupied cover
(i.e. awning) at least
9’ over sidewalk
May have entryway
encroach up to 6’
onto sidewalk, max.
30% of bldg. frontage.
5’ corner lot
setback on Type B
street; no setback
on Type C
Lot line = Buildto
line
Corner lot
building must
build to rear lot
line.
Tuck-under, attached, or
detached garages accessed from
alley.
Units may have
deck or patio
encroachments
up to 10’ into
rear yard, or over
attached/
tuckunder
parking.
No minimum setback;
5’ maximum setback
1
2
3
4
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 42
Figure 13: Retail/Office Building
Definition: A building designed for occupancy by retail and office
uses where the building is intended for subdivision into tenant spaces,
with no residential component. The building may have a primary user
and smaller tenant spaces (as in a bank building with upper-floor office
space for rent), but buildings intended for single-tenant use must use
the Single-Use Building template at Figure 14.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 60’ minimum, 200’ maximum
Width/Depth: 1:4 minimum, 4:1 maximum
Frontage Street: Type D, Boulevard
Alley: Permitted, not required
Parking: 2 spaces per 1000 sf office use
4 spaces per 1000 sf retail use
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 80%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: Principal bldg maximum of 60% of lot area
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 2 stories
Maximum Height: 3 stories
Building Place-
Office/Retail/Parking
Office/Parking
Modifications and Exclusions:
May be oriented using Building Placement
standards in Auto-Oriented Layout (Figure
15) when building is located in the
Neighborhood Center subzone.
Building may have a deck or patio for common
or individual tenant use in the
Neighborhood Mixed-Use subzone by conditional
use permit.
Surface parking lot landscaping is subject to
the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance. A
parking structure is permitted by CUP.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type.
Office/Retail/Parking
Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over
sidewalk
Entrance façade of
building set back maximum
9’ from lot line; type
limited to 15% of block
frontage
Continuous,
unoccupied cover
(i.e. awning) at least
9’ over sidewalk
May have entryway
encroach up to 6’
onto sidewalk, max.
30% of bldg. frontage.
No corner lot
setback from
sidewalk; frontage
encroachments
allowed for
entrances.
Lot line = Buildto
line
Corner lot
building is not
required to build
to rear lot line, but
parking must be
accessed from side
street or alley.
10’ max setback for
parking access if no
alley or side-street
access. Parking must
be to rear of building.
Maintain sidewalk
integrity over driveway
access.
No setback unless
needed for parking
access
1
2
3
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 43
Figure 14: Single-Use Building
Definition: A building designed for occupancy by retail, service or
office uses on the ground floor with an optional mezzanine. May also
be used as template for placing a standalone parking structure in a proposed
development
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width: 60’ minimum; 300’ maximum
Width/Depth: 4:1 minimum, 1:4 maximum
Frontage Street: Type D (w/o liner bldg)
Alley: Permitted, not required
Parking: 4 spaces per 1,000 sf of retail
2 spaces per 1,000 sf of other
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 80%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: maximum 60% of lot
Height and Use
Maximum Height: 35 feet; for application of
massing rule, portion of building over 20 feet
is considered 2nd story.
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Office/Retail/
Commercial/Parking
Modifications and Exclusions:
Alternate placements and alignments are allowed
by use of Liner Building (Figure 14a),
Collar Building (Figure 14b), or Auto-
Oriented Layout (Figure 15).
“Commercial” uses in any single-use building
arrangement are allowed on sites east of
Highway 61 only. A single-use building may
not be used as an off-sale liquor store.
Outdoor storage and outdoor display and
sales of merchandise or equipment may be
approved as a conditional use.
Surface parking lot landscaping is subject to
the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance. A
parking structure is permitted by CUP.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type.
35’
Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over
sidewalk
Entrance façade of
building set back maximum
9’ from lot line; type
limited to 15% of block
frontage
Continuous,
unoccupied cover
(i.e. awning) at least
9’ over sidewalk
May have entryway
encroach up to 6’
onto sidewalk, max.
30% of bldg. frontage.
No corner lot
setback from
sidewalk; frontage
encroachments
allowed for
entrances.
Lot line =
Build-to line
Corner lot
building is not
required to build
to rear lot line, but
parking must be
accessed from side
street or alley.
10’ max setback for
parking access and
30’ max for access
and side parking if
no alley or sidestreet
access. Side
parking may begin
10’ to rear of front
façade.
No setback unless
needed for parking
access
Maintain sidewalk integrity
over driveway access.
20’
1
2
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 44
Figure 14a: Liner Building
Definition: A building that conceals from street view a Single-Use building
for which it is impractical to design compliant front or side façades
(such as a warehouse or a parking garage) . Liners may have retail or office
uses on the ground floor and office or residential uses on the upper floors,
if any are built.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Dimension: See Single-Use Building
Frontage Street: Type C, Type D, Boulevard
Alley: Permitted, not required
Parking: See Single Use Building;
2 spaces per residential unit if used
(on-street parking not applicable)
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: within maximum footprint allowed to the Single Use Building
on the site, no minimum/maximum size.
Height and Use
Minimum Height: Same as inner bldg.
Maximum Height: 1 story over inner
single-use building.
Building Place-
Office/Retail
Office or
Residential
Modifications and Exclusions:
Can only be constructed in connection with a
single-use building. The liner building itself
may be separated from the Single-Use Building
by up to 20’ to provide an access drive or
pedestrian arcade, provided that the Single-
Use Building remains shielded from street
view.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type.
Office/Retail
Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over
sidewalk
Entrance façade of
building set back maximum
9’ from lot line; type
limited to 15% of block
frontage
Continuous,
unoccupied cover
(i.e. awning) at least
9’ over sidewalk
May have entryway
encroach up to 6’
onto sidewalk, max.
30% of bldg. frontage.
No corner lot
setback from
sidewalk; frontage
encroachments
allowed for
entrances.
Lot line =
Build-to line
Corner lot
building is not
required to build
to rear lot line, but
parking must be
accessed from side
street or alley.
10’ max setback for
parking access and
30’ max for access
and side parking if
no alley or sidestreet
access. Side
parking may begin
10’ to rear of front
façade.
No setback unless
needed for parking
access
Maintain sidewalk integrity
over driveway access.
Single Use
Bldg.
35’
20’
2
3
1
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 45
Figure 14b: Collar Building
Definition: Structure(s) accompanying a commercial use with large
parking requirements, intended to maintain storefronts and entrances
on the public street. A Collar Building configuration permits an exception
to Design Standards, allowing the primary entrance of the Single-
Use Building to face an interior parking lot instead of the frontage
street. The Collar Building can be integrated with the Single Use Building,
built with common walls, or separated by up to 20’ for vehicle access
or a pedestrian arcade. The side and rear facades of the Single-Use
Building which are not screened from the street by the Collar Building
must satisfy Design Standards applicable to side and rear façades.
Lot Size and Placement:
See single-use building
Parking: 2 spaces per 1,000 sf of retail/office space; any
off-street space required should be shared with
central single-use building parking
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: within maximum footprint allowed to the Single Use Building
on the site, no minimum/maximum size.
Height and Use
Minimum Height: 1 story
Maximum Height: 5’ over inner single-
use building.
Build- ing
Modifications and Exclusions
Can only be constructed in connection with a
single-use building.
The minimum height of a collar building is
measured by use of a “story.” However, the
interior of the building is not required to have
a second story floor in order to exceed 20
feet; the building (and individual tenant
spaces within the building) may be open for
its entire height.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type.
Standard set of retail/commercial frontage choices for each separate tenant space. Strongly consider
varying frontage type along façade. Separations in façade up to 8’ are allowed to permit pedestrian
access to sidewalk from rear parking area.
No setback from
side street
frontage/parking
area access drive.
Parking area
access drive may
be up to 30’ to
accommodate
side parking,
beginning at a
line set back 10’
from the front
façade.
Lot line =
Build-to line
No requirement
to build to rear
lot line; parking
must be
screened in
accordance with
design standards.
No requirement to separate collar
from single-use building; may
separate buildings for pedestrian
walkway from parking area to
collar building entrances.
If pedestrian way used, the front façade entrances remain the “primary entrances” for
application of design standards.
Side façade beyond depth of collar on
frontage can be collar, single-use building,
or combination of both.
Office/Retail
Office/Retail
Single Use
Bldg.
35’
20’
2
1
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 46
Figure 15: Auto-Oriented Layout
Definition: Alternative layout standard for Single-Use Buildings and Retail/
Office Buildings designed and intended for occupancy by automotive
service businesses using drive-through lanes, service bays, or a combination
thereof.
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Dimension: See Template for building used..
Frontage Street: Type D
Alley: Permitted, not required
Parking: See template for building used
For automotive services:
Greater of 1 space per 1,000 sf or
3 per service bay
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage: 80%
Building Disposition
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: See template for building used.
Height and Use
Maximum Height: See Type Template for
applicable building.
Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
Modifications and Exclusions:
Alternative layout in this Template is available
through conditional use permit, either
for an automotive-oriented use (such as auto
repair or other auto services) or for a drivethrough
service window. A Retail/Office
building type or Single Use Building with a
Liner Building may employ this layout along
any Type D thoroughfare; a proposed Single-
Use Building standing alone or with a
Collar Building may request this layout east
of Highway 61 only.
See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
office/retail accessory and conditional uses
associated with this Building Type.
As drive-through for permitted retail use, may use setbacks shown below for access, but
otherwise must comply with applicable build-to line and façade rules for building type. For
auto-specific uses, no specific build-to line for front or side facades. Front facades must
comply with design standards (by itself or with use of liner building). Side facades may have
service bay openings if set back 25’ or more from sidewalk. Access drives must preserve
integrity of sidewalk.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 47
B) Accessory and Alternative Uses. Figures 16 and 17 provide charts stating the compatibility of listed accessory uses
and variations on categorical primary uses (such as restricting residential use to Senior Housing) with each Building Type.
The items listed in Figure 16 and 17 further refine the general definitions stated above, and any perceived conflict should
be resolved in favor of Figures 16 and 17. Placement of accessory buildings is generally noted on the Building Type
Template and is also governed by the Design Standards.
C) Uses designated as “conditional” or “CUP” within this Section, on a Building Type Template or within Figures 16 and
17 shall require a Conditional Use Permit, following the existing procedures in Section 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Figure 16: Building Use Matrix: Residential Buildings and Lots
SF Detached
House
Twin Home Townhouse/
Rowhouse
Apartment/Condominium Bungalow Court
Edge General General M-U General M-U General M-U Center General M-U
Accessory Structures/Uses
Garage, less than 800 sf P P P P P P * * * P P
Garage, 800 sf or larger CUP CUP * * 1 1 P P P 1 1
Shed, less than 200 sf A A A A A A A * * A *
Shed, 200-1000 sf CUP CUP CUP * CUP * CUP * * * *
Storage of large vehicles CUP CUP CUP * CUP * * * * * *
Deck or Patio P P P P P P * * * P P
Pool, tennis court or similar P P P P P P P P P P P
Conservatory/Greenhouse P P P P P P * * * CUP CUP
Health/fitness facility * * * * * * P P P CUP CUP
Alternative Residential
Uses
Bed & breakfast * CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP * * * * CUP
Senior housing (unassisted) n/a n/a CUP CUP CUP CUP P P P P P
Assisted living facility * * * * * * CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
Occupancy of dwelling unit
by more than 3 unrelated individuals
R R R R R R R R R R R
Notes:
A = allowed without permit
P = use permitted with initial zoning review or with building permit
CUP = conditional use permit required
* = not allowed for this combination
R = as required by Minnesota Statute or requested as a reasonable accommodation under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
Fair Housing Act, or related law.
1 = combined garage for 2 or more units may be approved on initial zoning review
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 48
D) Certain uses of land which are not necessarily related to a building are generally permitted within the Gateway District
by conditional use permit:: Essential Service Structures, Planned Unit Development, Institutional Overlay.
E) Nothing in this Section or its attachments shall be construed to prevent the application of other Gem Lake ordinances
pertaining to types of uses (including, but not limited to, the Adult Use Ordinance and the Pawnbroker Ordinance) or to
city licensing of businesses and activities in general.
Figure 17: Building Use Matrix: Commercial-Use Buildings and Lots
Live-Work Unit Mixed Use Building Retail/Office Single Use
Building
Liner Building Collar
Building
General
M-U General
M-U Center M-U Center M-U Center M-U Center Center
Accessory Structures/Uses
Detached Garage, 2 or fewer
cars
P P * * * * * * * * * *
Detached Parking Structure * * CUP P P CUP CUP 2 2 3 3 3
Shed, less than 200 sf A A * * * * * * * * * *
Shed, 200-1000 sf CUP * CUP * * * * * * * * *
Outdoor storage * * * * * * * CUP CUP 3 3 3
Storage of large vehicles CUP CUP * * * * * * * * * *
Deck or Patio P P 1 1 1 CUP * * * * * *
Pool, tennis court or similar P P P P P * * * * * * *
Conservatory/Greenhouse P P P CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP 3 3 3
Health/fitness facility (4) * * P P P * * * * CUP CUP *
Alternative Residential Uses
Senior housing (unassisted) n/a n/a P P P n/a n/a n/a n/a * * n/a
Assisted living facility * * CUP CUP CUP n/a n/a n/a n/a * * n/a
Notes:
A = allowed without permit
P = use permitted with initial zoning review or with building permit
CUP = conditional use permit required
* = not allowed for this combination
1 = combined garage for 2 or more units may be approved on initial zoning
review
2 = Parking structure may be primary use of building or otherwise integrated
3 = may be allowed in connection with the single-use building on site
4 = as amenity for residents of building
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 49
F) If a use or structure is not listed or included among the definitions herein, the Building Type Templates, or Figures 16
and 17, then it is prohibited within the Gateway District.
Live-Work Unit Mixed Use Building Retail/Office Single Use
Building
Liner Building Collar
Building
General M-U General M-U Center M-U Center M-U Center M-U Center Center
Office-Related Uses
Showroom(6) CUP A CUP A A A A A A A A A
Supplemental Retail(6) CUP CUP CUP CUP A CUP A A A CUP A A
Related Repair(6) CUP A CUP A A A A A A A A A
“Open” hours between 8—11 PM * CUP * CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
Retail/Commercial Related
Uses
Operation between 8 - 11 PM * P * P A P A P A 3 3 3
Operation between 11 PM - 8
AM
* * * * * * CUP * CUP * 3 3
Drive-through window * * * * * CUP CUP CUP CUP 3 3 3
Outdoor seating(7) * P * P P * P P P P P P
On-sale liquor * P * P P P P P P P P P
Live entertainment * CUP * CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
Single-tenant space over 50,000 sf n/a n/a * CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
Related repair (6) * A * A A A A A A A A A
Outdoor display and sales (5) * * * * * CUP CUP CUP CUP 3 3 3
Off-sale liquor * CUP * CUP P P P * * P P P
Figure 17: Building Use Matrix: Commercial-Use Buildings and Lots
Notes:
A = allowed without permit
P = use permitted with initial zoning review or with building permit
CUP = conditional use permit required
* = not allowed for this combination
3 = may be approved in connection with accompanying single-use building
5 = not permitted as a primary use; not including outdoor restaurant seating
6 = limited to 25% of related floor space; non-automotive repair
7 = applicable to restaurants and bars, administrative permit required
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 50
9.7 Proposals for Undeveloped Land or for Large Redevelopment. An applicant shall follow the following procedure when
seeking approval for construction upon land undeveloped at the time this Section was adopted, or upon any plan requiring the
platted subdivision of land or the construction of new streets. Proposals which include a major subdivision of land shall
proceed through the platting procedure mandated by the Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance, and shall submit the materials
requested herein in addition to the materials required to support the application for subdivision.
9.7.1 Pre-application Meeting. Before making a formal application for a land use plan which will involve the creation
of new streets or platted subdivision of land, the potential applicant shall prepare sketch plans and preliminary
descriptions which reflect the six items addressed below and any additional items required by Section 12.1 of the
Subdivision Ordinance. The applicant shall schedule and attend the pre-application meeting described in Section 11.1
of the Subdivision Ordinance, in which the participants shall address all of the following areas:
- Subdivision plat and related infrastructure;
- Thoroughfare network and civic space;
- Building Type placement and disposition;
- Proposed Design of completed buildings;
- Potential incentives, if any, which may apply to the proposal; and
- Likelihood that environmental review under Ordinance 92 is necessary.
9.7.2 Submission of Development Plan. An applicant shall submit an application for a Zoning Compliance Permit
and supporting documentation to the City which addresses all components of the proposed development. The
applicant shall submit twelve (12) sets of all applications and required supporting materials in forms acceptable to the
Zoning Administrator, including:
A) Development Plan. All attachments to development plans shall be drawn to scale and provide the
following information, unless otherwise specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator:
1. A vicinity map, to include locations of any public streets, railroads, major streams or rivers and other
major features within 500 feet of the site.
2. Boundaries and dimensions shown graphically, along with a written legal description of the property.
3. Present and proposed topography of the site and adjacent areas within 50 feet by contour lines at
intervals of no more than five feet, and directional arrows showing proposed flow of stormwater runoff
from the site.
4. The location of existing and proposed structures, with height and gross floor area noted.
5. Elevation views of all proposed buildings and structures, with building materials and proposed colors
noted.
6. Phasing plans, where applicable.
7. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed curb cuts, aisles, offstreet parking and loading
spaces, and walkways.
8. Location, height and material for screening walls and fences, and other screening devices.
9. Location of all existing and proposed water and sewer facilities and storm drainage systems.
10. Existing and proposed public streets or rights-of-way, easements, or other reservations of land on the
site.
11. Location and method of screening of outdoor trash storage areas.
12. Location and size of all proposed signage.
13. Location and height of proposed lighting facilities.
B) Subdivision Plat supporting data as required by Section 12 of the Subdivision Ordinance (if subdivision
is proposed);
C) Grading and Filling Plan;
D) Tree Preservation Plan;
E) Sediment and Erosion Control Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, as applicable; and
F) Landscaping Plan.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 51
9.7.3 Thoroughfare Network.
A) Orientation of Thoroughfares. The orientation of streets and pedestrian access should enhance open
spaces and prominent buildings and provide for the maximum number of lots with southern exposure. All
streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, except as specified below:
i) Type A thoroughfares that terminate in cul-de-sacs may be permitted only when topography
prevents the use of loop streets.
ii) Any thoroughfare may terminate in a stub street when the stubs act as connections to future phases
of the development or adjacent undeveloped areas. A stub requires a dedication of public right-of-way
or similar title restriction encumbering the area on the property from the closest intersection to the phase
line or property boundary over which the thoroughfare would run if built out.
B) Street Layout.
i) No lot shall be more than 550 feet from a street intersection. A future intersection proposed as part
of a later phase of the same development may be used to meet this requirement. Local streets shall be
designed to limit and slow through traffic by narrower roadways, short lengths and other geometric
configurations.
ii) Low volume streets (Types A and B) should be aligned to form three-way intersections when
possible. Three-way intersections create an inherent right-of-way assignment (the through street receives
precedence), which significantly reduces accidents without the use of traffic controls.
iii) A low volume street that intersects a higher-order street (Types C, D and Boulevard), should be
aligned with another street to form a four-way intersection, which can easily be regulated by a stop sign
or other traffic control device.
iv) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. No street shall intersect another at an
angle of less than 75 degrees.
v) The roadway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius
of 20 feet for low-volume streets and 30 feet for intersections involving higher-order streets.
a. Where the intersection of low-volume streets will be controlled by the placement of stop signs, the
radius may be reduced to 15 feet.
b. The intersection of a low-volume street and an alley shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of 10 feet.
vi) Pedestrian crossing distances at intersections shall be shortened to the greatest extent possible, using
curb bump-outs to cover space assigned to parking in other parts of the thoroughfare (see Figure 5,
Boulevard, for example), or similar methods to reduce the average time required for a pedestrian to cross
the travel lanes of a thoroughfare.
vii) Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at intersections, unless controlled by traffic signal devices.
a. For Type C and D streets intersecting low-volume streets the minimum required clear sight
distance shall be 120 feet.
b. For a Type C or D street intersecting another Type C or D street the minimum required clear
sight distance shall be 130 feet.
c. For any street intersecting either County Road E or U.S. Highway 61, the minimum required
clear sight distance is subject to the standards of Ramsey County or the Minnesota Department of
Transportation..
d. For Type A and B streets intersecting any other streets the minimum required clear sight distance
shall be 15 feet.
C) Pedestrian Network. Pedestrian sidewalks, paths and walkways shall be provided within the community
and shall constitute an integral element of the overall site design. They shall provide safe, convenient and
attractive connections to, from and among community focal points, including residential neighborhoods,
town and neighborhood centers, transit stops, schools, parks and recreation areas, municipal buildings, and
other public facilities.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 52
i) Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets, except for residential access lanes (Type A
streets), which may have sidewalks on one side.
ii) Pedestrian paths shall be landscaped to provide scale, enclosure and shade.
iii) Intersections of pedestrian paths with streets shall be designed with clearly defined edges. Crosswalks
shall be well-lit and defined with contrasting paving materials or striping.
iv) Sidewalks and paths shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width in residential areas, and 10 feet within
commercial and civic areas, where practicable. Where space for the minimum width is not available, the
maximum practicable width shall be used.
v) Within lots, walkways shall provide pedestrian access through parking areas or open space to building
entries. Such walkways shall be located and aligned to directly and continuously connect areas and points
of pedestrian origin and destination. Such walkways shall be at least 5 feet in width and be delineated by
grade separation, planters, or alternate paving material.
vi) Where the primary pedestrian access to a building or site crosses an internal traffic lane or other
automotive access, the pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place priority on pedestrian access and
safety. The material and layout shall be continuous as the pedestrian access crosses, with a break in
continuity of the automotive paving and not in the pedestrian access way.
vii) All sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be handicapped accessible. Curb cuts and ramps shall be
located at convenient, safe locations for the physically disabled, bicyclists, and people pushing strollers or
carts. The location and design of curb cuts and ramps shall meet the requirements of County and State
Americans with Disabilities Act ramp standards, and shall avoid crossing or directing pedestrian and
bicycle traffic through loading areas, drive-in lanes, and solid waste storage and collection areas.
viii) Where transit service is available or planned, site plans shall provide pleasant and convenient access
to transit stops. Where transit shelters are provided, they shall be placed in locations that promote
security through natural surveillance and visibility, and shall be well-lighted and weather-protected.
9.7.4 Civic Space Placement. The plans should identify the 10% or more of the total acreage in development which
will be developed as Civic Space. Layout and relation to surrounding thoroughfares should be clearly depicted on the
plans. If a development is proposed in phases, the 10% Civic Space requirement shall be calculated for the
development as a whole, instead of for each phase. The apportionment of Civic Space dedication may be unbalanced
among the proposed phases, though any initial phase of a development must include at least one Civic Space in
proportion to the size of the phase. Phased development plans which propose to meet over half of the Civic Space
requirement in a second or later phase must include a timetable which shows the development dedicating or building
at least half of the required Civic Space within 3 years of initial development approval.
9.7.5 Building Placement Standards. The types of buildings proposed in the plan and their placement within the
property is governed by the Building Type Standards set forth at Section 9.6 and depicted in Figures 6 through 15.
The plan must depict the types of buildings intended for construction, their proposed disposition, any incentives
sought by virtue of the intended design of any buildings or arrangement of building types, and any special
requirements or requests for variance required to implement the building placement plan.
9.7.6 Design Review. The Zoning Administrator shall refer all applications requiring evaluation of the Design
Standards in 9.10 to the City Architect. The Architect shall review the development plan and supporting documents
for conformance with the Design Review guidelines at Section 9.10 and provide written comment to the Zoning
Administrator. If any deficiencies are noted by the City Architect in the design when the applying the Design
Standards, the Architect shall describe the deficiency and suggest at least one complying alternative.
9.7.7 Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time of development
application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and their effect on the overall
Development Plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically delegated within the ordinance creating
the applicable incentive. The Zoning Administrator shall confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by
ordinance or at the Administrator’s best discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make
recommendations to the approving authority. If incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator
shall reach agreement on the application of incentives prior to submitting the application to the Planning
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 53
Commission. If any applied-for incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit
portions of the plans to incorporate the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant
electing to re-submit plans shall submit a written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable timelines under
Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358, and other applicable laws and ordinances. The extension request shall be
indefinite; the City shall process the re-submitted materials within the timelines specified by law, treating the date of
re-submission as the first day of any applicable time period.
9.8 Plans for Re-development of Single Lots or Small Subdivisions. An applicant shall follow the following procedure when
seeking approval for new building construction (not an addition or expansion to an existing building) upon land which was
developed at the time of the application, either requires no subdivision or is eligible for minor subdivision approval, and for
which no new streets are required. Such applications should be processed for a Zoning Compliance Permit administratively by
the Zoning Administrator unless the proposal requires conditional use permit or variance approval.
9.8.1 Suggested Presentation. The plans for this type of development shall use the Building Type templates at
Figures 6 through 15, as allowed by the sub-zone in which the property lies. Plans should introduce new lot lines, if
any, and then depict the placement and disposition of the proposed building type for each lot.
9.8.2 Required Submissions. The applicant shall submit four (4) sets of the application materials listed in 9.7.2.
The Zoning Administrator may allow the applicant to omit certain items if it is clear that they are not applicable to the
overall proposal. In all circumstances, the proposal shall include the elements required for review under Sections 9.7.5
(Building Type) and 9.7.6 (Design).
9.8.3 Connectivity requirements. While improvements to an existing roadway are not required, plans under this
subsection must indicate how the proposed construction would relate to the roadway if it were reconstructed in
accordance with the requirements of Section 9.7.3. Proposals under this Section 9.8 involving more than one lot shall
comply with Section 9.7.3(C). Single-lot proposals must indicate design incorporating the requirements of 9.7.3(C),
but only must build the improvements when the adjacent lots on the same side of the right-of-way also have built
such improvements or have been approved for construction under this Section.
9.8.4 Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time of development
application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and their effect on the overall
development plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically delegated within the ordinance creating
the applicable incentive. The request for incentive approval does not require City Council approval of the entire plan.
The Zoning Administrator shall confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by ordinance or at the
Administrator’s best discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make recommendations to the
approving authority. If incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall reach agreement on
the application of incentives prior to submitting the application to the Planning Commission. If any applied-for
incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of the plans to incorporate
the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant electing to re-submit plans shall submit a
written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358,
and other applicable laws and ordinances. The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the resubmitted
materials within the timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any
applicable time period.
9.8.5 Administrative Approval. If the application satisfies all applicable criteria, the Zoning Administrator shall
approve the Zoning Compliance Permit. The applicant shall execute a Development Agreement with the City prior
to the receipt of any building permit under the plan.
9.9 Parking Regulations.
9.9.1 On-street parking, either diagonal (angled) or parallel, shall be provided along all streets other than Alleys.
Parking is indicated on the Thoroughfare standards at Figures 2 and 3. Where angle parking is permitted or required,
the parking may be forward or reverse angle. Parking spaces (other than handicapped spaces) on thoroughfares and
on-grade parking lots shall be no wider than 9 feet. Plans for new development and other major subdivisions are
encouraged to plan thoroughfares and civic spaces to provide a significant portion of the parking required for planned
buildings. On-street parking within 1/8 of a mile of a building entrance may be applied toward that building’s
applicable parking requirement.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 54
9.9.2 A parking plan shall be included for all buildings, indicating how the parking requirement for each proposed
building is met through on-street parking, shared off-street parking or dedicated off-street parking. Reductions in the
number of spaces required by the Building Type regulations may be approved if the proposal is supported by a
parking study specific to the proposed building(s) and likely tenants. Shared parking proposals are encouraged and
should reference the Urban Land Institute’s Shared Parking Guidelines or similar guidance. Plans including off-street
parking and loading facilities within the Gateway District shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner. If,
upon review, either consultant determines that an alternative to the proposed parking plan is desirable, it will
recommend an alternate parking plan to the Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the City
Council for final review and approval.
9.9.3 The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require a contribution of land or money
toward community parking facilities in lieu of providing off-street parking facilities on the property to be developed.
9.9.4 On-grade parking areas within lots are prohibited within any front yard setback or in front of the principal
building. On-grade parking areas shall be located at the side or the rear of buildings in mid-block areas, and may not
be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any public streets (excluding Alleys). Parking areas shall be landscaped
in accordance with the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance.
9.9.5 Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of interlocking pavers or similar materials is strongly
encouraged for areas that serve low-impact parking needs, such as remote parking lots, parking areas for periodic uses
and parking in natural amenity areas.
9.9.6 Bicycle Parking. Parking plans shall include designed space and facilities for bicycle parking, at a ratio of 1
bicycle parking space for each 4 residential units or 20 required automobile spaces. Bicycle parking facilities shall be
located within fifty (50) feet of building entrances and shall be visible from the uses they serve. They shall not be
located so as to impede pedestrian or automobile traffic flow or to cause damage to plants and trees from bicycle
traffic. The facilities shall be of permanent construction, attached to the ground, and designed to allow the bicycle
frame and both wheels to be securely locked to the parking structure. Facilities shall be at least two feet in width and
six feet in length, and be placed to allow a minimum of five feet of back-out or maneuver space.
9.10 Design Review Standards. The guidelines established in this section are for the purpose of promoting quality
development that is attractive, convenient and compatible with surrounding uses. These guidelines are intended to be general
in nature and not to restrict creativity, variety or innovation. However, unless site characteristics or conditions dictate
otherwise, Gem Lake’s expectation is that these guidelines be adhered to. In cases where building and site design standards are
specific to Building Types, those standards are noted within the Building Type Template.
9.10.1 Site layout guidelines.
A. Site design shall incorporate existing topography and natural features, such as hillsides, wooded areas and
greenways. Important vistas and viewpoints, both from the site and into the site, should be protected and
enhanced.
B. Building arrangement. When multiple buildings are proposed for a site, care should be taken to provide
maximum street exposure for all buildings.
C. Service and docking facilities. Loading, delivery and service bays should be oriented away from existing
residences and public streets. When this is impractical, service and docking areas shall be screened from view
through the provision of walls, fencing or landscaping.
D. Drive-through facilities, where permitted, shall be designed with safe and easily understood traffic patterns
and shall provide sufficient stacking space, based on requirements of Section 9.9. Drive-through windows
should not face public streets; and loudspeakers should not create nuisances for adjacent properties.
E. Shadowing. Where possible, buildings shall be located so that they minimize shadowing on adjacent
properties. A sun and shadow study may be required for any building that is more than 2 ½ stories or 35 feet in
height.
9.10.2. Building placement – Nonresidential and Mixed uses. At least 70 percent of the front facade of any building
shall be located on the front build-to line as indicated by the Building Type Template (with the exception of a
“dooryard” layout as indicated on the template’s layout diagram). The placement of buildings shall reinforce the street
wall, maximize natural surveillance and visibility, enhance the character of the surrounding area and facilitate
pedestrian access and circulation. Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building or use
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 55
served. The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement,
provided that any adverse effects shall be mitigated by a masonry wall, decorative fence or planted materials, between
38 and 46 inches in height, which reinforces the street wall.
9.10.3. Building placement – Residential-only uses. Buildings shall be located so that the front doors of the building or
individual units face the public street rather than the interior of the site, unless a courtyard layout is authorized on the
Template for the particular building. Parking areas and garages larger than 3 cars shall be located to the rear or interior
of the site, or underground. The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to
this requirement when one or more of the following occurs:
A) The proposed building has primary or corner frontage on a Type C or Type D street.
B) Commercial buildings are located across the street from the proposed building.
C) Unusual or unique site conditions make the requirement impractical.
9.10.4. Building height and scale. In addition to the height and mass instructions contained within the Building Type
Templates, the height and scale of new buildings shall be related to the prevailing scale of surrounding development
and shall be compatible with surrounding buildings in roof form and pitch. Larger buildings, where permitted, shall
be designed to reflect the same architectural massing and style as other buildings built or proposed within a two-block
area. If no other single, large buildings are present or proposed in the area, then the facade of the new building shall
be designed to reflect the form, mass and shape of several contiguous smaller buildings within the two block area.
The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement if a larger
building is proposed, to reduce its apparent size by dividing the building mass into smaller sections, including:
A) Stepping back or extending a portion of the building façade;
B) Emphasizing architectural elements, including windows and entries; and
C) Emphasizing architectural elements of the roof, including dormers, chimneys and gables.
9.10.5. Building facades. Building facades shall provide architectural detail and shall contain windows at the ground
level in order to create visual interest and maximize outdoor surveillance and visibility. Exterior materials and
appearance shall be compatible with surrounding buildings.
A) Front Facades and Entries.
1. Primary entries to residential buildings shall be emphasized through the use of architectural features
such as porches and roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details that express the importance of the
entrance. At least 20 percent of the first floor facade that faces a public street or sidewalk shall consist of
windows and doors. Windows shall be distributed in a more or less even manner. Plans should avoid
placing garage doors and openings on the front façade of a building. If the garage door or opening is
placed on the front façade, it shall not be located on the building’s leading edge facing the street, but shall
be set back at least six feet from the front line of the building or an approved front yard encroachment
(such as a porch, or a deck over a tuck-under garage).
2. Primary entries to nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be emphasized through the use of
architectural features such as roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details that express the
importance of the entrance. At least 60 percent of the first floor facade that faces a public street or
sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly-tinted glass that allow views into and out of the
building. The windows shall be distributed in a more or less even manner. The use of traditional window
dimensions and a one-over-one or two-over-one sash arrangement is strongly preferred. Buildings shall
have entrances to a street or public open space placed no more than sixty (60) feet apart. Buildings are
strongly encouraged to use awnings on the front façade, particularly over the main entry. The awning
should be compatible in style, material and color to the rest of the building, and the width of the awning
should fit the geometry of the building façade. There may be signage on the end panel or front valance
of an awning, proportional to the space available. The installation of the awning should not hide any
architectural detail or character features of the building.
B) Side and Rear Facades. The exterior materials and appearance of the rear and side walls of any building
shall be similar to and compatible with the front of the building. Where the façade is visible from a public
street or right-of-way or any residential district and concrete-block construction is used, the façade shall use
integrally colored block or textured block. Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 56
street, public open space, or abutting property may not exceed sixty feet (60’) in length without significant
visual relief consisting of one or more of the following:
1. The façade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different materials or textures;
2. Horizontal offsets of at least four feet (4’) in depth;
3. Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet (4’); or
4. Fenestration at the first-floor level which is recessed horizontally at least one foot (1’) into the façade.
9.10.6. Architectural variety. The use of a variety of architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give
each building or group of buildings a distinct character. When accent colors are proposed, the number of colors
should be limited to prevent a gaudy appearance.
9.10.7. Materials. All buildings shall be constructed with materials that are attractive in appearance, durable with a
permanent finish, and of high quality. New mixed-use or commercial buildings erected within the Gateway District
shall be of masonry construction, an equivalent, or better. Exterior building materials shall be classified as either
primary, secondary, or accent materials. Primary materials shall cover at least sixty percent (60%) of the façade of a
building. Secondary materials may cover no more than thirty percent (30%) of the façade. Accent materials may
include door and window frames, lintels, cornices and other minor elements, and may cover no more than ten percent
(10%) of the façade.
A) Primary materials may be face brick, stone, glass, architectural concrete or precast concrete units
(integrally colored block or textured block), provided that surfaces are molded, serrated examples or treated
with a textured material in order to give the wall surface a three-dimensional character.
B) Secondary materials may be decorative block or integrally colored stucco, fiber cement siding (integrally
colored or painted) with hidden seams. Synthetic stucco may be used as a secondary material on upper floors
only.
C) Accent materials may be wood, metal or fiber cement when used in trim, fascia or soffit if appropriately
integrated into the overall building design and not situated in areas which will be subject to physical or
environmental damage.
D) Prohibited Materials. No buildings shall be constructed of sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel,
corrugated metal, plastic or fiberglass siding. Face materials which rapidly deteriorate or become unsightly
such as galvanized metal or unfinished structural clay tile are not permitted.
9.10.8 Colors. Colors used for exterior surfaces shall be harmonious with surrounding development and shall visually
reflect the traditional concept of the town center. Contrasting colors should be used to emphasize architectural detail.
Where a development plan proposes multiple buildings, the plan shall carry over colors and materials across adjacent
buildings.
9.10.9 Roofs. The predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood Center subzone is flat with articulated parapets; the
predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood General subzone is peaked. Roof shapes in the Neighborhood Mixed-
Use subzone should achieve a gradual transition between the two roof types.
9.10.10 Outdoor Storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either materials or products except through the
issuance of a conditional use permit.
9.10.11 Screening. Property boundaries abutting property that is not included within the Gateway District shall have
significant dense vegetative screening.
9.10.12 Signage. Signage should be integrated as an architectural element, with attention given to the color, scale and
orientation of all proposed signs in relation to the overall design of the building. Signs shall conform to the
regulations in Section 19 of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTIONS 10 TO 12 RESERVED.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 57
SECTION 13 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
13.1. PURPOSE
13.1.1 The purposes of this article are:
(A) To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its improvements through the
preservation of natural features and amenities than is possible under the more restrictive application of
zoning requirements. This section may allow modifications such as non-standard lot sizes, private streets and
driveways, reduced rights-of-way and street widths, housing types, zero lot lines and building setbacks. These
changes shall meet the standards and purposes of the comprehensive plan while preserving the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(B) To allow for the potential mixture of uses in an integrated and well planned area.
(C) To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and a preservation of the natural
resources of the site.
(D) To facilitate the economical provision of streets and public utilities.
(E) To facilitate mixed use developments, and/or affordable housing, recreational uses and institutional
uses.
(F) Parks and open space. The creation of public open space may be required by the city. Such park and
open space shall be consistent with the comprehensive park plan and overall trail plan.
(G) Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and sightings and the clustering
of buildings and land uses.
(H) Use of traffic management and design techniques including the provision of transit and pedestrian
linkages to reduce the potential for traffic conflicts. Improvements to area roads and intersections may be
required as appropriate. Where appropriate, the use of transportation demand management strategies may be
required within a project.
13.2 PERMITTED USES.
13.2.1 Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a development plan.
(A) Each PUD shall primarily be used for the use or uses for which the site is designated in the
comprehensive plan. Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a PUD
development plan.
(B) Where the site of a proposed PUD is designated for more than one land use in the comprehensive plan,
the city may require that the PUD include all the land uses so designated or such combination of the
designated uses as the city council shall deem appropriate to achieve the purposes of this ordinance and the
comprehensive plan.
13.2.2 A PUD is an allowable conditional use in all zoning districts in the City of Gem lake except for land zoned
Open Space/Recreational (‘OS/R”).
13.3. GENERAL STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL
13.3.1 A conditional use permit shall be required of all planned unit developments. The city may approve the planned
unit development only if it finds that the development satisfies all of the following standards:
(A) The planned unit development is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city.
(B) The planned unit development is an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities on
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 58
the project site and the development plan provides for the preservation or creation of unique amenities such
as natural streams, stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, manmade landforms or landscaping and
similar areas.
(C) The planned unit development can be planned and developed to harmonize with any existing or
proposed development in the areas surrounding the project site.
(D) The tract under consideration is under single ownership or control.
(E) The tract is at least five (5) acres in size unless the applicant can show that a PUD of less acreage meets
the standards and purposes of the comprehensive plan and preserves the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city and that all of the following conditions exist:
1. The proposal better adapts itself to the physical and aesthetic setting of the site and with the
surrounding land uses than could be developed using strict standards and land uses allowed within
the underlying zoning district.
2. The proposal would benefit the area surrounding the project to greater degree than development
allowed within the underlying zoning district(s).
3. The proposal would provide mixed land use and/or site design flexibilities while enhancing site
or building aesthetics to achieve an overall, workable higher quality of development than would
otherwise occur in the underlying zoning district.
4. The proposal would ensure the concentration of open space into more workable or usable areas
and would preserve the natural resources of the site than would otherwise occur in the underlying
zoning district.
(F) Single-family detached units or clustering of housing units may be allowed as a PUD providing parks and
open space are an integral part of the plan.
(G) The planned unit development shall use city water and sanitary sewer for all structures and facilities
unless the City Council makes a specific finding that doing so would not be economically feasible.
13.3.2 The exact density allowable in a PUD shall be determined by standards agreed upon between the applicant and
the City.
13.4 COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATION.
13.4.1 It is the intent of this article that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of a
planned development under this article.
13.4.2 The plans required under this article must be submitted in a form, which will satisfy the requirements of the
Gem Lake subdivision ordinance for the preliminary and final plats.
13.4.3 Flexibility of design standards and criteria of the Gem Lake subdivision ordinance may be allowed as part of a
planned unit development.
13.5 CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED
13.5.1 Prior to submitting an application for a proposed planned unit development, an applicant shall submit a
general concept plan to the City, and meet with City staff.
13.5.2 The concept plan shall address and represent the following items:
(A) Overall maximum PUD density range.
(B) Summary of site conditions, including location and extent of any water bodies.
(C) General location of streets, sidewalks, and trails.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 59
(D) General location and extent of public and common open space.
(E) General location of each type of land use, with approximate intensities of development.
(F) Style of structures to be built in the development.
(F) Concept for harmonizing the PUD with neighboring land uses.
(G) Staging and time schedule of development.
13.6 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
13.6.1 Following a meeting on the concept plan, an applicant shall make an application for a planned unit
development permit following the procedural steps as set forth for the processing of conditional use permits in the
Gem Lake zoning ordinance.
13.6.2 In addition to the criteria and standards set forth for the granting of conditional use permits, the following
additional findings shall be made before the approval of the outline development plan:
(A) The proposed PUD is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.
(B) The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable enjoyment of
neighboring property and will not be detrimental to potential surrounding uses.
(C) Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be completed, is of sufficient size,
composition, and arrangement that its construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete unit,
and that provision and construction of dwelling units and common open space are balanced and coordinated.
(D) The PUD will not create an excessive burden on parks, schools, streets, and other public facilities and
utilities, which serve or are proposed, to serve the area.
(E) The proposed total development is designed in such a manner as to form a desirable and unified
environment within its own boundaries.
13.6.3 The following exhibits and written narratives shall be submitted to the zoning administrator by the proposed
developer as a part of the application for a conditional use permit:
(A) An explanation of the character of the planned development and the manner in which it has been
planned to take advantage of the planned development regulations.
(B) A list of the present ownership of all the land included within the planned development and a list of
property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the outer boundaries of the property as obtained through
Ramsey County records.
(C) A general indication of the expected schedule of development including progressive phasing and time
schedule.
(D) A map giving the legal description of the property including approximate total acreage and also
indicating existing property lines and dimensions, ownership of all parcels, platting, easements, street right-ofways,
utilities, and buildings for the property and for the area five hundred (500) feet beyond.
(E) Natural features, maps or maps of the property and area five hundred (500) feet beyond showing
contour lines at no more than two-foot intervals, drainage patterns, wetlands, vegetation, soil, and subsoil
conditions.
(F) A map indicating proposed land uses including housing units and types, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, and open space uses.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 60
(G) Full description as to how all necessary governmental services will be provided to the development
including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water systems, streets and other public utilities.
(H) An engineering report presenting results of percolation tests and soil analysis of the site.
(I) Any additional information requested by the city staff, the planning and zoning commission and city
council that may be required for clarification of the proposed project.
(J) Ten (10) copies of all required information shall be submitted.
13.6.4 The applicant shall also submit a preliminary plat and all the necessary documentation as required under the
Gem Lake subdivision ordinance of all or that portion of the project to be platted. For purposes of administrative
simplification, the public hearings required for the conditional use permit and preliminary plat and potential rezoning
of property may be combined into one (1) hearing or may be held concurrently.
13.7. FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
13.7.1 The final development plan with recommended modifications, if any, and if necessary, the modified
preliminary plat, shall be filed with the zoning administrator containing the information required in the general
development plan plus any changes recommended by the planning and zoning commission and the city council as a
result of the public hearing.
13.7.2 The applicant shall also submit a final plat for all or that portion to be platted. Such plats may be submitted in
smaller increments as may be economical to finance or construct at one time.
13.7.3 The final general development plan shall be submitted with the first final plat which shall conform to the
approved general development plan and approved preliminary plat. This plan shall include any recommended changes
by the planning and zoning commission or city council to the original general development plan and original
preliminary plat.
13.7.4 The city council shall review the final development plan and final plat. If the final development plan is
approved by the city council, the zoning administrator shall issue a conditional use permit to the applicant.
13.8. ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE
13.8.1 The construction and provisions of all of the common open spaces and public and recreational facilities which
are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same phase of the construction of dwelling units. From
time to time the zoning administrator may review all of the building permits issued for the planned development and
examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If he shall find that the rate of construction of dwelling
units is greater than the rate at which common open spaces and public and recreational facilities have been
constructed and provided, he shall forward this information to the city council, which may modify or revoke the
planned unit development permit.
13.9 CONVEYANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE
13.9.1 All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be conveyed to homeowners
association or similar organization provided in an indenture establishing an association or similar organization for the
maintenance of the planned development. The common open space must be conveyed to the homeowners
association or similar organization subject to covenants to be approved by the city attorney which restrict the
common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of
the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
13.9.2 If a homeowners association is created, the applicant shall submit any required homeowner association
documents at the time of the first final plat of development to the city attorney and city staff which explain:
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 61
(A) Ownership and membership requirements.
(B) Articles of incorporation and bylaws.
(C) Time at which the developer turns the association over to the homeowners.
(D) Approximate monthly or yearly association fees for homeowners.
(E) Specific listing of items owned in common including such items as roads, recreation facilities, parking,
common open space grounds, and utilities.
13.10 STANDARDS FOR COMMON OR OPEN SPACE
13.10.1 No open area may be approved as common open space under the provisions of this article unless it meets the
following standards:
(A) The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space must be suitable for the planned
development.
(B) Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for the
common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the planned development, considering
its size, density, expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided.
(C) Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use but common space containing
natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements
which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the
common open space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard
to its topography and unimproved condition.
(D) Outlots to be dedicated for park, ponding or other purposes shall be deeded to the city before the final
plat is released for recording.
13.11 REVIEW AND AMENDMENT
13.11.1 From time to time the zoning administrator may review PUDs within the city and may make a report to the
city council on the status of non-compliance for a particular PUD. If the zoning administrator finds that the
development has not commenced within one (1) year after the original approval of the conditional use for the PUD,
the zoning administrator may recommend that the city council extend the time or revoke the conditional use permit as
set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance. Prior to cancellation or revocation of this permit, the city council shall
hold a public hearing at which time all interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.
13.11.2 For additional phases of the PUD, if within three (3) years the project has not progressed, the zoning
administrator may recommend that the city council determine what action will be taken with the remainder of the
project. Prior to determining the outcome of the PUD, the city council shall hold a public hearing at which time all
interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.
13.11.3 Minor changes in the location, placement, and heights of the buildings or structures may be authorized by
the zoning administrator if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was
approved.
13.11.4 Approval of the planning commission and city council shall be required for other changes such as
rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of the
approved final development plan.
13.11.5 Any amendment to the PUD shall require the same procedures as for the application for a conditional use
permit as set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 62
SECTION 14 - GARDEN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 14.1 Findings and Purpose.
14.1.1 The City Council makes the following findings:
A) The land-use plans of the City of Gem Lake historically have not assigned any land in the City for long-term
agricultural use, as the City has developed and continues to develop as a primarily residential community surrounded
by fully developed suburban neighborhoods. The City Council reaffirms the City’s intent to encourage development
of the City in accordance with its adopted comprehensive plans.
B) At the time this Ordinance is considered, large land parcels in the City have yet to develop any primary use and
stand vacant. Additional large-lot property in the City is projected to subdivide and develop into smaller lots over the
next 10 to 30 years. The City Council recognizes that economic conditions are not always favorable for real estate
development, and that the costs to carry vacant land can create pressures that promote sub-optimal development.
Permitting small-scale agriculture as a primary use will allow owners of large undeveloped parcels to qualify for
agricultural tax classification, and thus lower tax payments, without affecting the long-term plans for the land. The
Council finds that providing this means to temporarily ease this pressure will enhance the City’s ability to fully realize
the goals of its comprehensive plans.
C) Several cities and metropolitan areas are placing a greater emphasis on local food production as a means of
improving public health. Allowing the use of available space in the City for “community gardens” or “market
gardens” to grow food will promote local food production and improve public health in Gem Lake and the
surrounding community.
D) As an interim use of land, subject to the regulations proposed, community gardening and market gardening will be
compatible with all allowed land uses in the City of Gem Lake, and with the goals of the City’s comprehensive plan.
14.1.2 The Council intends that the Garden Overlay District be available to overlay on parcels of land in any existing
zoning district to add the uses described in the district regulations to the list of uses allowed upon that land. The Garden
Overlay District may be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning
Ordinance, as existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. Nothing in this Section is
intended to affect the ability of landowners to maintain accessory uses that are allowed without the Overlay zone upon
their property, whether or not the Overlay zone covers their property. This overlay district is intended to permit a
temporary land use, and should no longer be needed on a parcel when it eventually develops in accordance with the
regulations of the underlying zoning district.
Section 14.2 Requesting Garden Overlay. Applications to create a Garden Overlay District shall be made and considered as a
re-zoning request in accordance with Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. In addition to the documents and materials generally
required for a re-zoning application, the applicant shall supply copies of draft leases, contracts or use agreements to which the
groups or individuals using the gardens will agree prior to using the garden space. Such agreements must provide the land
owner or designated representative with the legal ability to evict a tenant and bar entry to any individual member of a group, if
the tenant or individual violates the terms of this Ordinance, the terms of the Interim Use Permit for the property, any
restrictive term of the lease or agreement, or any other applicable City Ordinance or state law.
Section 14.3 Termination of Garden Overlay. A Garden Overlay District shall remain in effect until one of the following
occurs:
14.3.1 City approval of a zoning application for a use or uses permitted in the underlying zone (e.g. development plan,
conditional use permit, or building permit); the Garden Overlay status and any permits granted under the terms of this
Section shall expire six months from the date of approval; or
14.3.2 The Interim Use Permit for the property expires, and no application is made to renew the permit within six
months of the expiration; or
14.3.3 The Interim Use Permit for the property is revoked by the City Council for violations of this Ordinance, permit
conditions, or any other applicable law or ordinance.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 63
Section 14.4 Interim Uses.
14.4.1 Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to be Interim Uses in the Garden
Overlay District:
A) Community Gardens.
B) Market Gardens.
14.4.2 Interim Use Permits granted under this Section expire on March 15th of each year. The permit may be renewed
annually, at the discretion of the City Council. Application for and approval of an Interim Use Permit shall follow the
procedures set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance. In addition to the requirements of that Section, the applicant shall
provide a written summary of the proposed uses of fertilizers, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals in the
maintenance of the gardens. In approving an Interim Use Permit, the City Council may attach such additional conditions
as it deems necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding land uses, including conditions relating to the use of
agricultural chemicals on the property.
Section 14.5 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are allowed accessory
uses to any validly issued Interim Use Permit in any Garden Overlay District:
14.5.1 Hoophouses, coldframes and similar structures used to extend the growing season.
14.5.2 Benches, planting beds, compost bins, rain barrels and similar structures used to facilitate the growth of plants.
14.5.3 Off-street parking and loading areas.
Section 14.6 Prohibited Practices.
14.6.1 No motorized implements or machinery may be used in the cultivation and maintenance of any garden, except for
plowing of the plots between the hours of 8:00 A.M and 5:00 P.M, Monday through Friday. Motor vehicles of less than
7,000 lbs gross vehicle weight may be used to deliver and carry away equipment, supplies and product.
14.6.2 Animal husbandry and aquaculture are not permitted activities within a Garden Overlay zone.
14.6.3 No fuel, fertilizer, pesticides or similar chemicals shall be stored on the property.
Section 14.7 General Regulations.
14.7.1 The minimum land area for application of a Garden Overlay shall be ten acres.
14.7.2 All gardening activity and all structures and equipment shall be set back at least 20 feet from the property line of
any property not included within a Garden Overlay Zone, and at least 150 feet from any dwelling.
14.7.3 All gardens shall be divided into garden plots, separated from other plots and from required setback areas by
unpaved walkways of at least 6 feet in width. No single plot shall cover more than 10% of the total land area of the
property on which the plot is located.
14.7.4 Off-street parking and loading areas shall be unpaved and shall not exceed 15% of the lot area covered by garden
plots and required walkways.
14.7.5 The property owner is responsible for the collection and disposal of litter on the property.
14.7.6 The hours of operation for a permitted garden are ½ hour before sunrise until ½ hour after sunset.
14.7.7 The property owner is responsible for ensuring compliance with all other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations, including city ordinances and watershed district rules governing wetlands and stormwater control.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 64
SECTION 15 - INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 15.1Purpose
15.1.1 The Institutional Overlay District is intended to provide a means of overlaying an existing Zoning district located in
the City of Gem Lake, for facilities devoted to serving the public. This district is unique in that the primary objective of
uses within this district is for the providing of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than for the sale of goods
or services. It is intended that all uses within such an overlay area will be compatible with all adjoining uses.
15.1.2 The Institutional Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district,
defined in this Zoning Ordinance, as existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. The
Institutional Overlay District will remain in effect as long as the use and the user remains the same. If an overlay area is
no longer used, uses are changed or terminated, the parcel will revert back to its original underlying zoning classification.
Section 15.2 Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in an
Institutional Overlay District:
15.2.1 Religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, but with activities limited to worship and
related social activities.
15.2.2 Private Child Care and Education facilities as defined in the definitions section of this Ordinance, but with activities
limited to school/educational activities.
a) an enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years:
b) a total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);
c) a maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) “full-day equivalent” students with a full-day* defined as ten (10) hours.
d) The “full-day equivalent” shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during each
hour of the “full-day” of school. This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.
Section 15.3 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted
accessory uses in any Institutional Overlay District:
15.3.1 Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the uses permitted as a Permitted Use or Conditional or Interim Use (if a
Conditional or Interim Use is allowed).
15.3.2 Off-street parking and loading areas.
15.3.3 Accessory building as described in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
Section 15.4 Conditional Or Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to
be Conditional Uses in the Institutional Overlay District.
15.4.1 Living quarters (such as parsonage, rectory or care-takers house) that are supplied as an accessory use to a principal
use provided that:
A) The use shall not be used as rental property.
B) The maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.
C) There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility.
15.4.2 Governmental and public regulated buildings and essential service structures as defined in this Ordinance and
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, excluding public works facilities and uses provided that:
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 65
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setback and side yard setbacks and
side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in adjacent
residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this
Ordinance.
15.4.3 Public recreational facilities provided that:
A) The site is landscaped.
B) The use is available to the “public”.
C) The land area of the property containing such uses or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
D) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this
ordinance.
15.4.4 Publicly owned or cultural buildings, such as libraries, city offices, auditoriums, public administration offices and
historical developments, but excluding public works type facilities and uses, provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements
are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this
ordinance.
15.4.5 Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship activities, as an accessory use within a religious
building, provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements
are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this
ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.
15.4.6 Accessory buildings with a cumulative total greater than one-thousand (1,000 s.f.) square feet.
Section 15.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an Institutional
Overlay District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this ordinance:
15.5.1 The minimum land area for an Institutional Overlay shall be two and three quarter (2.75) acres of buildable area.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, buildable area means two and three quarter (2.75) acres of land, not including
wetlands and land seasonally flooded on an annual basis, land containing drainage ways or surface water or land containing
aquatic vegetation, and land with slopes in excess of twelve (12%) percent.
15.5.2 Lot width:
A) Two hundred (200) feet of frontage which must be located on a County or State maintained roadway.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 66
15.5.3 Setbacks TABLE 15.5.3
A) Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
15.5.4 Accessory Structure(s) Setbacks. TABLE 15.5.4
A) Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
Section 15.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements. The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in
the Institutional Overlay district.
15.6.1The total lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent.
15.6.2 The minimum open space requirement for any proposed use shall be twenty-five (25%) percent, including green
areas not covered by buildings, parking lots, access roads, storage areas or other areas covered by impervious surfaces.
15.6.3 No building structure shall exceed thirty-five (35') feet in height.
15.6.4 No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25') feet in height, whatever is lesser and no
accessory structure any part of which is within three-hundred (300') feet of an “R” district or a roadway bordering an “R”
district shall exceed fifteen (15') feet in height.
Section 15.7 Landscaping and Screening
15.7.1 As most Institutional Overlays will occur in residential areas or closely adjacent to Residential areas, landscaping
and screening shall be provided to isolate all light and noise from the Institutional Overlay use from entering the adjacent
Residential areas. This landscaping and screening must be done in accordance with the procedures in this Ordinance.
Section 15.8 Procedures for Requesting An Overlay
15.8.1 Application for re-zoning for an overlay.
A) An Institutional Overlay shall be considered a rezoning for a specific parcel of land. This overlay may occur in any
zoning district in the City of Gem Lake. The application for an Institutional Overlay shall be made on a form
provided by the City Clerk. The fee for an Institutional Overlay shall be the same as the rezoning fee, defined in the
Zoning Ordinance. This application for rezoning will only be deemed to be complete when the following are
received:
1) A properly completed application and payment in full is received;
2) A registered property surveyors report is provided properly identifying the parcel to be rezoned;
3) All requirements of the Plan Review described in Section 14.1 of this Ordinance have been met. These plans
must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and City Council before any
overlay shall be granted. If this is a rezoning to initially define and overlay, the rezoning activities and the Plan
Review shall occur at the same time;
4) Proof of ownership or authorization shall be provided. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal
description of the property for which the Institutional Overlay is requested consisting of and abstract of the title
or registered property abstract currently certified together with unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners
FRONT YARD
50 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
50 foot set-back
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back
FRONT YARD
100 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
50 foot set-back
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 67
acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the
property in question to proceed with the requested Institutional Overlay.
5) A list of all the property owners within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the proposed site. This certified list
shall be obtained from the County Assessor and supplied to the City Clerk.
15.8.2 Procedures
A) Pursuant to Minnesota Statues 15.99 as may from time-to-time be amended, an application for an institutional
Overlay shall be approved or denied within the time allowed for by law from it’s official and complete submission
unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable,
processing of the application through required state and federal agencies may extend the review and decision making
period by the additional time allowed by law unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional City
requirements are as follows:
1) Applications for rezoning for an Overlay District shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official
application form available for available from the City Clerk. Such applications shall also be accompanied by five
(5) large scale copies and one (1) reduced scale copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the
processed change, development, or use. The request for an institutional Overlay shall be placed on the agenda of
the first possible Planning Commission meeting after the date of submission of the completed application. The
request shall only be considered officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied with.
2) Upon receipt of such application, the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification as
applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to
the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the
request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to this hearing and written
notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three-hundred fifty
(350') feet of the property in question. The City Clerk shall have the right to provide additional property owners
notification beyond the three hundred fifty (350') foot distance if it is judged that the request will have an impact
upon additional properties. The records of the County Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the
location and ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and
addresses to which the notice is sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding.
3) Failure of a property owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this
Ordinance provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this section.
4) When reviewing the proposed institutional overlay, the following additional factors shall be included in the
review:
a) The proposed action in relation to specific policies and provisions of the Official City Comprehensive Plan
b) the proposed use’s conformity with present and future land uses in the area.
c) The proposed use’s conformity with all performance standards contained herein.
d) The proposed use’s effect on the area in which it is proposed.
e) The proposed use’s impact upon property value in the area in which it is proposed.
f) Traffic generation by the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets and roads serving the property.
g) The proposed use’s impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks, schools, streets and
utilities and the City’s service capacity.
5) The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional
information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony at eh expense of the applicant, said information to
be declared necessary to evaluate the request and establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent
sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information my
be grounds for recommendation of denial of the request.
6) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer
question concerning the proposed request.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 68
7) The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.
8) The City Council shall not act upon such an Overlay request until they have received a report and
recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the
request after thirty (30) days from the first regular meeting at which the request was considered, the City Council
may proceed with its consideration and action on the request.
9) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report
and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and
recommendations shall be entered into and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
10) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall have the
option to hold another public hearing if deemed advisable.
11) If, upon receiving such reports and recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City Council finds
that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will
differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking any final action, refer the matter
back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City council shall provide a written statement
detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular request.
15.8.3 Approvals
A) Approval of the Overlay request shall require passage by a four-fifths (4 of 5 votes) majority of the entire City
Council.
B) The Institutional Overlay zoning shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves the
overlay and after said approval is published in the official newspaper.
C) Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or structure,
in the Institutional Overlay Zone, a plan review, in accordance with section 14.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be
made. No building permits shall be issued until this plan review is complete.
15.8.4 Denials
A) If the City Council finds that a proposed use contemplated for the parcel which is the subject of an application for
rezoning to Institutional Overlay Classification is likely to have a material adverse effect on the public health, safety of
general welfare after considering possible adverse effects which may include, but not be limited to, those delineated in
Section 20.7.2D(1-7) above, then such application shall be denied.
15.8.5 Recording of actions taken
A) If a request for an Institutional Overlay receives approval by the City Council, the applicant shall record such with
the County Recorder within thirty (30) days of the approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such or
as soon as is reasonably possible, furnish the City proof of recording, no building permits for the property in question
will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.
15.8.6 Actions if the overlay is denied
A) Whenever an application for an overlay district has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar
application and proposal for an overlay affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning
Commission or the City Council for at least one (1) year from the date of its denial except as follows:
1) Applications for an overlay are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter.
2) If the City Council determines by a vote of not less than four-fifths (4 of 5 votes) majority that the
circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 69
15.8.7 Time period (duration) of this Institutional Overlay approvals
A) An Institutional Overlay shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:
1) Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request, the
rezoning for an Institutional Overlay shall become null and void twelve (12) months after the date of approval,
unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started construction of any building, structure, addition or
alteration, or use requested for this overlay. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an
application for time extension in accordance with this section.
2) If any one of the following occur the overlay shall expire:
a) The use of the property is changed to not be in accordance with the uses outlined in this section of this
Ordinance,
b) The organization to which the permit for and Overlay District has been given is not longer the occupant of
the building or facilities on the site. No leases or subletting of the building or facilities operating on an
Institutional Overlay shall be permitted.
3) If an Institutional Overlay is allowed to expire or is revoked for cause, the parcel of property shall revert back
to the underlying zoning of the parcel.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 70
SECTION 16 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 16.1 Application of this Ordinance
16.1.1 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
16.1.2 Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
16.1.3 Except as in this Ordinance specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed
or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for any purpose, nor in any manner which is not conformity with this
Ordinance.
16.1.4 When land is proposed to be annexed to the City of Gem Lake the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing upon the permanent zoning of said land. The results of the hearing, along with a recommendation, shall be
presented to the City Council. In the event of annexation proceedings becoming final before the permanent zoning is
determined, the annexed area shall be placed in the “R-1” District and such classification shall be considered as an interim
step pending permanent classification.
16.1.5 Real Property Development. In accordance with Section 12.1.3 of the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan,
when making application for development of real property in the City of Gem Lake, the developer shall submit twelve
(12) sets of all plans, variance requirements, and permit requirements in forms acceptable to the Zoning Administrator or
City officials including, but not limited to, the following:
A) a Site Plan; and
B) a Grading And Filling Plan; and
C) a Landscape Plan; and
D) a Tree Preservation Plan; and
E) a Sediment And Erosion Control Plan; and
F) a Storm Water Management Plan; and
G) a Description of the Project; and
H) a Description of Future Expansion Plans; and
I) All Variances, Conditional and Interim Use Permits, and Zoning Amendments required; and
J) All other such plans or information as may be required for specific zoning districts.
16.1.6 Development Review Considerations. In accordance with the Section 12.1.4 of the Gem Lake Comprehensive
Municipal Plan, when making recommendations and decisions considering land use, variance applications, or rezoning
applications, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review and measure the impact of such uses including, but
not limited to, the following as criteria:
A) the impact of the use on adjacent uses; and
B) the impact of the use on air and water quality; and
C) the impact of the use on traffic generation
D) the impact of the use on public safety, health and welfare; and
E) the impact of the use on the economy
Section 16.2 Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that the several provisions of
this Ordinance are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or
application thereof to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Ordinance not specifically included
in said judgment.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 71
Section 16.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
16.3.1 Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in
a manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified.
16.3.2 Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared
unsafe by the City.
16.3.3 When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a confirming use
it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.
16.3.4 Whenever a lawful non-conforming building or structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion,
earthquake, war, riot, or act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it be reconstructed within twelve (12)
months after such calamity, unless the damage to the building or structure is fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair market
value, in which case the reconstruction shall be for a use in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
16.3.5 Whenever a lawful, non-conforming use of a building or structure or land is discontinued for a period of six (6)
months, any future use of said building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
16.3.6 Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is
permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
use.
16.3.7 A lawful non-conforming use may be changed only to a use of the same or more restricted classification.
16.3.8 Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing lawful non-conforming residential units when they
will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units.
16.3.9 Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts
A) Whenever, in any Zoning District, a use is neither specifically allowed or denied, the use shall be considered as
prohibited. In such cases, the City Council or the Planning Commission may, by their own initiative, or upon request
of the property owner, conduct a study to determine if:
1) the use can be deemed consistent with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan;
2) the use is acceptable to and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners;
3) the use is in the public interest and is not determined to be offensive;
4) which defined Zoning District would be most appropriate for the use;
5) what conditions and standards relating to development of the use should be imposed. Upon completion and
consideration of the study, the City Council or Planning Commission or the real property owner may initiate a
request for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration in
accordance with the definitions and provisions contained in this Ordinance.
Section 16.4 Lot Provisions
16.4.1 Land covered by Gem Lake, its contiguous bog area including islands (measured to the mean high water mark) and
other DNR protected wetlands shown on applicable section maps covering the area shall not be included in any area
calculations required by this Ordinance.
16.4.2 In all residential districts, a lot must include contiguous buildable area as shown in tables located elsewhere within
the ordinance unless the lot is part of a cluster or planned unit development that has been reviewed and recommended for
approval by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 72
Section 16.5 Accessory Buildings
16.5.1 No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
16.5.2 No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory
building exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.
16.5.3 An accessory building shall be considered to be an integral part of the principal building unless it is six (6) feet or
more from the principal building.
16.5.4 No detached accessory building shall be less than sixty (60') feet from the public right-of-way except on a corner
lot, unless it conforms to the side yard requirements of the principal building. Those accessory buildings located sixty
(60') feet or more behind the right-of-way line shall have a side yard of two (2') feet or more and a rear yard of three (3')
feet or more.
16.5.5 No combinations of accessory buildings shall be allowed to exceed one-thousand (1,000) square feet in size, except
by Conditional or Interim Use Permit from the City Council.
Section 16.6 Required Yards, Open Space and Heights
16.6.1 No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less
than the minimum required by this Ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the
minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
16.6.2 No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy minimum lot
area requirements for any other buildings.
16.6.3 The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on set-back and height requirements:
A) In any yards: posts, off-street open parking spaces, open terraces, awnings, open canopies, steps, chimneys, and
flag poles.
B) In front yards: service stations pump islands and fences. Fences must be at least eighty (80%) percent open.
C) In side and rear yards: fences or walls six (6') feet in height or less. However, in a corner lot no obstruction higher
than three (3') feet above curb level shall be located within twenty (20') feet of the lot corner formed by any two
streets, or within fifteen (15') feet of any street right-of-way. See Residential Zoning Districts for additional regulations
for fences.
D) In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breeze ways,
porches, detached outdoor living rooms, barbecue facilities and portable seasonal living structures.
E) Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries, cupolas
and domes; monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public utility facilities; Accessory and Secondary Use
antennas and parapet walls extending not more than four (4') feet above the limiting height of the building.
Section 16.7 Traffic Visibility
16.7.1 No fences, structures or planting exceeding thirty (30") inches in height above the center line grade of the street
shall be permitted within the required front yard set-back on a corner lot.
Section 16.8 Farming Operations
16.8.1 All farms in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance and all farms which are brought into the City by
annexation shall be a permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations
contained herein and other City Ordinances as in effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 73
cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character. See Residential Zoning Districts
for additional regulations of agricultural buildings.
Section 16.9 Essential Services
16.9.1 Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the City of Gem
Lake.
Section 16.10 (Deleted)
Section 16.11 (Deleted)
Section 16.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units
16.12.1 It shall be the stated policy of the City of Gem Lake to maintain a harmonious and high standard of residential
development and to protect residential areas from deleterious effects through insuring that both new and relocated
dwellings form other areas, both within the City of Gem Lake and from outside, shall meet specified requirements. Such
relocation of dwellings as stated above must conform to all regulations of the Building Code and shall be permitted in the
zoning district where all necessary specifications as to lot sizes, setbacks, type of use, height regulations and all other
conditions as laid down in this Ordinance are met.
16.12.2 In addition, such relocations shall require a Conditional Use Permit from the City Council wherein the following
procedures shall be followed and provisions shall be met:
A) Application shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk.
B) A fee for the Relocation of Dwelling Units shall be required in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council at it’s first meeting in January of each year. Further, the City may impose additional fees including, but not
limited to, engineering costs, attorneys fees, expert opinions and publishing costs payment of which may also be
required of the applicant as part of the process. The building mover shall meet all requirements for licensing and
insurance as required by Minnesota Statues 221.81 and as from time to time amended.
C) The application shall be referred to the City Council, who shall set a time and place for a public hearing giving at
least ten (10) days’ public notice of such hearing.
D) At least ten (10) days before such hearing, the Council shall mail a notice of said hearing to property owners within
three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the relocation premises. Failure of the Council to mail the notice, or failure of the
title holder to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
E) The Planning Commission shall make a report to the City Council on the matter before or at the public hearing.
F) The City Council shall make a finding and declare whether or not the structure to be moved is architecturally
compatible.
Section 16.13 Fences
16.13.1 General Provisions
A) No fences shall be placed on or extend into a public or private right-of-way or utility easement.
B) The side of the fence considered the “face’ (i.e. the side having no structural supports) shall face abutting property
or the public or private right-of-way.
C) Both sides of the fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance by it’s owner and
shall not be allowed to become or remain in a condition of disrepair or danger or constitute a nuisance, public or
private.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 74
D) No physical damage of any kind shall occur to abutting property during fence construction.
E) All fences shall be constructed inside the property lines of a lot. If corner property stakes can not be readily
identified, a certificate of survey and setting of corner property stakes is necessary before fence construction starts.
F) All man-made fences shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: decorative
masonry, wrought iron or wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use, or wood of proven durability
such as cedar or redwood is used.
G) Chain link fences shall only be used for dog confinement areas (six (6'0") foot maximum height), around
swimming pools or spas four (4'0") foot maximum height) or for tennis courts (twelve (12'0") foot maximum height)
in rear and side yards only. Chain link fences which need additional height or for other uses or placement shall require
a Conditional Use Permit.
H) Fences, utilized for the protection of gardens, crops and shrubs from deer and other wildlife which are setback a
minimum of twenty-five (25'0") feet from any property line, are at least eighty (80%) percent open and not greater
than six (6'0") feet in height and are limited to specified areas requiring protection, shall be exempt from any City
review or processing requirements.
I) It is recommended that all fences be screened with trees or shrubs to buffer views, neighboring property or public
right-of-way, or to generally ensure aesthetic quality and compatibility with the natural character of the community.
16.13.2 Specific Fence Standards. Fences may be allowed in the City of Gem Lake subject to the following standards:
A) Split rail fences not exceeding forty-eight (48") inches in height are permitted anywhere within the property lines of
a lot located within the City. Location of the fence in relation to the property line as described in 16.13.1 E) must be
followed.
B) Except as may be provided herein, fences up to six (6'0") feet in height and no more than eighty (80%) percent
solid matter shall be permitted along the boundaries of the side and rear yard of a lot on a permanent basis. Location
of the fence in relation to the property line as described in 16.13.1 E) must be followed.
C) Fences not exceeding six (6'0") feet in height, in areas other than for residential areas of the City, may be permitted
in front of the front building lines as established by the primary structure on the lot, where required for screening of
adjacent property.
D) On corner lots, no fence greater than thirty (30") inches high shall be located in the sight visibility triangle on the
corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within fifteen
(15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.
E) All swimming pools must be completely enclosed with a safety fence at least four (4'0") feet in height which shall
completely enclose the pool. This fence shall be as described in Section 16.14.3. A temporary fence as described in
16.14.3. C) shall be installed and shall be in-place before the pool is filled.
F) All outdoor spas shall have either a fence or a latchable cover, as described in 16.14.3 D)
G) Freestanding stone, brick, stucco, concrete, wood or other walls, not required as retaining structures, are
considered fences under this section of this Ordinance.
H) There are no height restrictions on natural hedges or plantings utilized as fences in any residential zoning district
except no plantings greater then thirty (30") inches high shall be located in the sight visibility triangle on the corner of
the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within fifteen (15'0") feet of
any street right-of-way.
I) Temporary snow fences can be erected for temporary site protection or for diverting snow. Snow fences shall not
be used as permanent fencing. Snow fences shall not be located in the sight visibility triangle on the corner of the lot
defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within fifteen (15'0") feet of any
street right-of-way.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 75
16.13.3 Fence standards allowed by Conditional Use Permits. The following fences may be approved by Conditional Use
Permit only, in accordance with the standards as set forth by the City Council:
A) Fences allowed by Conditional Use Permit are as follows:
1) All chain link fences with a height greater than described in Section 16.13.1.G).
2) Fences, such as sales lot security fences, which include a security gate at a point where access is provided to the
property and/or principal building.
3) Fences greater than six (6') feet in height around a garden, crops, and shrubs utilized for the protection of such
from deer and other wildlife.
4) Barbed wire and electrically charged fences. (All such fences must be marked with caution signs on all
exposures).
16.13.4 Non-conforming fences. It is the intent of this section to allow the continuation of such non-conforming fences
as may already exist until they are discontinued as provided herein. However, it is not the intent of this Section to
encourage the survival of non-conforming fences and such fences are declared to be incompatible with permitted
conforming fences and such fences are declared to be incompatible with permitted fences within the City. Such fences
shall be regulated by the following provisions:
A) An existing fence not permitted by this Ordinance, except when required to do so bylaw or ordinance, shall not be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such fence is changed to one permitted. Maintenance
of a non-conforming fence will be allowed, however, when this includes necessary repairs and incidental alterations
which do not expand or intensify the non-conforming use.
Section 16.14 Outdoor Swimming Pools and Spas
16.14.1 Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupant of the subject
property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall conform as follows:
A) Permit Required - No outdoor swimming pool shall be constructed or established and no such pool construction
shall be commenced in the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining building and plumbing and, as necessary
mechanical permits approved by the City Building Official.
B) Applications - Applications for a swimming pool related permits may be secured from and shall be submitted to
the City Clerk along with a fee determined by the fee schedule for construction permits in effect at the time of
application and based upon the estimated value of the construction. Applications for swimming pool permits shall
include, without limitation the following information:
1) Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool.
2) A site plan showing the location of all structures on the lot including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead
or underground wiring, utility easements, sewage systems and other significant improvements or natural features;
3) The proposed locations of pumps, filters, electrical power source (if applicable), flushing and drainage outlets
and other operational features;
a) A plan showing where pool water will be discharged and the path such discharged water will follow. In no
case shall any water discharged from a swimming pool or spa be allowed to flow directly into any lakes, ponds
or wetlands.
4) Location and specifications of protective fencing.
16.14.2 Construction setback requirements for pools. Private outdoor swimming pools shall be constructed as to avoid
hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall meet the
following minimum requirements;
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 76
A) Underground or overhead utilities shall be located in conformance with the National Electric Code;
B) No pool shall be located within any private easement, public or private utility easement, ingress or egress easement,
drainage way, marsh, or other location in which it will represent a threat to the natural environment;
C) In areas zoned or used for single family residential purposes, pools are prohibited in the front yard and shall not be
located within thirty (30'0") feet of any lot lines, nor within ten (10'0") feet of any principal structure or accessory
buildings except accessory building without frost footings. No mechanical equipment shall be located closer than
thirty (30'0") feet to any lot line;
D) No portion of any swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be located less than ten (10'0") feet to any
portion of a sewage disposal line or sewage treatment system, nor shall any water supply line for a swimming pool be
less than fifteen(15'0") feet from any portion of the sewage treatment system.
16.14.3 Safety Fence Required. A safety fence of at least four (4'0") feet in height shall completely enclose the outdoor
pool. All openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or
doors. All gates and doors shall have a latch which is no less than four (4'0") feet above the ground level and which shall
be so constructed and so placed as to be inaccessible to small children. All gates and doors shall be latched when the pool
is not in use or is unattended by an adult with demonstrated swimming ability. Any opening between the bottom of the
fence and the ground level shall not exceed three (3") inches.
A) Safety fences shall be constructed of materials with minimum spaces between the materials and shall be
constructed so as to inhibit the climbing thereof by any person. If a safety fence is located within an area subject to
and covered by a homeowners association, and if such homeowners association has an architectural review
committee, then the architectural review committee shall approve the location and style of the fence.
B) Above ground pools of four (4') feet or more in wall height shall be exempt from complete closure by a type of
fence resistant to being climbed, however, above ground pools shall be equipped with a fence and gate system at all
point of entry to the pool. Said fence and gate system shall effectively control access to the pool and shall be
constructed pursuant to the specifications herein contain for under ground pools.
C) Temporary fence. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced any water to a depth of more than eighteen
(18") inches into the shallowest portion of any swimming pool newly constructed or being constructed until such time
as the Building Official authorizes the filling of such pool with water. Such authorization shall be withheld until, as a
minimum, the permittee has caused such pool to be completely enclosed by a swimming pool construction fence. Said
construction fence shall:
1) Be of snow fence like of similar design and be securely anchored in place.
2) Be constructed with its base flush to the ground.
3) Be at least four (4'0") feet in height and have supportive posts placed no more than eight (8'0") feet apart.
4) Remain in place until a permanent fence completely enclosing the swimming pool is installed.
D) All outdoor Spas shall either have a fence as described in this section for outdoor swimming pools or a latchable
cover. The cover should be constructed of a material impenetrable by toddlers and subject to inspection by the City
building Official.
16.14.4 Miscellaneous requirements
A) All back-flushing water or pool drainage water shall be directed to be on the property of the owner or on approved
drainage ways. Drainage onto public or private streets or other public or private drainage ways shall require a permit
from the City Building Official.
B) Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to spill or shine upon adjacent properties.
C) All electrical installations shall comply with the State Electrical Code.
D) Precautions during construction:
1) Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property..
2) Assure that proper care shall be taken in stockpiling excavating materials to avoid erosion, dust or other
infringements upon adjacent property..
3) All access for construction shall be over the owner’s land and due care shall be taken to avoid damage to streets
and adjacent private or public property.
16.14.5 Nuisance. The conduct of persons and the operation of pools shall be the responsibility of the owner and any
tenants thereof and such conduct of persons and operation of the pool shall be done in a manner so as to avoid any
nuisance or breach of the peace, and it shall be unlawful to allow loud noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property
upon which the pool is located to adjacent property.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 77
SECTION 17 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 17.1 Enforcing Officer
17.1.1 The Mayor shall appoint a Zoning Administrator, subject to the approval of the City Council, who shall have the
duty and responsibility of enforcing and administering this Ordinance.
Section 17.2 Building Permit
17.2.1 No structure shall hereafter be erected, or structurally altered until a building permit shall have been issued
indicating that the existing or proposed structure and the use of land, comply with this Ordinance and all Building Codes.
All applications for building permits pertaining to the erection, or major alteration which will affect the outside
dimensions of a structure shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a site plan to scale showing the actual dimensions of
the lot, lots or parcel to be built upon, the dimensions of the ground plan and the extensions beyond the outside wall of
the proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their location on the site in relation to the outside boundary
and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One copy of the site
plan is to be approved and is to be made available on the site.
Section 17.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator
17.3.1 The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority
he shall:
A) Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;
B) Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
and conditional and interim uses, variances, appeals and applications, thereto;
C) Receive, file and forward all applications for zoning amendments, variances, conditional or interim uses or other
matters to the Planning Commission and City Council;
D) Institute in the name of the City of Gem Lake any appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as provided
by law;
E) Approve all building permits, submitted by the Building Inspector, after determining that the permit is in
compliance with this Ordinance. This approval must be made before the permit is issued.
F) Act as Chairman of the Gem Lake Plan Review Commission.
17.3.2 The City Council may, on prior recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, empower the Ramsey County
Sheriff in specific instances to perform any of the acts which the Zoning Administrator is directed or authorized to
perform by this Section.
Section 17.4 Variances
17.4.1 Purpose and Intent. The City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeal and Adjustment, may grant Variances from
the strict applications of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and impose conditions and safeguards in the Variances
so granted. These Variances shall be considered in cases where by reason of narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a lot or
where by reason of exceptional topographic or water conditions or where other extraordinary and exceptional conditions
of such lot exist, the strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance would result in practical difficulties upon the
owner of such lot in complying with the regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located. “Practical
difficulties,” as used in connection with the grant of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the
property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance; the plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties
include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. A variance may not be
granted to allow any use that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the property is located.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 78
17.4.2 Application. An application for any Variance from the Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the
City. If the Variance is to be considered in association with any other Building Permits, Conditional or Interim Use
Permits, or Subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Variance application so as to
represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an
aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state full all facts relied upon by the
applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the Variance as required
and communicated by the Zoning Administrator.
A) An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials
requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application
within the period prescribed unless said required period is extended or waived.
B) When reviewing variance applications, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by the
Planning Commission and City Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact on the Entire Area; and
7) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
17.4.3 Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning
Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular
meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the
public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the
Variance or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application.
17.4.4 Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning
Commission or the City Council to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published
in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date,
time, place and a summary of the application.
17.4.5 Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact and recommendation to the
City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry
out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
17.4.6 Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public
comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to
be not more than the number of days allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date
is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within
thirty (30) days of its receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning
Commission. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, and convey its decision to
approve or deny the application. The Council may impose conditions on the grant of a variance, provided that any
condition imposed is directly related to a likely impact of the variance, and in rough proportionality to the scope of said
impact. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
17.4.7 Issuance of Variance. Following a decision by the City Council to approve or deny the application, the Zoning
Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered
delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail.
17.4.8 Lapse of Variance. Any Variance issued shall lapse if not acted upon within one (1) year of the date of issuance.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 79
Section 17.5 Conditional and Interim Use Permits
17.5.1 Purpose and Intent. The City Council may, by resolution, grant Conditional or Interim Use Permits for the uses
and purposes described elsewhere in this Ordinance as Conditional or Interim Uses and may, in the granting of such
Conditional or Interim Use Permits, impose conditions and safeguards which promote the guidelines set forth in the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
17.5.2 Application. An application for a Conditional or Interim Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City.
If the Conditional or Interim Use Permit is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, or
subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Conditional or Interim Use Permit
application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to
the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied
upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the
application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on
the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning
Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required
period is extended or waived.
A) When reviewing Conditional and Interim Use Permit applications, except those for residential building height,
impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact On The Entire Area; and
7) Consistency With The Comprehensive Municipal Plan; and
9) Anticipated Duration of the Conditional or Interim Use.
B) Residential Building Heights. When reviewing Conditional Use Permit applications which deal exclusively with
residential building heights, the matter shall be forwarded to the Gem Lake Plan Review Commission who shall, in a
timely manner, review all such applications in accordance with criteria established and, from time to time, modified,
by the Plan Review Commission. Upon completion of the review, the Plan Review Commission shall forward the
application along with it’s written recommendation to the City Council for consideration and approval or denial at it’s
next regular meeting. No review by the Planning Commission as required in Section 17.5.3 or Public Hearing as
required in Section 17.5.4 shall be required for this Conditional Use unless specifically ordered by the City Council. In
all such matters, the City Council shall be considered the Board of Appeals.
17.5.3 Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning
Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular
meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the
public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the
application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application.
The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Conditional or Interim Use
on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District;
conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable
law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the Conditional or Interim Use.
17.5.4 Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning
Commission or the City Council to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published
in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date,
time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within
three hundred fifty (350'0") feet of the Conditional or Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from
Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 80
17.5.5 Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section
12.1.5 C. of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City
Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
17.5.6 Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public
comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to
be not more than the number of days allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date
is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within
thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning
Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed Conditional or Interim
Use: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form
of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such
conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a
majority vote of the City Council.
17.5.7 Issuance of Conditional or Interim Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in
writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail.
In the case of approvals, a Conditional or Interim Use Permit shall apply only to the use stated on the permit and the
application.
17.5.8 Lapse of Conditional or Interim Use Permit. If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and
implemented within one (1) year of the date of issuance, such issued Conditional or Interim Use Permit shall lapse.
17.5.9 General Standards. All Conditional and Interim Uses shall comply with the following general standards.
A) Existing Uses. Shall be in accordance with zoning and building standards in effect at the time of initial
construction and development and shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.
B) New Uses. Shall conform as follows: 1) compliance with all zoning and other regulations as may otherwise be
applicable; 2) the date or the event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty; 3) the existence of the
Conditional or Interim Use will not impose additional costs on the public if it becomes necessary for the public to
take the property in the future; 4) the user agrees to any conditions of approval associated with the approval of the
Conditional or Interim Use Permit by the City Council.
C) Existing and New Uses. Shall conform as follows:
1) shall maintain harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and with the architectural character and design
standards of existing uses and development;
2) shall meet or exceed all Performance Standards contain elsewhere in this Ordinance;
3) shall not generate such additional traffic associated with the use that would overburden or exceed the
capabilities of streets and other public services and facilities including, but not limited to, parks, schools, and
utilities serving the area.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 81
Section 17.6 Amendments
17.6.1 General. In accordance with provisions of Minnesota Statues, the City Council may, from time to time, adopt
amendments to this Ordinance providing such amendments are consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan.
17.6.2 Initiation. The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend
the text, tables or district boundaries and maps of this Ordinance. Any person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) who are the
fee title owners of real property in the City or who have been designated in writing to represent the interest of the fee title
owners of real property in the City may initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district boundaries and maps so as to
affect the said real property or such real property adjacent thereto.
17.6.3 Application. An application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If
the application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance is to be considered in association with any other Building Permits,
Variances, Conditional or Interim Use Permits, or Subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously
with the application so as to represent the full intent of the application. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee
payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all
facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of
the application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete
on the date of the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning
Administrator. As required by law, The City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required
period is extended or waived.
17.6.4 Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning
Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular
meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the
public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the
application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application.
The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed application on: the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the affected neighborhood(s) and Zoning District(s);
conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable
law, regulations, and provisions which my affect the amendment.
A) Only applications for zoning amendment which meet one of the following conditions should be considered:
1) A mistake has been made in the original zoning which was inconsistent with the Comprehensive Municipal
Plan adopted by the City which should now be corrected; or
2) Substantial changes have occurred within the City since the adoption of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan
which changes should result in a amendment of both the zoning and the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; or
3) There shall exist a clear public need for a benefit to be derived from the proposed zoning which shall be
greater than any benefit or convenience of the property owners.
4) Beyond a public need being evident, the application shall show that the public interest would be best served by
rezoning the property in question and that the property in question is the best qualified to serve said public need;
or
5) In the case of “down zoning” which would diminish the intensity of the current use to a less intensive use, the
proposed zoning shall allow the property owners a reasonable use of their property under the terms of this
ordinance as well as serve the public interest.
B) When reviewing a zoning amendment applications, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured
by the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 82
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact On Then Entire Area; and
7) Consistency With the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
17.6.5 Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning
Commission to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s
official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place
and a summary of the application. If the amendment might affect the zoning or use of specific property, a similar notice
shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the affected property based
upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within the
same time frame.
17.6.6 Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section
12.1.5 A). of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City
Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
17.6.7 Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public
comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to
be within the time prescribed by law unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the
City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without
further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine
that the proposed amendment: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The
City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding a fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the
application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
17.6.8 Adoption of The Amendment and Incorporation of Amendments Into The Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator
shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon
deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals and unless otherwise specified by the City Council, the
Amendment shall be considered in effect on a date specified by the City Council, but not later than thirty (30) days
subsequent to the City Council’s decision.
Section 17.7 Appeals
17.7.1 All appeals from any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall be
brought before the Planning Commission who shall act in the capacity of Board of Appeals in all matters related to this
Ordinance.
17.7.2 All appeals shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by any substantiating information
and list of experts who shall may testify on behalf of the appellant. Upon receipt, materials shall be forwarded to the
Chairman of the Planning Commission who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next meeting or a special meeting,
provided a notice of the special meeting is appropriately published in the City’s legal publication. Notice of all hearings
for appeals shall be mailed to all appellants.
17.7.3 Upon review of the appeal and supplemental documentation and testimony related thereto, the Planning
Commission shall decide the matter subject to judicial review or appeal to the City Council.
17.7.4 In the event the appeal is granted, it shall be published in the City’s legal publication and shall become effective the
date of publication.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 83
Section 17.8 Fees
17.8.1 Application Fees. The fees to be paid to the City for an application for amendment of this Ordinance, a Variance
from this Ordinance, a Conditional or Interim Use Permit, or any construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other
related permit shall be made payable to the City in an amount established, and from time to time, amended by resolution
of the City Council.
17.8.2 Supplemental Costs. In addition to application fees, the City shall require payment of supplemental costs related to
an action or application including, but not limited to: attorney’s fees, fees of outside experts; staff time; direct expenses
exceptional to the effort and as identified by City staff. The applicant shall deposit funds with the City, to be held in
escrow, for payment of these supplemental costs, as determined by the City Council in ordinances adopted from time to
time setting forth fees and charges for City services. Any application fees shall be applied to the costs incurred by the
City. All expenses and costs incurred by the City in connection with an application under this Ordinance shall be borne
by the applicant, and paid prior to final action on the application. Any amounts remaining from a deposit posted by an
applicant shall be refunded to the applicant within thirty (30) days after final action on the application.
17.8.3 Fees shall be payable at the time applications are first filed with the City and are not refundable unless the
application is withdrawn prior to referral of the matter for consideration. There shall be no fee in the case of an
application filed in the public interest by members of the Planning Commission or City Council.
Section 17.9 Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
subject to the maximum penalties provided for by law and costs for every offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 84
SECTION 18 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 18.1 General. The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage high quality
development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are also
designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause urban and rural blight. The Zoning Administrator, assisted by
the Building Inspector, shall be responsible for enforcing these standards and may require the submission of information
showing compliance or non-compliance with the standards.
Section 18.2 Requirements for Consideration
18.2.1 Construction Plan Review
A) Residential Construction
1) Prior to the start of construction or remodeling that will create a new building or structure or will change the
outside dimensions of any building or structure located in a residential zoning district, six (6) copies of the
following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.
a) Existing Improvements. Copies of a site plan drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet
(1" = 50') for the lot upon which the structures will be built or remodeled. Each site plan shall identify the
location(s) and size(s) of all existing structures, proposed structures or additions, driveways, sidewalks,
parking spaces and Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS). The dimensions and area calculations of the
lot and all building set-back lines shall also be shown.
b) Wetlands And Water Bodies. All wetlands and other water bodies on the property shall be identified and
set-back lines to all structures shall be indicated on the site plan.
c) Trees And Landscape. If the proposed construction or remodeling will result in any loss of existing trees or
vegetation, a tree inventory and, if necessary, reforestation plan as described in Ordinance No. 66 shall be
provided. A landscape plan shall also be provided indicating existing and proposed vegetation improvements.
d) Plans. Preliminary architectural plans including floor plans and exterior elevations for the proposed
construction or remodeling.
e) Sediment And Erosion Control. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed on
the property to provide sediment and erosion control in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance.
f) Additional Data. Any additional data requested by the Zoning Administrator or Plan Review Commission
due to conditions peculiar to the property.
B) Commercial Construction
1) Prior to the start of construction or remodeling that will create a new building or structure or will change the
outside dimensions of any building or structure located in a commercial or business zoning district, six (6) copies
of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.
a) Existing Improvements. Copies of a Registered Surveyors Report drawn to a scale not smaller than one
inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') for the lot upon which the structures will be built or remodeled. Each site plan
shall identify the location(s) and size(s) of all existing structures, proposed structures or additions, driveways,
sidewalks, parking spaces and Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS). The dimensions and area
calculations of the lot and all building set-back lines shall also be shown.
b) Wetlands And Water Bodies. All wetlands and other water bodies on the property shall be identified and
set-back lines to all structures shall be indicated on the site plan.
c) Topography. A topographical survey in two (2') foot increments and at a minimum scale of one inch equals
twenty feet (1" = 20') for the proposed construction site which includes existing topographical and natural
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 85
features, proposed changes to the topographical and natural features, existing structures and improvements
and proposed structures and improvements.
d) Trees And Landscape. If the proposed construction or remodeling will result in any loss of existing trees
or vegetation, a tree inventory and, if necessary, reforestation plan as described in Ordinance No. 66 shall be
provided. A landscape plan shall also be provided indicating existing and proposed vegetation improvements.
e) Fences And Screening. Details and specifications for all fencing, walls and screening devices to be installed
as part of the project.
f) Storm Water Drainage Plans. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed on the
property to provide storm water drainage sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulation
within the proposed development site, said BMP’s to be in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance.
These plans to be reviewed by the City Engineer and the appropriate Watershed Management Organization
(WMO).
g) Sediment And Erosion Control. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed on
the property to provide sediment and erosion control in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance. These
plans to be reviewed by the City Engineer and the appropriate Watershed Management Organization (WMO).
h) Traffic And Parking. Detailed plans showing all entrances and exits accompanied by reviews by Ramsey
County if development will access onto a county road or Mn/DOT if development will access onto a state
highway. Plans shall also include all interior driveway and road details, parking requirements and emergency
access routes.
I) Lighting. Lighting plans shall include all proposed installation of exterior, parking lot, display and storage
lot lighting.
j) Signage. Proposed placement, description and quantity of all sign types and associated fixtures.
k) Structure Plans. Preliminary architectural plans including floor plans, exterior elevations and description of
exterior facades.
l) Deviations. Plans should be accompanied by a list of all Variances, Conditional or Interim Use Permits,
and Zoning Amendments required for the development.
18.2.2 Cost of data review
A) All costs in excess of those already included in established permit fees incurred by the City in the review of the data
supplied for commercial construction, such as City Engineer plan review costs, shall be paid by the person presenting
the plans, prior to any approval. The final approval of these plans will not be voted on by the City Council until all
costs have been paid.
B) Whenever the proposal may involve a potential for significant environmental impact, or if an Environmental
Impact Statement or an Environmental Assessment Worksheet may be needed by state law or applicable regulation,
the City will require the applicant to prepare or pay for the professional assistance needed in the preparation of these
statements or worksheets.
18.2.3 Procedures for review
A) Residential Construction
1) No building permits will be issued for the proposed construction or remodeling until the data required has
been reviewed and approved by the Plan Review Commission which shall be charged with completion of the
review in a timely manner.
a) If approved by the Plan Review Commission, one (1) copy of the data shall be filed with the application for
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 86
a building permit, one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans retained by the City for it’s records
and one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans and made available for inspection at the
construction site.
b) In the event the applicant and Plan Review Commission disagree on any portion of the proposed plans
which would preclude issuance of a building permit, the matter may be submitted to the City Council. In this
case, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals and may order approval of the building permit
application as presented, may order approval of the building permit application with such amendments as it
may deem appropriate or may order denial of the building permit application.
B) Commercial Construction
1) No building permits will be issued for the proposed construction or remodeling until the data in required has
been reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and submitted for review by the Planning Commission at it’s next
regular meeting. The Planning Commission with assistance as requested by the Plan Review Commission, City
Engineer, Building Official or other such professionals as it may deem necessary shall review the submittal and
forward recommendations to the City Council for approval of the building permit application, approval of the
building permit application with such amendments as may be appropriate or denial of the building permit
application.
a) If approved by the City Council, one (1) copy of the data shall be filed with the application for a building
permit, one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans retained by the City for it’s records and one
(1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans and made available for inspection at the construction site.
b) In the event the applicant and City Council disagree on any portion of the proposed plans, the matter may
be resubmitted with amendments to the Planning Commission for reconsideration and the Planning
Commission shall review the resubmittal and forward recommendations to the City Council for approval of
the building permit application with amendments as resubmitted or denial of the building permit application.
Section 18.3 Exterior Storage
18.3.1 Residential Districts
A) In Residential Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as not to
be visible) from adjoining properties or a street, except for the following; laundry drying and recreational equipment,
construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment
and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of passenger automobiles and
pick-up trucks, except inoperative automobiles and trucks may be parked once for a period of time not to exceed
fourteen (14) days.
B) The use of commercial storage equipment and/or semi-trailer type containers or other similar portable storage
units is not allowed in any residential district except when used in conjunction with an Interim Use Permit, issuance of
which is not subject to a public hearing, issued for a period of not more than one-hundred twenty (120) days in
conjunction with a properly issued Building Permit for the property. Whenever possible, such containers should be
restricted to a location in the side or rear yard.
18.3.2 Business Districts
A) In business districts all materials, equipment and vehicles shall be stored in a building or fully screened (so as not to
be visible) from adjoining properties or a street except for:
1) Temporary storage of construction and landscaping materials currently being used on the premises.
2) Open Storage Lots where screening but not a building shall be required.
3) Open Sales or Rental Lots where merchandise for retail sales or rental may be displayed in areas designated by
the required Site Plan or a Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 87
B) The use of commercial storage equipment and/or semi-trailer type containers or other similar portable storage
units is not allowed in any business district unless an Interim Use Permit for a period not to exceed one-hundred
eighty (180) days is first secured in accordance with Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. Whenever possible, such
containers should be restricted to a location in the side or rear yard.
Section 18.4 Refuse
18.4.1 In All Districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly
contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. Farms may be excluded from this requirement providing the
waste material is that commonly associated and incidental to normal farm operations. The owner of vacant land shall be
responsible for keeping such land free of refuse, and weeds.
A) In all non-residential districts, all commercial refuse containers shall be enclosed in a building or properly fenced or
screened to prevent any refuse from spilling beyond the fenced or screened area and to prevent access by children or
other unauthorized persons. Fences or screens shall also be subject to the provisions for same found elsewhere in this
ordinance.
18.4.2 In All Districts, no person shall store, park or permit the parking or storage of any junked vehicle, machinery or
equipment external to any structure, on any property within the city.
Section 18.5 Screening
18.5.1 Screening shall be required in all zones where:
A) any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces and is within thirty (30') feet of an adjoining
residential use or zone; and
B) where the driveway to a parking area of more than six (6) parking spaces is within fifteen (15') feet of an adjoining
residential use or zone.
18.5.2 Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property zoned or developed for
residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening
shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a developed residential zone, but not on that
side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the Building Inspector).
18.5.3 In all districts all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
A) retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure;
B) materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises;
C) merchandise located on service station pump islands.
18.5.4 The screening in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than five (5') feet high, but shall not
extend within fifteen (15') feet of any street, right-of-way or driveway. The screening shall be placed along property lines
or in case of screening along a street, fifteen (15') feet from the street right-of-way with landscaping between the screening
and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered “solid” if it blocks direct vision. Planting of a type approved by
the Council may also be used as a screening.
A) Screening shall also be subject to additional provisions of other sections of this Ordinance.
Section 18.6 Landscaping
18.6.1 In All Districts, all exposed ground areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use including but not
limited to street boulevards not devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios and the like shall be landscaped.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 88
18.6.2 Landscaped yards shall be provided along all streets, both public and private. Landscaped yards shall not be used
for parking of vehicles or equipment or for storage or display of household items, materials, supplies or merchandise
advertised for sale. Landscaped yards shall be at least twenty (20') feet in depth along all streets measured from the rightof-
way. Except for driveways, the yard shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot and, in the case of a corner lot,
along both streets.
18.6.3 All property owners and their (sub-) contractors shall employ and maintain sediment and erosion control in
accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance until landscaping is complete.
18.6.4 All landscaping shall be completed within one (1) growing season after completion of any development, grading
and filling, construction, or other activity which shall result in exposed ground on the property.
Section 18.7 Maintenance
18.7.1 In All Districts, all structures, landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not be unsightly or present harmful
health and safety or nuisance conditions to the adjoining areas.
Section 18.8 Lighting and Glare
18.8.1 In All Districts, any lighting shall be arranged as to deflect light from all adjoining property, and from the public
streets and highways. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from lighting or from high temperature processes such as
welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
18.8.2 Glare or Heat - Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed
with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use
is located.
18.8.3 Outdoor Lighting - All outdoor lighting shall be so designed and installed so that light will not be directed onto
adjoining property or public streets and highways. Lighting units shall be properly shielded to give no upward component
of light to create a sky-glow.
A) Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be mounted at the lowest possible level above ground, but in no case shall any pole
or structure for mounting such fixtures exceed the maximum principal structure height restrictions.
B) Prior to installing or remodeling any outdoor lighting, a site plan showing type, location and configuration details
and proposed area of direct illumination must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his approval.
C) After completion of any outdoor lighting system the property owner may be required to submit an affidavit, by a
registered lighting engineer, that the completed project does not exceed the requirements of this section.
18.8.4 Lighting used to illuminate sales lots - Lighting used to illuminate sales lots for new or used cars shall be arranged
and designed so as to comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the lot, measured 36 inches above grade,
shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) foot candles.
B) Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured thirty (30') feet out from the property line with the meter
directed toward the lot, shall be five (5) foot candles.
C) The maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point thirty (30') feet out from the
property line, shall be no greater than six-hundred (600) foot Lamberts.
18.8.5 Lighting for outdoor storage areas - Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the area, measured thirty-six (36") inches above grade, shall
not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 89
B) Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured five (5') feet out from the property line with the meter
directed toward the area in question, shall be two (2) foot-candles.
C) Maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point five (5') feet out from the property line,
shall be no greater than three-hundred (300) foot Lamberts.
18.8.6 Lighting for off street parking - Lighting for off street parking lots shall comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the parking area, measured thirty-six
(36") inches above grade, shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles.
B) Limitations on the hours of lighting operation may be imposed by the City Council.
Section 18.9 Vibration
18.9.1 Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge, shall be prohibited if
such vibrations are perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. This standard shall not apply to
vibrations created during the process of construction.
Section 18.10 Off-Street Loading
18.10.1 In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading space on
the basis of adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used incidental to the operation of the use.
A) No loading berth of vehicles over two-tons capacity shall be closer than one-hundred (100') feet to any residence
district unless completely enclosed by building walls not less than eight (8') feet in height.
B) Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audile in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Section 18.11 Traffic Control
18.11.1 The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid:
A) congestion on the public streets; and,
B) traffic hazards; and
C) additional truck traffic through residential areas.
18.11.2 Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe and orderly flow.
18.11.3 Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall avoid residential areas and in all cases be forward-moving
with no backing into streets.
18.11.4 All entrances from private property onto city streets shall be subject to review and approval of the City Engineer
and all entrances from private property onto county roads or state highways shall be subject to review and approval by
Ramsey County Public Works or the Minnesota Department of Transportation.
Section 18.12 (Deleted)
Section 18.13 Architecture
18.13.1 It is hereby affirmed as public policy that the appearance of this community is a proper matter for public concern
and that all developed open spaces, and all buildings, signs, plantings, surfaces and structures
which may be seen from the public ways are subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
18.13.2 In All Districts, all principal buildings other than one-family dwellings must be designed or approved by a
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 90
registered architect and certified in accordance with the appropriate Minnesota State statutes.
18.13.3 In All Business Districts, a building permit shall not be issued unless the proposed use is designed, sited, oriented
and landscape-planned to produce a harmonious relationship of building and grounds with
adjacent buildings and grounds and with the environment of the neighborhood.
18.13.4 In All Residential Districts, a building permit shall not be issued if the proposed building is so similar or dissimilar
to the other homes in the area as to result in depreciation of property values in the neighborhood.
Section 18.14 Explosives
18.14.1 No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products, such as TNT or dynamite,
which could decompose by detonation shall be permitted except such as are licensed by the Council.
Section 18.15 Radiation and Electrical Emissions
18.15.1 No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radio-activity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no
electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
Section 18.16 Aircraft
18.16.1 Landing Area. Aircraft landing areas are hereby prohibited within the City of Gem Lake.
18.16.2 Operation. The landing and the taking off of aircraft within the City of Gem Lake is prohibited except for
emergencies or by duly authorized law enforcement, military or medical transport aircraft.
Section 18.17 Other Nuisance Characteristics
18.17.1 No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, dangerous wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other such adverse
influences shall be permitted in any district that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby
property.
18.17.2 All wastes shall be properly contained, fenced or screened and disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to
public health and safety.
Section 18.18 Consistency with Plans and Policies
18.18.1 The proposed use shall preserve the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and shall be consistent with the goals,
plans and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
Section 18.19 Clustering and Density Transfer
18.19.1 This clustering and density transfer system is to provide a means by which parcels of land in the City of Gem
Lake, having unusual building characteristics due to subsoil conditions, elevation of the water table, water area, and/or
relative location or shape of the parcel may be more efficiently utilized. Density zoning also provides a means to preserve
and protect natural resource areas such as wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes, as well as good agricultural land and scenic
views. Basically, this approach allows a developer to cluster housing or business units in buildable areas in return for
leaving the natural resource areas or agricultural land open from development.
18.19.2 The City Council, in determining the reasonableness of the proposed clustering, shall consider the following
factors:
A) Location, amount and proposed use of open space;
B) Location, design and type of dwellings or business provided,
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 91
C) Physical characteristics of the site
D) Relationship of the proposed dwelling or business units to nearby uses.
18.19.3 The owner or owners of any tract of land in the City of Gem Lake may submit to the Planning Commission, for
review and recommendation to the City Council, a plan for use and development of such a tract of land as a cluster area
by making an application for a Conditional Use Permit authorizing completion of the project according to an approved
plan. The plan for the proposed project shall conform to the requirements of the Use District within which the land is
located except as hereinafter modified:
A) The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a Conditional Use Permit requested shall not be less than five
(5) acres in size; and
B) The applicant shall state precisely what, in this opinion, are the unusual characteristics of this site for purposes of
justifying the granting of a Conditional Use Permit for this project; and
C) The plan shall be submitted in the form of a preliminary plan and be in complete conformance with what would be
submitted as described in the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance for a preliminary plan, and,
D) The number of dwelling or business units proposed for the entire subdivided area shall not exceed the total
number permitted for the Use District within which the land is located, unless a bonus is given for unique uses of the
area; and,
E) The average lot density in the plan shall not be greater than the maximum for the area and the lot area of any one
(1) lot shall not be reduced more than one-half (½) by assigning additional dwelling or business units; and,
F) That land which is set aside as unbuildable and on which the plan is justified shall be clearly indicated on the plan.
This land shall be dedicated as a “conservation easement” naming both the City and the Minnesota Land Trust or
similar as holders of that title for that land. Provisions for the continual maintenance of that “easement” area so
dedicated and accepted by the City shall be required from the property owner(s).
18.19.4 When calculating the number of dwelling or business units per acre the size of site shall be determined by the total
land area within the perimeter of the privately owned property. This will include any area of newly proposed public or
private roads of road right-of-ways.
18.19.5 A density bonus of up to ten (10%) percent of the maximum allowable dwellings on a defined parcel may be
allowed by the City Council
Section 18.20 Park Land Dedication Requirements
18.20.1 As a pre-requisite to plat or Planned Unit Development approval, all developers shall dedicate land for parks,
playgrounds, public open spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City of Gem Lake’s park fund as
provided by this section of this Ordinance. The form of the contribution, cash or land (or any combination), shall be as
determined by the City Council in an amount equal to ten (10.0%) percent of the total acreage in the development or ten
(10.0%) percent of the pre-development land value.
18.20.2 Subdivision of land which has been previously platted and officially recorded and which contains less than one (1)
acre shall be exempt from dedication requirements.
18.20.3 Land to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds and public open spaces shall be reasonably suitable for its intended
use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed
park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location. The
City Council, at it’s discretion, may reject proffered land and mandate monetary contribution.
18.20.4 The Gem Lake Planning Commission shall review all park land dedication proposals including the location of
land and the amount of land to be conveyed or dedicated within a proposed development or subdivision. Upon review,
the Gem Lake Planning Commission shall recommend the land dedication and cash contribution requirements for
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 92
proposed developments or subdivisions to the City Council. The exact amount of land or cash considerations to be
dedicated shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
18.20.5 Land areas conveyed or dedicated to the City of Gem Lake, as a park or recreation area, shall not be used in
calculating the density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the proposed development or subdivision, and shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for Planned Unit Developments.
18.20.6 Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided for in a proposed development,
subdivision or Planned Unit Development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents
of the subdivision or PUD , such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the City Council against the requirement
for dedication for park and recreation purposes, providing the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so and
that the following standards are met:
A) The yards, court areas , setbacks and other open space required to be maintained by the zoning and building
regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open spaces, and
B) That the public ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreements,
and
C) That the public open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with
the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be eliminated without the
consent of the City Council, and
D) That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreations purposes, taking
into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, hydrological conditions, geology, access and location of
private open space lands, and
E) That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational
element of the comprehensive plan, and are approved by the City Council, and
F) That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall not exceed forty (40.0%) percent of the park
dedication requirements for the development.
18.20.7 The City of Gem Lake shall maintain a separate fund into which all cash contributions received in lieu of
conveyance or dedication of land for park and playground, public open space or trail purposes shall be deposited and shall
make, from time to time, appropriations from such fund for acquisition of land for park and playground purposes, for
developing existing park and playground sites, for public open space and trails, or for debt retirement in connection with
land previously acquired for parks and playgrounds which benefit the residents of the City.
18.20.8 If a developer or subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a commitment to the City of Gem Lake as to the type
of buildings that will be constructed on lots in the proposed plat, then the land and cash requirement will be a reasonable
amount as determined by the City Council.
18.20.9 Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City of Gem Lake shall not be considered in the park
land and/or cash contribution to the City.
SECTION 19 - SIGNS
Repealed by Ordinance No. 109, October 19, 2009.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 93
SECTION 20 - OFF STREET PARKING AREAS
Section 20.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for offstreet
parking in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and/or structures.
Section 20.2 Site Plans. When applying for a building permit in all Districts for a new structure, the enlarging of a structure or
new enlarged use of a parcel of land, the application shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension
indicating the location of off-street parking spaces in compliance with the following requirements.
Section 20.3 General Provisions.
20.3.1 Existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be
reduced in number unless said number exceeds the requirement set forth herein for a similar new use.
20.3.2 Should a building, structure or use in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance be damaged or
destroyed by fire or other cause, it may be re-established except that in doing so any off-street parking or loading which
existed must be retain and should plans be effected for enlarging the floor area, seating capacity or other facilities which
would affect the parking or loading requirements, the parking or loading spaces shall be enlarged accordingly.
20.3.3 Floor Area - The term “Floor Area” shall mean the sum of all floor areas in a building as calculated from the
outside dimensions of the building. It shall not include areas used primarily for non-public purposes such as storage,
incidental repair, office building management or maintenance, toilets, or rest rooms, utilities, or dressing, fitting or
alteration rooms.
20.3.4 Parking Spaces - Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9') feet wide and twenty (20') feet in length
exclusive of an adequately designed system of access drives.
20.3.5 Use of Parking Facilities - Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the
parking or passenger automobiles and/or one truck not to exceed one and one-half (1 ½) ton capacity for each dwelling
unit except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit. Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not
be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners,
tenants or customers of business or manufacturing establishments except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage or repair of commercial
vehicles.
20.3.6 Required off-street parking space in the Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
20.3.7 Joint Parking Facilities - Off street parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures or uses may
be provided collectively in any “district” in which separate parking facilities for each separate building, structure or use
would be required, provided that number of spaces provided shall equal te sum of the separate requirements of each use.
20.3.8 Use of Parking Area - Required off-street parking space in any District shall not be utilized for open storage of
goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or rent.
Section 20.4 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas.
20.4.1 Parking Areas - shall be designed so as to provide adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such
driveway access shall not exceed twenty-two (22') feet in width and shall be so located as to cause the least interference
with traffic movement.
20.4.2 Calculating Space - When calculating the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of
one-half (½) or more shall constitute another space. One parking space shall equal three-hundred (300 s.f.) square feet or
parking and moving area.
20.4.3 Signs - No signs shall be located in any parking area except as necessary for orderly operation of traffic
movement.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 94
20.4.4 Surfacing - All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with a material
to control dust and drainage. Parking area for less than three (3) vehicle spaces shall be exempt. Plans for surfacing and
drainage shall be subject to approval of the City Council.
20.4.5 Lighting - Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away
from the adjoining property, and shall comply with Section 18.8.
20.4.6 Curbing and Landscaping - All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property
line shall provide a bumper curb not less than three (3') feet from the side property line or guard of normal bumper height
no less than one (1') foot from the side property line. When said area is for six (6) spaces or more, a curb or fence not
over six (6') feet in height shall be erected along the front yard set-back line with grass or planting occupying the space
between the sidewalk and curb or fence.
20.4.7 When a required off-street parking space for six (6') feet in height nor less than three and one-half (3'6") feet in
height shall be erected along the “R” District property line. Screen planting may also be required.
20.4.8 Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces - It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner
of the principle use, uses and/or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space, access ways,
landscaping and required fences.
Section 20.5 Required Off-Street Parking - Shall be as follows:
20.5.1 Single Family Dwellings - At least one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional parking space
for each two (2) roomers accommodated. A garage will fulfill this requirement. However a building permit shall not be
granted to convert a garage to living space unless other acceptable provisions are made to provide the required parking
space.
20.5.2 Two-Family Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit, but not more than two (2) per unit.
20.5.3 Boarding and Rooming Houses - At least two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) persons for which
accommodations are provided for sleeping.
20.5.4 Multiple Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for each four (4)
two-bedroom units and one (1) additional space for each two (2) three bedroom units.
20.5.5 Hotel or Apartment Hotel - At least one (1) parking space for each rental unit provided in the design of the
building.
20.5.6 Motel, Tourist Home, Motor Hotel - At least one space for each dwelling unit or lodging room.
20.5.7 Church, Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each three and one-half (3.5) seats based on the design
capacity of the main assembly hall.
20.5.8 Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Rest Home, Nursing Home or Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each
six (6) beds for which accommodations are offered, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on maximum
shift.
20.5.9 Medical or Dental Clinic - At least three (3) parking spaces for each staff doctor or dentist.
20.5.10 Drive-in Flood Establishments - At least one (1) parking space for each fifteen (15 s.f.) square feet of gross floor
space in building allocated to drive-in operation
20.5.11 Bowling Alley -At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for
related uses such as a restaurant.
20.5.12 Motor Fuel Station - At least one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on maximum shift, plus two (2)
off-street parking spaces for each service stall.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 95
20.5.13 Retail Store - At least seven (7) off-street parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000 s.f.) square feet of gross
floor space.
20.5.14 Restaurants, Cafes, Bars, Taverns, Night Clubs - At least one (1) space for each three (3) seats based on capacity
design.
20.5.15 Banks, Offices and/or Public Office Building - At least four (4) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000 s.f.)
square feet of gross floor space.
20.5.16 Undertaking Establishments - At least five (5) parking spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space
for each funeral vehicle maintained on premises. Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral
procession.
20.5.17 Furniture Store, Wholesale, Auto Sales, Repair Shops At least three (3) parking spaces for each one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area. Open sales lots shall provide one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces for each
employee on maximum shift, but not less than three (3) spaces.
20.5.18 Warehouse, Storage, Handling of Bulk Goods - At least one (1) space for each two (2) employees on maximum
shift or one (1) for each two thousand (2,000 s.f.) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is the larger.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 96
SECTION 21 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS
Section 21.1 General Provisions.
21.1.1 Shoreland District. The land use regulations in this Section shall apply to any land in the City of Gem
Lake located within a floodplain, within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a public water or public
waters wetland, including but not limited to the body of water known as Gem Lake and its attendant wetlands, or
within 300 feet of a stream or river. The regulations of this Section shall apply in addition to the provisions of the
zoning district applicable to the property, the Flood Hazard ordinance of the city (No. 114), and other ordinances
of the City.
21.1.2 Wetland Conservation Act. The City of Gem Lake has delegated its authority under the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 and attendant rules to the Vadnais Lake Area Watershed Management
Association (VLAWMO). All requests for permits, review or approval required by the Wetland Conservation Act
must be submitted to VLAWMO as the acting Local Government Unit.
21.1.3 Applied in Concert with Other Law. These regulations and requirements shall be in addition to those
imposed by Federal and State law, regional and local water management regulations, and city ordinances, all of
which shall jointly apply. Under joint application, the most restrictive requirements shall apply.
21.2 Shoreland Use Controls.
21.2.1 Policy. Intact, vegetated and stable shorelines and streambanks provide valuable functions to Gem Lake
and other water resources in the City including prevention of erosion, reinforcement of soils through root
structure, trapping of nutrients and sediments, and provision of fish and wildlife habitat. Gem Lake is a Natural
Environment lake under the criteria established by the Department of Natural Resources.
21.2.2 Minimum Lot Size and Setback Requirements. All lots created and structures erected in a shoreland
district following the enactment of this Section must meet the criteria established in the underlying zoning district.
No variance shall be granted, or other approval given, which allows the creation of a lot in a shoreland district
that is less than 80,000 square feet in area (measured above the ordinary high water mark of the water body), or
less than 200 feet in width. No structure, other than water-oriented accessory structures managed by this Section,
shall be placed within 150 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the water body. The maximum lot coverage by
buildings and impervious surfaces is 25%.
21.2.3 Accessory Structures and Facilities. All accessory structures and facilities, except those that are wateroriented,
must meet or exceed structure setback standards. If allowed by local government controls, each
residential lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure or facility located closer to public waters than the
structure setback if all of the following standards are met:
a. The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an
area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
b. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least ten feet.
c. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of
government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
d. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.
e. The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water
supply or sewage treatment facilities.
f. Any accessory structures or facilities not meeting the above criteria, or any additional accessory structures
or facilities must meet or exceed structure setback standards.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 97
21.2.4 Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic
alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet
the following design requirements:
a. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width.
b. Landings for stairways and lifts must not exceed 32 square feet in area.
c. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings.
d. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into
the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
e. Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed
from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
f. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for persons with physical disabilities are also allowed for
achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of (a) to (e) are
complied with.
21.2.5. Decks. Except as provided in section 21.2.3, decks must meet the structure setback standards. Decks to be
added to structures existing on the date the shoreland structure setbacks were established by ordinance may be
allowed without a variance, if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
a. thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or
exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;
b. the deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing
shoreline setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet,
whichever is more restrictive; and
c. the deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.
21.2.6 Driveways and parking areas. Driveways and parking areas must meet all applicable structure setbacks, and
must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from
view from the water body. Access ramps and approach roads are not allowed in the structure setback area
surrounding Gem Lake.
21.2.7 Shoreline alteration. Alterations of vegetation and topography in a shoreland district is controlled to
prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutruents, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping, and protect wildlife habitat.
a. Removal or alteration of vegetation is limited to the amount necessary to construct an approved structure,
and to maintain the health of the vegetation, provided that no such removal or alteration shall substantially
reduce the screening of structures, vehicles and other facilities as viewed from the water. This provision shall
not restrict the removal of trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards, or the
removal of buckthorn and similar invasive species identified by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
b. Any application for new construction in a shoreland district must include a Tree and Vegetation
Preservation Plan which, in addition to the requirements of Ordinance No. 66, includes an inventory of all
vegetation affected by the construction and a plan for preservation, relocation, or replacement of the
vegetation.
b. Use of fertilizer and pesticides in a shoreland district must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff
into the water body.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 98
c. No grading, filling, or other topographical alteration shall be allowed within 50 feet of the ordinary high
water mark of the water body, with the exception that the Zoning Administrator may approve the installation
of clean beach-type sand in this area, in accordance with DNR regulations, after review of an installation plan.
d. Any grading or filling anywhere else in a shoreland area involving movement of more than 50 cubic yards
of material requires a grading and filling permit. If the grading or filling is to take place in a wetland,
VLAWMO review and approval must be obtained before the City can issue a permit. In addition to any other
requirements, grading and filling activity in shoreland areas must also meet the following criteria:
1. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare
ground is exposed for the shortest time possible.
2. Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a
permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible.
3. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature
must be used.
4. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards. The use of bioengineering is
encouraged as an alternative to engineered stabilization techniques. Retaining walls are to be used only
when there is no adequate stabilization alternative.
5. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope.
6. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of the water body must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
21.2.8 Nonconforming uses. In addition to the regulations of this ordinance applicable to nonconforming uses
generally, in a Shoreland district the following shall apply:
a. An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be
permitted on the side of the structure or facility facing away from the water body.
b. An improvement to an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be allowed to extend
parallel to the shoreline when the improvement is otherwise in compliance with the dimensional and setback
requirements of this Ordinance.
c. Exterior decks attached to an existing lawful non-conforming structure which do not extend any roof or
foundation may be permitted to extend parallel to the shoreline and shall be constructed to be visually
inconspicuous when viewed from the water (under summer leaf-on conditions).
d. Reconstruction of an existing historic structure, any appurtenances thereto, and the grounds shall be
allowed to preserve its historic character if the structure or site is recognized as a historic site on the National
Register of Historic Places.
21.3 Use of Gem Lake.
21.3.1 No Motorized Use. Gem Lake shall not be used by any motorized craft or traffic including, but not limited to,
motorized boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) excluding equipment used for cleaning, plowing snow or
other occasional maintenance uses.
21.3.2 No Wet Storage Of Boats. Boats shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any
one time. Regular storage of boats shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and
stored out of view from neighboring properties and Gem Lake while not in use.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 99
21.3.3 Docks.
a. Docks are seasonal and temporary in nature and, therefore, shall not be permanently affixed to the shore or
lake bottom of Gem Lake.
b. Docks shall not be greater than four (4'0") feet in width, two (2'0") feet in height above the water and twenty
(20'0") feet in length from the lake shore.
c. Docks shall not be covered with any roof structure, awnings or any other type of enclosure.
d. Only one (1) dock shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the waterline.
21.3.4 Swimming Rafts.
a. Swimming rafts are seasonal and temporary in nature and therefore shall not be permanently affixed to the lake
bottom.
b. Swimming rafts shall not exceed one hundred (100 s.f.) square feet in total area and shall not be more than two
(2'0) feet higher than the water surface.
c. Swimming rafts shall not be located more than fifty (50') feet from the lakeshore.
d. Swimming rafts shall not be covered with a roof structure, awning or any other type of enclosure.
e. Only one (1) raft shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the waterline.
f. Swimming rafts shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time.
Regular storage of swimming rafts shall be on the shore, properly secured and stored out of view from the water
and from neighboring properties.
21.3.5 Water Appropriation. No person shall appropriate water from Gem Lake without first obtaining an permit
from VLAWMO.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 100
SECTION 22 - SOIL EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 22.1 Erosion and Sediment Control.
22.1.1 Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City of Gem Lake to require the preparation and implementation of
erosion and sediment control plans to control runoff and erosion, to retain or control sediment on land during land
disturbing activities, and to prevent the degradation of resources and the loss or damage of property due to erosion
and sedimentation.
22.1.2 Regulation. No person shall commence land disturbing activities, unless granted a variance, without first
obtaining a permit from the City that incorporates and approves an erosion and sediment control plan for the activity,
development or redevelopment. The proposed activity will not result in an increase in sediment off the site during
construction and post-construction activities and be in conformance with the MPCA General Permit Construction for
Activities, and as amended.
22.1.3 Criteria. Erosion and sediment control plans and the land disturbing activity shall comply with the following
criteria:
a. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with BMPs, and shall be sufficient to retain
sediment on-site.
b. Erosion and sediment control measures shall meet the standard for the General Permit Authorization to
Discharge Stormwater Associated With Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program Permit MNR100001 (NPDES General
Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August 1 2008, as amended; except
where more specific requirements are provided in paragraphs 3(c) and 3(d) of this Section below.
c. The permittee or applicant must ensure final stabilization of the site in accordance with the NPDES
General Construction Permit requirements. The site will be considered as having achieved final stabilization
following submission of Notice of Termination by the permittee or applicant, and inspection and approval by
the City.
d. All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected
velocity of flow from a 10-year frequency storm without erosion.
22.1.4 Exception. No permit or erosion control plan shall be required under this Section for the following land
disturbing activities:
a. Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens, repairs and maintenance work.
b. Construction, installation and maintenance of individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS) other than those
on steep slopes, on riparian lots within a Shoreland District or in a bluff impact zone.
c. Installation of any fence, sign, telephone or electric poles, or other kinds of posts or poles.
d. Emergency activity necessary to protect life or prevent substantial harm to persons or property.
e. Minor wetland impacts that have received a “certificate of exemption or no loss” determination by the
LGU (VLAWMO or RWMWD) administering the Wetland Conservation Act, as amended.
f. All maintenance, repair, resurfacing and reconditioning activities of existing road, bridge, and highway
systems which do not involve land disturbing activities outside of the existing surfaced roadway.
All land disturbing activities not required by this Section to obtain a permit or have an approved erosion and sediment
control plan shall nevertheless be conducted in full compliance with this Section.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 101
Section 22.2 Stormwater Management.
22.2.1 Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City to:
a. Manage new development and drainage alternations by requiring each development or land disturbing
activity to manage its stormwater effectively, either on or off-site.
b. Promote and encourage a reduction in runoff rates, encourage infiltration and promote groundwater
recharge.
c. Maximize groundwater recharge as a means of maintaining drinking water supplies, preserving base flows
in streams, and limiting discharges of stormwater to downstream receiving waters.
d. Assure that property owners control the rate and volume of stormwater runoff originating from their
property so that surface water and groundwater quantity and quality is protected or improved, soil erosion is
minimized, and flooding potential is reduced.
e. Protect and improve natural resources within the watershed to prevent further degradation.
22.2.2 Regulation
a. Rate Control. The proposed activity will not increase the peak stormwater runoff rate from the site, under
pre-development conditions, for anything less than a 24-hour precipitation event with a return frequency of
1- or 2-, 10- and 100-years. The applicant must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General Permit
for Construction Activities.
b. Volume Control. Stormwater runoff volume retention shall be achieved onsite in the amount equivalent to
the runoff generated from one-half inch of runoff over the impervious surfaces of the development or as
specified under Section 8.0. Volume control credits can be used to control up to one-half (0.5) inch of runoff
as described under Section 22.2.5.
c. Water Quality
Stormwater management must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General Permit for
Construction Activities and guidelines set forth in total maximum daily load studies and sustainable lake
management plans. No direct (untreated) discharges of stormwater to natural or improved waterbodies are
allowed.
d. Waste Disposal to Waters
Stormwater management must not result in the discharge of any regulated substance, hazardous or biological
waste, or petroleum product, whether treated or untreated, to best management practice devices that may
have a deleterious effect upon water of the state (surface and groundwater), unless the discharge is in
compliance with Federal, State and local regulations.
22.2.3 Criteria. Stormwater management plans shall comply with the following criteria:
a. A hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory will be used to analyze runoff for the design or
analysis of flows and water levels.
b. Runoff rates for the proposed activities, development or redevelopment within the watershed shall:
1. Not exceed existing runoff rates for the 1 or 2-year, 10-year and 100-year critical duration storm
events;
2. Not accelerate on or off-site water course erosion, downstream nuisance, flooding or damage as
demonstrated by the applicant; and
3. Runoff rates may be restricted to less than the existing rates when necessary for the protection of
public health, safety and general welfare.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 102
c. Stormwater facilities must provide:
1. An identified overflow spillway and downstream route sufficiently stabilized to convey a 100-year
critical storm event;
2. Pond outlets designed to prevent short circuiting of the flow from pond inputs to the outlet;
3. A minimum depth for ponds of three (3) feet and conform to the design specifications of the
Stormwater Manual, 2005.
4. An outlet skimmer to prevent migration of floatables and oils for the 2-year event; and
5. Access for future maintenance that is free of plantings and impediments.
d. Regional ponds and practices can be used to provide for stormwater management based on the following
criteria:
1. Regional ponds are required to be designed based on ultimate conditions for the contributing
subwatershed.
2. Regional ponds are required to be constructed and operational prior to constructing
imperviousness within the contributing drainage area.
e. Design of all Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be consistent with the Minnesota Stormwater
Manual, 2005, and as amended and the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as
amended.
f. When using infiltration for volume control, infiltration volumes and facility sizes shall be calculated using
the appropriate hydrological soil group classification and infiltration rate, and shall be capable of infiltrating
the required volume within 72 hours or as specified in the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities.
g. In evaluating the infiltration capacity of a constructed BMP under post-development conditions, the
infiltration rates in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual should be used. Select the design infiltration based on
the least permeable soil horizon within the first five (5) feet below the bottom elevation of the proposed
infiltration facility. Site-specific infiltration measurements completed by a licensed professional (as described
in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, November 2005, and as amended) may be used in place of the values
in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, and as approved by the City.
h. All stormwater retention practices designed to meet the volume control regulation must provide
pretreatment of stormwater runoff prior to infiltrating into the groundwater system or discharging
downstream. Pretreatment methods must comply with the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as
amended, for the proposed practice. All highly recommended and recommended design criteria must be met,
unless specifically waived by the Technical Commission of VLAWMO or RWMWD, as appropriate.
i. To the maximum extent practicable, volume control shall be fully met onsite (Section 2, Subsection 2b). Site
conditions may make infiltration undesirable or impossible. The applicant must make soil corrections and/or
investigate other locations on the site for feasible infiltration locations. Infiltration practices are not allowed:
1. For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas;
2. Within hydrologic soil group D type soils;
3. Within some Wellhead Protection Areas (Review Wellhead Protection Plans for additional
guidance);
4. Within 50 feet of a septic tank or drain field;
5. On areas with less than three (3) feet vertical separation from the bottom of the infiltration system
to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or top of bedrock.
If the applicant claims that infiltration is not feasible or allowed onsite, the applicant must provide supporting
documentation and follow Section 2, Subsection 4.
22.2.4 Alternative Compliance Sequencing. For sites where infiltration practices are determined infeasible as described
in Section 22.2.3(i), the following Alternative Compliance Sequencing steps shall be taken in the order shown:
a. Use of alternative volume control practices as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as
amended, sized according to Section 22.2.2(b).
b. Use of on-site filtration practices and biofiltration using an impermeable liner and under drain, sized to filter a
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 103
volume of runoff according to Section 22.2.2(b).
c. Use of off-site volume control practices sized according to Section 22.2.2(b). Off-site volume control practices
can be used to provide for stormwater management based on the following criteria:
1. Off-site practices shall be constructed within the same drainage area or subwatershed as the project site.
2. Off-site practices are required to be constructed and operational prior to constructing imperviousness within
the contributing drainage area.
d. Use of wet sediment basins sized per the standard described within the MPCA General Permit for
Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.
22.2.5 Volume Control Credits.
a. Volume control credits will be awarded as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as
amended.
b. Volume control credits must be determined based on the methods outlined within Chapter 11 of the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, for the Adjusted Water Quality Volume.
1. The water quality volume (Vwq) shall be calculated by multiplying one (1) inch of runoff over the
proposed impervious surface.
2. Applied credits cannot exceed a Vwq greater than 1/2 inch of runoff over the proposed impervious
area.
3. All recommended and highly recommended conditions must be met, unless specifically waived by
VLAWMO staff and the Technical Commission.
4. For Drainage to Stream, Wetland, or Shoreland Buffer Credits, the credits will apply to areas outside of
the minimum buffer requirement as prescribed within these Policies.
5. Grass Channel Credits can be applied to the roadway portion of the proposed site when grass channels
have been designed with water quality adaptations such as water quality berms.
22.2.6 Maintenance and Easement.
a. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant for (1) access for facility inspections and
maintenance and (2) preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities,
including the overflow route.
b. Land used by stormwater management facilities shall be preserved by dedication and/or perpetual easement to
the City, when required by the City. These easements shall cover those portions of the property which are
adjacent to the facility and which lie below the 100-year flood elevation.
c. A maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the County as part of the City development approval process.
Minimum requirements for the maintenance agreement include:
1. A list of the responsible party(s) (City and facility owner/manager);
2. Contact information;
3. A formalized maintenance schedule, with scheduled activities;
4. A “Failure to Perform” provision laying out remedial actions if the responsible party does not perform
as expected;
5. Maintenance debris handling plans; and
6. Emergency response (environmental, spill, safety).
d. Maintenance is required for all stormwater practices constructed in compliance with these Policies. The City
will conduct periodic inspection of stormwater practices. A minimum of 20% of all stormwater facilities shall be
inspected annually by the City. The City shall provide to the VLAWMO annual inspection reports detailing
inspection activities and proof of maintenance where required.
e. When land used by stormwater management facilities is public land or public right-of-way, easements under
this section will not be required, and a written agreement between the City and applicant may be executed in lieu
of the recorded maintenance agreement.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 104
SECTION 23 - BROADCAST/TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND ANTENNAS
Section 23.1 Purpose and Intent
23.1.1 The purpose of this section is to establish predictable standards for siting and installing of wireless telephone, radio
broadcast, television broadcast and communications antenna towers or supporting structures within the City of Gem
Lake. It is the intent of this section to accommodate the communications needed of the residents and businesses while
protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
23.1.2 Specifically, the City Council finds the regulations set forth in this section necessary to:
A) Facilitate the provisions for wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City.
B) Restrict the location of towers and antennas to designated areas of the City and impose design standards to
minimize adverse visual effects of towers and antennas.
C) Require evidence of structural integrity and impose setback requirements to avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower or antenna failure.
D) Require applicants for towers and antenna to prove their need and to apply for permits for their construction.
E) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new antennas and reduce the
number of towers needed to serve the community.
Section 23.2 Zoning Districts For Construction
23.2.1 The following Zoning district preferences shall be followed when selecting potential commercial broadcast/
telecommunications tower sites in the City of Gem Lake:
A) General Business (GB)
B) General Business II (GBII)
C) Retail Business (RB)
23.2.2 The following Zoning districts shall not be used for commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower/antenna
sites in the City of Gem Lake:
A) Any R1, R2, R3, R4 or LD-B district
B) Any Overlay district
Section 23.3 Performance Standards
23.3.1 All stand along towers or antennas and/or supporting structures for the same must meet the design and
performance standards identified in this section.
23.3.2 A proposal for a new tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the Broadcast/
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot e accommodated on an existing or approved
tower or building within a one (1) mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one of the following reasons:
A) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost.
B) The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned
equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 105
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
C) Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at
a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
D) Other unforseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an
existing or approved tower or building.
23.3.3 Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunications service tower shall be designed structurally, electrically and
in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users
if the tower is over one hundred (100') feet in height or for at leaser one additional user if the tower is over sixty (60') feet
in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
23.3.4 Structural design, mounting, and installation of any tower or antenna shall be in compliance with the manufacturer’s
specification and as may be necessary or as determined by the City Council. All such designs and installations shall be
verified and approved by a qualified and licensed professional engineer employed by the applicant.
23.3.5 All towers and antennas and related structures shall be designed and built in compliance with all City of Gem Lake
building codes and electrical code requirements, and as applicable shall require permits. Existing towers may continue in
use but may not be structurally altered.
23.3.6 The height and style of the tower and antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified
by a communications engineer or other appropriate professional. However, no towers erected for broadcast or
Telecommunications service shall exceed 180 feet and no tower and accompanying antenna shall exceed two-hundred
(200') feet.
23.3.7 All obsolete and unused towers and antennas shall be removed within six (6) months of cessation or operation at
the site, unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. The City reserves the right to remove
any unused tower or antenna at it’s expense then back charge the property owner to recover costs.
23.3.8 Damaged existing towers and antennas my be rebuild to the same physical dimensions and at the same location.
Repairs and rebuilding shall be complete within one (1) year after receiving the building permit from the City. However, if
the tower is destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, so that repairs would be forty (40%) percent or more of a
new tower, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this Ordinance.
23.3.9 No advertising message shall be affixed to any tower and or antenna structure.
23.3.10 No tower or antenna shall be illuminated by artificial means and must not display strobe lights, unless such lighting
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal or state authority for that particular tower. When
incorporated into the approved design, the tower may support light fixtures used to illuminate parking lights, ball fields, or
similar areas.
23.3.11 Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through use of color and
camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the
Federal Aviation Administration. Antenna support structures shall be painted light blue, gray, or silver or have a
galvanized finish to reduce visual impact.
23.3.12 Towers located closer to a property line than the distance equal tot eh height of the tower shall be designed and
engineered to collapse progressively within the distance between the tower and property line. The applicant for any tower
shall submit written documentation explaining tower construction and possible failure and provide assurance that blowing
or falling ice from tower/antenna can be contained on the subject property. At a minimum, the tower shall comply with
the minimum setback requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located.
23.3.13 A tower shall be located on a parcel of land so as to have the least impact on adjoining properties and any negative
impact of the tower shall be confined onto the property on which it is located, to the greatest extent possible.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 106
23.3.14 The tower location shall provide the maximum amount of screening for off site views of the tower and/or
antenna and related structure. Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
23.3.15 All utility buildings, structures, and equipment accessory to the tower or antenna must be architecturally designed
to blend in with surrounding environment and must meet the minimum design requirements of the Zoning District in
which they are located.
23.3.16 No change in the use or ownership of an approved tower or antenna may be made without the written consent of
the City Council.
21.3.17 Co-location of antennas upon overhead power line poles or street light poles is encouraged provide the said
antenna meets all applicable federal state spacing requirements and inference regulation.
Section 23.4 Proof of Non-Interference
23.4.1 Each application for construction of a commercial Broadcast or Wireless telecommunication facility shall include
either a certified statement that the construction of the tower/antenna, including reception and transmission functions,
will not interfere with the radio, television, or other service enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties.
If interference is found after the facility has been built has been erected, the applicant has to solve any problems his
equipment has caused, at his cost.
Section 23.5 Tower Setbacks
23.5.1 Where adjacent parcels are zoned for commercial or industrial uses, setbacks equivalent to those established for the
principle structure shall be provided for any tower/antenna. Setbacks equal to the height of the tower shall be established
on sites that are adjacent to parcels developed or able to be developed for residential use.
Section 23.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review
23.6.1 Conditional Use Permit. Applicants for a tower/antenna Conditional Use Permit must file a Conditional Use
Permit application with the City of Gem lake and pay any and all associated fees.
23.6.2 Planning Commission/City Council review. All applications for a Broadcast/Telecommunications tower must first
be sent to the Planning Commission which shall review the application and may recommend to the City Council approval
or denial. Te City Council will hold the necessary Public hearing(s) on this matter and will then approve or deny the
request. The applicant is responsible for supplying a certified list of the property owners within three-hundred (350') feet
of the proposed tower/antenna site and pay all costs for notifying all such parties of the public hearing(s) needed.
Section 23.7 Exceptions
23.7.1 The following towers and/or antennas supporting structures and antennas are not subject to the restrictions of
Section 21 of this Ordinance:
A) Towers and/or antennas identified as “Accessory and Secondary Antennas” in this Ordinance are exempt. All
Amateur Radio “Accessory and Secondary” antennas and/or towers must be installed in accordance with instructions
furnished by the manufacturer of the tower/antenna.
B) Towers and antennas that are located entirely with a structure that complies with the height, bulk and density and
area requirements of the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance and are not visible from the exterior of the structure
are also exempt.
C) Towers/antennas for radio/telecommunications equipment owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake are also
exempt.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 107
SECTION 24 – WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
24.1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation
of residential wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be governed within the city.
24.2. Zoning Allowance. A Residential WECS may be installed as an accessory use in all zoning districts, provided that the
system complies with all terms and conditions of this Ordinance.
24.3. License Required. A Residential WECS with a blade diameter under 6 feet and installed so that the total extended height
does not exceed 10 feet over the tallest structure on a property shall not require a City license. For all other WECS, a license
must be obtained from the City of Gem Lake prior to installation of the system. The City Council shall designate a member of
City staff as the officer responsible for accepting and reviewing applications for Residential WECS licenses. The City Council
shall establish fees by separate resolution for review of an initial application and for renewal applications.
24.3.1. Initial Application. Any person wishing to install a Residential WECS requiring a license shall complete an
application on a form provided by the City, pay the required application fee, and submit the application fee, and attach
the following additional materials:
a) A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the location of all WECS components on the property; the locations
of property boundaries; the location of all structures and above-ground utilities located on the property, and
the location of any public rights-of-way or utility easements on the property. The plan shall also indicate the
height of the tallest structure, tree or object lying within 30 feet from the base of the tower.
b) Documentation that a current insurance policy extends coverage to the proposed Residential WECS,
whether under existing property insurance or a separate policy.
c) A copy of the WECS manufacturer’s documentation stating rated generation capacity, standards
certifications (such as Underwriters’ Laboratories certification) for each WECS component, installation
instructions, standard drawings or schematics for the equipment, warranties, manufacturer’s warnings, and
emergency procedures.
24.3.2. Renewal Application. A person with a licensed WECS previously installed upon their property shall submit a
renewal application on a form provided by the City, pay the required application fee, and provide the following:
a) A revised site plan and elevations reflecting the current location and height of trees, structures and utilities
on the property in which the tower is located; and
b) If any of the documents required by Section 24.3.1 (b) or (c) have been replaced by new documents or
revised, current copies of those documents.
24.3.3. Review of Applications. The officer designated by the City Council shall review the license applications and
attached supporting material for compliance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. If the reviewing officer
believes the proposed or existing WECS complies, the officer shall issue the license.
24.3.4. Term of license. A Residential WECS license shall remain in effect for five (5) years following issuance, unless
the City Council shall earlier revoke the license for failure to comply with the terms of this Ordinance.
24.3.5. Revocation. If the City learns of a violation of this Ordinance, it shall provide a notice to the property owner
of the alleged violation and the date and time of a hearing before the City Council to consider the violation. The City
Council shall hold a hearing, at which it will receive evidence of the violation and take testimony from any interested
parties, including the property owner. Following the hearing, if the Council determines that the WECS is in violation
of the standards in this Ordinance, it may revoke the WECS license immediately, give the owner a reasonable period
of time in which to correct the violation without revocation, or choose to take no action on the WECS license. If a
WECS license is revoked, the WECS and tower must be dismantled and removed from the property within 90 days of
revocation.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 108
24.4. Code compliance. WECS installation is not exempt from the State Building Code and similar safety codes, and all
permits required for the construction and/or installation of WECS components must be obtained from the City’s Building
Official prior to commencing work to install the WECS.
24.4.1. Compliance with state building code. Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy
conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with engineering data
and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the state building code. Drawings
and engineering calculations shall be certified by a Minnesota licensed engineer.
24.4.2. Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS electrical equipment and connections shall be designed
and installed in adherence to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
24.5. Standards for Siting, Installation and Operation of WECS.
24.5.1. Height. The height of a WECS must comply with FAA regulation part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air
Space" and/or MNDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 "Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation".
24.5.2. Setback. WECS towers shall be set back from the closest property line at least one foot for every one foot of
the system’s total extended height. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located within or above
any required front, side or rear yard setback.
24.5.3. Rotor clearance. At installation, the bottom of the WECS blade diameter shall have a minimum of 5 feet of
clearance over any structure (including above-ground utilities) or tree within a 200-foot radius of the WECS tower.
The property owner is responsible for ensuring that trees and other vegetation do not encroach on the minimum
rotor clearance after the system is installed.
24.5.4. Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with control equipment to prevent dangerous operation in high
wind and to allow the turbine to be slowed or stopped in an emergency.
24.5.5. Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with one of the following
provisions:
a) Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of the ground.
b) A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
c) Towers capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least six feet high.
24.5.6. Component certification. Each electrical component of the WECS must be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. The overall WECS system must either be certified or pending certification by the Small Wind
Certification Council as compliant with the American Wind Energy Association’s Small Wind Turbine Performance
and Safety Standard.
24.5.7. Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in
conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
24.5.8. Signs. Each WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two square feet, posted at the base of the tower and
said sign shall contain the following information.
a) High voltage warning, if a component of the WECS is “high voltage” under the National Electrical Code.
b) Manufacturer's name.
c) Emergency phone number.
d) Emergency shutdown procedures.
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 109
No other signage is permitted on the tower or turbine components of the WECS. A manufacturer’s name or logo
printed on a component is not considered “signage” for the purposes of this Ordinance.
24.5.9. Lighting. WECS shall not be illuminated from the ground, or have affixed or attached any lights, reflectors,
flasher or any other illumination, except for those required by FAA regulations part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable
Air Space" and FAA Advisory circular 70/7460-1F, September 1978 "Obstruction Marking and Lighting".
24.5.10. Noise emission. Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended.
24.5.11. Utility company interconnection. If the WECS is interconnected with a local electrical utility company, the
connection shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
24.6. Test Towers. A tower to support anemometers and other test equipment to determine the feasibility of installing a
WECS on the property may be installed as an accessory use in all zoning districts. A license is not required to erect a test
tower, but the City must be notified of the installation and provided with a site plan and elevations similar to that required in
Section 24.3.1(a). The test tower must comply with all applicable siting, installation and operation requirements in Section
24.5, though a test tower may use guy wires for support. If required by the State Building Code, a building permit must be
obtained before commencing work to erect the test tower. A test tower may stand on a property for a maximum of twentyfour
months in any three-year period.
24.7. Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any WECS license to inspect the premises on which the
WECS is located. If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall
take expeditious action to correct the situation.
24.8. Abandonment. If any WECS or tower is not used for six successive months, the City shall give notice to the property
owner that the WECS must be put back in service within six months from the date of notice. If the WECS is not put back
into service within that time, the WECS and tower shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the
property at the expense of the property owner.
SECTION 25 - ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
Section 25.1 The Ordinance changes contained herein will take affect immediately upon adoption by the City Council and
publication of a summary of this document, but not later than thirty (30) days from the date below.
Section 25.2 The Legend of this Ordinance shall be updated to reflect the date and changes made.
Section 25.3 This Ordinance, previously identified as Ordinance No. 43I shall now be known as City of Gem Lake Ordinance
No. 43J which replaces and supersedes all previous versions of same.
Section 25.4 This Ordinance No. 43J was unanimously adopted with amendments defined in Ordinance No. 43I by the City
Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 16th day of January in the year 2007 and ordered for summary publication in the
City’s official newspaper.
CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C Magnuson, City Clerk
Updated: 1/16/2007 Updated: 1/16/2007
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 110
APPENDIX
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the City Council as City of Gem Lake Ordinance
No.5 on 19 February 1963. Since that time, the Planning Commission has recommended and the City Council has
adopted several changes in keeping with the changing times and needs and wishes of the community. The following table is
added to Ordinance No.43 as an historic reference to those changes. All changes shown have been incorporated into Ordinance
No. 43, the City Zoning Ordinance.
TABLE 23.1 a)
ORDINANCE
NO.
TITLE & DESCRIPTION
ENACTED
5 The City Zoning Ordinance 12/19/1963
14 An Ordinance Amending the Official Zoning Map of Gem Lake 07/18/1967
17B An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Zoning Ordinance 03/24/1970
21 An Ordinance Amending The Zoning Ordinance 09/15/1970
29 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As General Business
12/16/1974
30 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As General Business
04/18/1977
31 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing Minimum Area Of Certain
Property In An R-4 Residential District
06/20/1977
33 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Residential.
11/20/1978
34A An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Retail Business
11/30/1978
35 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Retail Business
12/27/1979
36 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance 01/21/1980
38 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance 05/18/1981
40 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance 09/22/1981
41 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Retail Business
10/19/1981
42 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As LD-B Low Density Business District
10/19/1981
43 An Ordinance Restating The Zoning Ordinance Of Gem Lake With All Amendments
Thereto Enacted Through December 31, 1982
12/20/1982
49 An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43 09/19/1988
51 An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43, Including The Establishment
Of A New District Known As GB II, General Business II
02/20/1989
63 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43 And Replacing Ordinance No. 5 03/28/1994
72 An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43 Including Changes, Additions
Or Deletions To The Zoning Ordinance No. 43 Of The City of Gem Lake,
MN Providing For An Institutional Overlay District Rezoning.
05/18/1998
74 An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Gem Lake, regarding: 1) the addition of Section 21 establishing Commercial Broadcast/
Telecommunication tower and antenna regulations and definitions and amendments
attendant thereto; and, 2) the removal of all fee schedules from the Zoning
Ordinance; and 3) the revision of Section 4.10 Land Reclamation and Section 4.11
Land Mining of the Zoning Ordinance.
11/15/1999
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 111
75 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake,
regarding the rezoning of lands bordered on the West by Schueneman Road and the East by the
City’s common boundary with White Bear Lake and on the South by State Highway 61 and on
the North by lot identified as PIN number
02/02/2000
76 An Ordinance amending City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 43, hereinafter the “Zoning Ordinance”,
regarding: 1) adding provisions for minimum “buildable area” as Section 4.4 (3), definition
for “buildable area” as Section 3.2 (4A), and amending Tables 7.5 (1), 8.5 (1), 9.5 (1), 10.5 (1)
a), and 10.5 (1) b) to reflect said provisions; 2) amending definitions of and related to Variances
and Special Use Permits and adding definitions for Interim Use Permits; 3) Providing amended or
additional provisions for the City’s consideration of applications for Variances, Special Use Permits,
Interim Use Permits, Redistricting or other Amendments to Ordinance No. 43; 4) modification
of the lakeshore restrictions on the water body identified as Gem Lake. Now known as Ordinance
No. 43EOI.
02/20/2001
79 An Ordinance providing for amendment of Ordinance Number 43, the “Zoning Ordinance” as
follows: 1) adding definitions to Section 3.2 and, 2) deleting Section 22, Regulation Of The Body
Of Water Called Gem Lake, in it’s entirety; and, 3) adding new Section 11, Regulation of Bodies
Of Water, Wetlands, and Shoreland Zones to establish local controls that consistently reflect the
purpose and intent stated in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and it’s attendant Watershed
Management Plan; and, 4) amending tables for all districts defining Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
to include the term “foot set back”; and, 5) adding provisions for Vegetation Removal
And Alteration Permits; and, 6) adding Sections 4.1 (5) and 4.1 (6); and, 7) amending Sections 5.4
(5), 5.7 (6), 5.5 (5), 5.6 (5); and 8) deleting Section 17 in it’s entirety and copying the text of Section
17.1 to Section 12 as Section 12.6; and 9) amending the Legend of Ordinance No. 43 to record
the date of all changes contained herein.
12/15/2003
43G An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43F, the Zoning Ordinance, including: 1) additional
definitions related to set-backs, building height, storm water and sedimentation controls and management,
and the LDB Zoning District; 2) amendment to Sections 7.4, 8.4, 9.4 and 10.4 regarding
building height; 3) amendments to Section 14 providing for Building Density; 4) amendments to
Section 18 providing for changes in the LDB Zoning District; 5) amendment to Section 8.3 providing
for Two-family dwellings in the R2 Zoning District; 6) adding Section 17, Storm Water
And Sedimentation Controls And Storm Water Management as part of Gem Lake’s NPDES program.
NOTE: The development of Hillary Farm shall be subject to the provisions of Ordinance No.
43G through 21 March 2008 pursuant to Gem Lake City Council Resolution No. 2006-23B dated
24 July 2006 and Gem Lake City Council Resolution No. 2005-07 dated 21 March 2005.
02/21/2006
43H An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43G, the Zoning Ordinance, including recodification
and amendments to previously numbered Sections 3 adding definitions, 4 amending General Provisions,
5 amending Administration and Enforcement, 7 amending building height and fences, 8
amending building height and fences, 9 amending building height and fences, 10 amending building
height and fences, 12 expanding retail uses and controls, 13 amending using and yard requirements,
14 amending Performance Standards and 19 reducing open and green space requirements.
See NOTE exception in Ordinance No. 43G.
07/24/2006
43I An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43H, the Zoning Ordinance, by adding Section 12.3.1
K) adding provision for retail automobile renting as a permitted conditional use in the RB Retail
Business District.
12/21/2006
43J
An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43I, the Zoning Ordinance, by adding Section 13,
Planned Unit Development
1/16/2007
88
An Ordinance amending Section 17.8.2 of Ordinance 43J to require the payment of City zoning
review costs and the deposit of an escrow for payment of said costs.
10/21/2008
104
An Ordinance amending Section 10 of Ordinance 43J, making minor clarifications to the Permitted
Uses of the GBII zone, and adding Rental, Open Sales Lot and Open Storage Lot as Conditional
Uses within the zone.
10/21/2008
107 An Ordinance Revising the Zoning Ordinance By: Deleting Existing Sections 9, 10, 11 and 12;
Replacing Deleted Sections With a New Chapter 9, Gateway Zoning District, Amending the Official
Zoning Map; Restating Zoning Ordinance as No. 43K
5/19/2009
Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 112
109 An Ordinance Establishing Sign Regulations in the City of Gem Lake, and Repealing Prior
Versions of Sign Regulations
10/19/2009
121 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43K to Permit the Construction of Residential
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) Within the City of Gem Lake
12/21/2010
122 An Ordinance Amending the Zoning Ordinance of Gem Lake to Add a New Section Allowing
for a Garden Overlay Zone.
07/19/2011
123 An Ordinance Amending the Zoning Ordinance of Gem Lake Relating to the Consideration
and Allowances of Variances from the Zoning Ordinance.
07/19/2011
125 An Ordinance Amending the Zoning Ordinance of Gem Lake to Replace Sections 21 and 22
Relating to Gem Lake Waters, Wetlands, Shorelands, Erosion Control and Stormwater Management.
07/17/2012
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 45
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, AND OTHER REFUSE
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
Section 1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate the disposal of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse
in the City of Gem Lake so as to control rats and other vermin and otherwise protect the health of the inhabitants and
property located in the City.
Section 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Commercial Establishment. shall mean any premises where a commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is
carried on, and shall include hotels and boarding houses, clubs, churches, and establishments of nonprofit
organizations where food is prepared or served or goods are sold.
Garbage. shall mean animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, service and
consumption of food and shall also include all other animal wastes, but shall not include refuse or hazardous waste.
Hazardous Waste shall mean hazardous waste as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 116.06, subdivision 13.
Incinerator. shall mean any device sued for the destruction of refuse, rubbish, or waste materials by fire.
Open burning. means the burning of any matter whereby the resultant com bustion products are emitted directly to
the atmosphere without passing through an adequate stack, duct, or chimney.
Refuse. shall include all wastes which normally result from the operation of a household, except body wastes and
garbage, including, but not limited to, rubbish, tin cans, paper, cardboard, glass jars, bottles, wood, grass clippings,
Christmas trees, ashes, sod, dirt, tires, rocks, household construction material, cement bricks, trees, leaves, hedge
or tree trimmings, burning barrels and mesh backyard burners, household appliances and furniture, or any other
household refuse or materials small enough for one man to handle. The term "refuse" shall not include hazardous
waste, construction material or other waste or debris resulting from construction or reconstruction of buildings and
other improvements by contractors, or trees in excess of six (6) inches in diameter.
Residential Dwelling Unit. shall mean any single building consisting of four (4) or less separate dwelling places,
with individual kitchen facilities for each. Any building containing more than four (4) dwelling places, with
individual kitchen facilities, shall be deemed "multiple dwelling residences."
Section 3. Disposal of Garbage and Refuse. Every tenant, lessee, owner, or occupant of every private dwelling, house,
multiple residence, store, motel, restaurant, and every other type of property in the city which accumulates garbage or
refuse or bo th on such premises shall dispose of such garbage and refuse as provided in this section. Garbage and refuse
shall be disposed of at least once each week from residential dwelling unit properties. Garbage and refuse in outside
storage at any commercial establishment shall be disposed of at least once each week and as often as once each day if
necessary to protect the public health. No perso n shall accumulate or permit to accumulate any refuse on any property
in the city which might constitute a nuisance by reason of appearance, odor, sanitation, possible littering of neighboring
properties, littering of the property on which the refuse is accumulated, attracting rats or other vermin, or a fire hazard.
Section 4. Collection, Supervision, and Control. The City Council shall have the authority to make regulations
concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers, and such other matters pertaining to the collection,
conveyance, and disposal as they shall find necessary, and to change and modify the same. Any person aggrieved
by a regulation of the City Council shall have the right of appeal to the City Council which shall have the authority to
confirm, modify, or revoke any such regulation.
Section 5. Pre-Collection Practices. Grass clippings, leaves, and other similar refuse shall be placed in bags or bundles
not exceeding three (3) feet in any dimension and securely fastened to avoid spillage. Household appliances and
furniture falling within the definition of refuse need not be so packaged. All refuse deposited for pickup shall be placed
next to the property line unless the commercial private garbage and refuse collector agrees to pick up such refuse from
some other location on the premises. Refuse shall be deposited at one place, at gro und level, on each property. Refuse
and garbage shall not be deposited on the traveled roadway on any street or alley. Refuse and garbage shall not be
deposited next to streets or alleys for collection prior to 3:00 p.m. on the day preceding the day of collection and
containers and any garbage or refuse which is not picked up shall be removed from any such location on the day of
collection.
Section 6. Preparation of Garbage and Refuse. Except as otherwise provided in Section 4, all garbage and refuse
as accumulated on any premises shall be placed and maintained in containers and shall have drained from it all free
liquids before being deposited for collection and shall be wrapped or bagged.
Section 7. Contagious Disease Refuse. Refuse such as, but not limited to, bedding, wearing apparel, or utensils from
residential dwelling units or other units where highly infectious or contagious diseases are present shall not be deposited
for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the health officer or his deputy at the expense of the owner
or possessor thereof.
Section 8. Hazardous Waste; Hazardous Waste Regulations. All hazardous waste, including but not limited to,
explosive and highly flammable material, shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws and regulations of the
United States of America and the State of Minnesota, including regulations and permit requirements established by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Waste Management Board.
Section 9. Duty to Provide and Maintain Containers in Sanitary Condition. Garbage and refuse containers shall
be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant of the premises or garbage and refuse collector, located in such a
manner so as to prevent them from being overturned. Such containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
kept free from any substance which will attract or breed flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. No garbage or refuse
container shall exceed thirty-two (32) gallons in capacity or have ragged or sharp edges and any other defect liable to
hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof. Containers not complying with the requirements of this
ordinance shall be promptly replaced upon notice. Garbage containers shall be made of metal, or other suitable material,
which is rodent, fire, and waterproof and which will not easily corrode and is equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting
covers and shall be kept tightly covered when there is garbage therein. Refuse containers shall be of a kind
suitable for collection purposes, and shall be of such size and weight that they can be handled by one man, and kept
tightly covered when there is refuse therein.
Section 10. Multiple Dwelling Residences. Multiple dwelling residences shall either be equipped with refuse
containers and refuse pickup service as provided in this paragraph 10 or be equipped with a commercial incinerator
complying with the requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Refuse containers provided as an
alternative to or in addition to such incineration shall be at least one (1) cubic yard in capacity, shall be conveniently
located in relationship to the residence units for which they are provided, shall be water-tight and rodent-pro of with selfclosing
lids and shall be kept in an enclosing structure concealing them from public view. Such structure shall have a
raised concrete floor and shall be surrounded by a concrete barrier curb. Such structure shall be kept in a state of good
repair at all times. The refuse containers shall be located so that their contents are inaccessible to at least three (3) feet
above the base of the enclosing structure. The owner or operator of such multiple dwelling residence shall provide for
garbage pickup from such containers each day. Refuse, debris, garbage and other waste materials shall not be permitted
to be accumulated in or near the enclosing structures (except in the containers). There shall be daily cleanup in and
around each such enclosing structure.
Section 11. Commercial Establishments. The owner or occupant of any commercial establishment or any other
property which provides a volume of garbage or refuse or both, which requires garbage and refuse pickup more
frequently than once a week, shall also comply with the provisions of the foregoing Section 10.
Section 12. Disposition by Burning; Air Pollution Control Regulations. No perso n shall dispose of garbage or refuse
by burning except in accordance with applicable state law and regulations, including the conditions of any open burning
permit obtained for such purpose. The regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, which have been adopted
and incorporated by reference by City Ordinance No. 44 require that a permit be secured for open burning.
Section 13. Vehicles for Hauling Garbage and R efuse. All persons hauling or conveying garbage or refuse over the
streets in the city shall use a vehicle provided with a tight cover and so operated and maintained as to prevent offensive
odors escaping therefrom and garbage or refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled from the vehicle. Any such
vehicles shall be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and, if customarily used for the hauling of
garbage or refuse, shall not be allowed to stand in any street, alley, or other place longer than is reasonably necessary
to collect garbage and refuse. Any vehicle customarily used for such purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be thoro ughly disinfected at least once each week unless the same has not been used since the last
disinfection thereof.
Section 14. Hours for Hauling Garbage and Refuse. No person engaged in hauling refuse or garbage for hire within
the city shall do so after eight thirty o'clock p.m. or before six thirty o'clock a.m. on any day. There shall be no garbage
or refuse pickup from residential dwelling units on Sunday.
Section 15. Inspection. Each vehicle engaged in hauling garbage or refuse in the city shall be subject to inspection by
the city at all reasonable times. Any such vehicle, while it is used in the city, shall have the name of the owner clearly
printed on both sides.
Section 16. Obligation of Commercial Collectors. A commercial garbage and refuse collector shall pick up any
garbage and refuse of his customers which has been deposited for collection, in the manner provided by this ordinance.
Section 17. Disposal of Garbage and Refuse; Solid Waste Disposal Regulations. No person shall dispose of garbage
or refuse upon any property in the city except at a sanitary landfill site, resource reco very facility or other mixed solid
waste dispo sal facility, approved in accordance with applicable law, including M innesota Statutes Sections 473.801 to
473.834, and the rules and regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
Section 471.62, the Solid Waste Disposal Regulations, of the M innesota Pollution Control Agency are hereby adopted
by reference.
Section 18. Storage of Garbage and Refuse Containers. Garbage cans and other garbage and refuse containers shall
be so located as to be out of the public view, insofar as possible, except on the day of pick up.
Section 19. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $700 for each violation or both.
Section 20. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 45 was enacted and placed in full force and effect on 15 August 1983 by
a unanimous vote of the Gem Lake City Council.
CERTIFIED COPY
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 48
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF ALARM SYSTEMS, ESTABLISHING USER FEES,
ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATION OF SUCH ALARMS, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES
FOR FALSE ALARMS.
Section 1. Title. This ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as "the Alarm Ordinance," except as herein
referred to as "this ordinance."
Section 2. Scope and Purpose.
(a) Scope. This ordinance provides regulation for the use of fire, burglary, and safety alarms, establishes users' fees
and establishes a system of administration.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect public safety services of the City from misuse of pub lic
safety alarms and to provide for the maximum possible service to public safety alarm users.
Section 3. Definitions.
(a) Alarm System: An alarm installation designed to be used for the prevention or detection of burglary, robbery,
or fire and located in a building, structure, or facility.
(b) Alarm User: The perso n, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind
in control of any building, structure, or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
(c) False Alarm: An alarm signal eliciting a response by personnel of the Public Safety Department when a
situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system
through mechanical failure, pet movement, alarm malfunction, improper installation, or the inadvertence of the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his/her employees or agents. False alarms do not include alarms caused
by climatic conditions such as tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature, or any
other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer, or owner.
(d) Public Safety Department: The Ramsey County Sheriff's Department with respect to an alarm system
designed to be used for prevention or detection of burglary or robbery; the Fire Department of the City of W hite
Bear Lake with respect to an alarm system designed to be used for the prevention or detection of fire.
Section 4. Reports of False Alarms; Notice to Alarm User. The Public Safety Department shall file, a written report
of each false alarm with the Administrator of this Ordinance. Upon receipt of the first false alarm report at an address,
the Administrator shall, be certified mail, notify the alarm user of the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 5. User Fees; Notice. An alarm user owning an alarm system which precipitates or reports more than three (3)
false alarms in a calendar year shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00 per false alarm in excess of three (3) and $150.00
per false alarm in excess of fifteen (15) false alarms in a calendar year. Upon receipt of a fourth and all subsequent false
alarms reports as to an alarm system, the Administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail that the threshold
number of false alarms has occurred and that the applicable user fee specified in the previous sentence hereof has become
due and owing.
Section 6. Appeals Process. Any alarm user who is required by the City to pay a user fee as the result of a false alarm
may make a written appeal of the false alarm charge to the City Council within ten (10) days of the City's mailing of the
notice of false alarm. The City Council will have authority to make a final determination as to whether the appellant is
to be charged with a false alarm.
Section 7. Payment of Fees.
(a) When and Where Due. Payment of user fees provided for under Section 5 must be made to the City Treasurer
within thirty (30) days of the date of notice by the City to the alarm user. Failure to pay the fee within said thirty
(30) day period will cause the alarm user to be considered delinquent and subject to a penalty of a full ten percent
(10%) of the fee due.
(b) Delinquencies. All delinquent charges for user fee shall be certified by the Administrator to the Ramsey County
Department of Property Taxation for collection with taxes due against the property on which the alarm system is
installed. This certification process shall take place on a yearly basis by October 10 of each year or by such earlier
date as is necessary to have the delinquent charges collectible with taxes due and payab le against the pro perty in the
next calendar year.
Section 8. Alarm Report When an alarm user has incurred five (5) false alarms or more within one (1) calendar year,
the alarm user shall submit a written report to the Administrator within ten (10) days after being charged with the fifth
false alarm, describing actions taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. Failure to submit a written
report required by this Section will be considered a violation of the Ordinance.
Section 9. Administrative Rules. The Administrator may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this Ordinance and the administration thereof.
Section 10. Confidentiality
(a) All information submitted in compliance with this Ordinance shall be held in confidence and shall be a
confidential record exempt from discovery to the extent permitted by law.
(b) Subject to requirements of confidentiality, the Administrator may develop and maintain statistics for the purpose
of on-going alarm systems evaluation.
Section 11. Enforcement and Penalties. Failure of omission to comply with any Section of this Ordinance shall be
deemed a misdemeanor and may be so prosecuted, and subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. Upon conviction
a violation of this Ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $700.00, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or both.
Section 12. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 48 was enacted and placed in full force and effect on 17 August 1987 by
a unanimous vote of the Gem Lake City Council.
CERTIFIED COPY
Page 1 of 2
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 56
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA
CORPORATION, IT'S SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO ERECT A GAS DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM FOR THE PURPOSE OF INSTALLING, ENLARGING, OPERATING, REPAIRING, AND
MAINTAINING IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, THE NECESSARY GAS PIPES, MAINS, AND
APPURTENANCES FOR THE TRANSMISSION OR DISTRIBUTION OF GAS TO SAID CITY AND IT'S
INHABITANTS AND OTHERS AND TRANSMITTING GAS INTO AND THROUGH SAID CITY AND TO
USE THE PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS OF SAID CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSE.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY, MINNESOTA, DOES ORDAIN:
Section 1. There be and hereby is granted to Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota corporation, it's successors
and assigns, hereinafter referred to as "Company", for a period of twenty (20) years from the date hereof, the right and
privilege of erecting a gas distribution system in the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Minnesota, hereinafter referred
to as "City", and using the public ways and public grounds of City for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and
maintaining, in, on, over, under, and across the same, all gas pipes, mains, and appurtenances, usually, conveniently, or
necessarily used in connection therewith, for the purpose of the transmission of gas, or the distribution of gas, for public
and private use within limits of City as it's boundaries exist or as they may be extended in the future, and for the purpose
of transmitting gas into and through the City. Company may also do all reasonable things necessary or customary to
accomplish these purposes subject, however, to the further provisions of this franchise. "Gas" as used herein shall be held
to includ e natural gas, manufactured gas, or other form of gaseous energy.
Section 2. The gas transmission or distribution service to be provided and the rates to be charged by Company for
service in the City shall be subject to the jurisd iction of the Public Utilities Commission of this State. Company shall
provide reasonably efficient and adequate service to members of the public within the City who apply for such service
in accordance with the rules and regulations of Company.
Section 3. Company shall indemnify, keep, and hold City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of
injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of Company's
gas facilities located in, on, over, under, or across the public ways and public grounds of City, unless such injury or
damage grows out of the negligence of City, it's employees, or agents, or results from the performance in a proper manner
of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by Company, but such performance is nevertheless ordered and directed by City
after notice of Company's determination. In the event a suit shall be brought against City under circumstances where the
above agreement to indemnify applies, Company at it's sole cost and expense shall defend City in such suit if written
notice thereof is promptly given to Company within a period wherein Company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice.
If such notice is not reasonably given as hereinbefore provided, Company shall have no duty to indemnify nor defend.
If Company is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have complete control of such litigation, but Company
may not settle such litigation without the consent of City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section
is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to City; and Company, in defending
any action on behalf of City shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that City could assert in
it's own behalf.
Section 4. The City shall give the Company at least two (2) weeks prior written notice of a vacation of a public way.
Except where required solely for a City improvement project, the vacation of any public way, after the installation of gas
facilities, shall not operate to deprive Company of it's rights to operate and maintain such gas facilities, until the
reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense, resulting from such relocation are first paid to Company.
In no case, however, shall City be liable to the Company for failure to specifically preserve a right-of-way under
Minnesota statutes, Section 160.29.
Page 2 of 2
Section 5. Company shall have full right and authority to assign to any person, persons, firm or corporation all the rights
conferred upon it by this Ordinance, provided that the assignee of such rights, by accepting such assignment, shall
become subject to the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 6. Company shall, if it accepts this Ordinance and the rights and obligations hereby granted, file a written
acceptance of the rights hereby granted with the City Clerk within ninety (90) days after the final passage and any
required publication of this Ordinance.
Section 7. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after it's passage, any publication required by law,
and acceptance by Company.
Section 8. Where provision of any other O rdinance conflicts with the pro visions of this Ordinance, the provisions of
this Ordinance shall prevail.
Section 9. Any notice to the Company required under this Ordinance, shall be mailed to the V ice President of Gas Utility
thereof at 825 Rice Street, St. Paul, Minnesota, 55117. Any notice to City shall be mailed to the City Clerk.
Section 10. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 56 was enacted and placed in full force and effect on 16 July 1990 by a
unanimous vote of the Gem Lake City Council.
ENACTED: ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
DATED: 16 July 1990 DATED: 16 July 1990
CERTIFIED COPY
- 2 -
Page 1 of 2
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 57
AN ORDINANCE REPLACING ORDINANCE NO. 7 {EXPIRED} AND GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES
POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION, IT'S SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION
TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, REPAIR, AND MAINTAIN IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, AN
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND TRANSMISSION LINES, INCLUDING NECESSARY POLES,
POLE LINES, FIXTURES, AND APPURTENANCES, FOR THE FURNISHING OF ELECTRIC ENERGY TO
THE CITY AND IT'S INHABITANTS AND OTHERS, AND TO USE THE PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC
GROUNDS OF SAID CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA DOES ORDAIN:
Section 1. There be and hereby is granted to Northern States Power Company, a Minnesota corporation, it's successors
and assigns, hereinafter referred to a "Company", during the period of twenty (20) years from the date hereof, the right
and privilege of constructing, operating, repairing, and maintaining, in, on, over, under, and across the streets, alleys,
and public grounds of the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Minnesota, hereinafter referred to as "City" an electric
distribution system and electric transmission lines, including poles, pole lines, and fixtures and appurtenances, usually
conveniently, or necessarily used in connection therewith, for the purpose of transmitting and furnishing electric energy
for light, heat, power, and other purposes for public and private use in and to said City and the inhabitants thereof, and
others, and for the purpose of transm itting into and through said City such electric energy, provided that such electric
distribution system and transmission lines shall be so located as in no way to interfere with the safety and convenience
of ordinary travel along and over said streets, alleys, and public grounds, and provided that Company, in the construction,
operation, repair, and maintenance of such poles, pole lines, and fixtures and appurtenances, shall be subject to such
reasonable regulation as may be imposed by the City Council.
Section 2. The service to be provided and the rates to be charged by Company for electric service in the City shall be
subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of this State. Company shall provide reasonably efficient
and adequate service to members of the public within the City who apply for such service in accordance with the rules
and regulations of Company.
Section 3. There is also granted to Company, during the term hereof, permission and authority to trim all trees and
shrubs in the streets, alleys, and public grounds of said City which may interfere with the proper construction, operation,
repair, and maintenance of any poles, pole lines, and fixtures and appurtenances, installed in pursuance of the authority
hereby granted, provided that Company shall save said City harmless from any liability in the premises.
Section 4. Company shall indemnify, keep and hold City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury
to persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of Company's electric
facilities located in, on, over, under, or across the public ways and public grounds of City, unless such injury or damage
grows out of negligence of City, it's employees, or agents, or results from the performance in a proper manner of acts
reasonably deemed hazardous by Company, but such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by City after notice
of Company determination. In the event a suit shall be brought against City under circumstances where the above
agreement to indemnify applies, Company at it's sole cost and expense shall defend the City in such suit if written notice
thereof is promptly given to Company within a period wherein Company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If such
notice is not reasonably given as hereinbefore provided, Company shall have no duty to indemnify nor defend. If
Company is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have complete control of such litigation, but Company
may not settle such litigation without the consent of City, which consent shall not be unresonably withheld. This section
is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to City; and Company, in defending
any action or immunity that City co uld assert in it's own behalf.
Section 5. The City shall give Company at least two (2) weeks prior written notice of a proposed vacation of a public
way. Except where required solely for a City improvement pro ject, the vacation of any public way, after the installation
of electric facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense resulting from such
relocation are first paid to Company. In no case, however, shall City be liab le to Company for failure to specifically
preserve a right-of-way under Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.29.
Section 6. Company shall have full right and authority to assign to any person, persons, firm, or corporation all the
rights conferred upon it by this Ordinance, provided that the assignee of such rights, by accepting such assignment, shall
become subject to the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Page 2 of 2
Section 7. Company shall, if it accepts this Ordinance and the rights and obligations hereby granted, file a written
acceptance of the rights hereby granted with the City Clerk within ninety (90) days after the final passage and any
required publication of this Ordinance.
Section 8. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after it's passage, any publication required by law,
and acceptance by Company.
Section 9. Where a provision of any other Ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of
this Ordinance shall prevail. Notice to Company shall be mailed to Area Manager thereof at 1700 East County Road E,
White Bear Lake, Minnesota, 55110 and any notice to City shall be mailed to the CITY CLERK.
Section 10. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 57 was enacted and placed in full force and effect on 16 July 1990 by a
unanimous vote of the Gem Lake City Council.
ENACTED: ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
DATED: 16 July 1990 DATED: 16 July 1990
CERTIFIED COPY
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
Ordinance No. 58C
AN ORDINANCE FOR PURPOSES OF REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF
LAND WITHIN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MN, DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS
USED THEREIN, PROVIDING FOR THE PREPARATION OF PLANS AND PLATS,
PROVIDING FOR THE INSTALLATION OF STREETS AND OTHER
IMPROVEMENTS, ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL AND
RECORDING OF PLATS, PROVIDING FOR FEES FOR PROCESSING
SUBDIVISION REQUESTS, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS
ORDINANCE AND REPEALING THE CODES AND ORDINANCES THAT ARE
REPLACED BY THIS ORDINANCE.
The City Council of the City of Gem Lake, MN does hereby ordain:
SECTION 1. TITLE
1.1 The short title of this ordinance shall be “The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of
Gem Lake, MN,” and referred to herein as “This Ordinance.”
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
2.1 In order to safeguard the best interests of the City of Gem Lake and to assist the
subdivider in harmonizing his interests with those of the City at large, the following
Ordinance is adopted so that the adherence to the same will bring results beneficial to
both parties. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to make certain regulations and
requirements for the platting of land within the City of Gem Lake, pursuant to the
authority contained in Minnesota Statutes, which regulations the City Council deems
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of this community.
SECTION 3. JURISDICTION
3.1 The regulations herein governing plats and the subdivision of land shall apply within
the corporate limits of the City of Gem Lake, MN.
SECTION 4. INTERPRETATION
4.1 The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
minimum requirements adopted for the protection of public health, safety and general
welfare.
SECTION 5. REQUIREMENTS
5.1 This Ordinance requires that all land division in the City of Gem Lake be
accomplished thru subdivision of property as described in this Ordinance.
5.2 No subdivision of property in the City of Gem Lake shall be recorded in the Ramsey
County Recorders Office or have any validity unless it is:
5.2.1 part of a Platted Subdivision, or
5.2.2 part of a Minor Subdivision described by a plat approved by the City, or
5.2.3 a single lot, existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, described by
metes and bounds, which description shall be accompanied by a registered lot
survey, or
5.2.4 a parcel 20 acres or more in size with at least 500 feet or more of frontage.
5.3 No building permits shall be considered for issuance by the City of Gem Lake for
constructing any building, structure or improvement on the land on any lot in the
subdivision as defined herein, until all requirements of this Ordinance have been met.
Section 5.4 Park Land Dedication Requirements
5.4.1 As a pre-requisite to plat or Planned Unit Development approval, all
developers shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces or trails
and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City of Gem Lake’s park fund as
provided by this section of this Ordinance. The form of the contribution, cash or
land (or any combination), shall be as determined by the City Council in an
amount equal to ten (10.0%) percent of the total acreage in the development or ten
(10.0%) percent of the pre-development land value.
5.4.2 Subdivision of land which has been previously platted and officially
recorded and which contains less than one (1) acre shall be exempt from
dedication requirements.
5.4.3 Land to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds and public open spaces shall be
reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the
people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and
recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree
cover, access and location. The City Council, at its discretion, may reject
proffered land and mandate monetary contribution.
5.4.4 The Gem Lake Planning Commission shall review all park land dedication
proposals including the location of land and the amount of land to be conveyed or
dedicated within a proposed development or subdivision. Upon review, the Gem
Lake Planning Commission shall recommend the land dedication and cash
contribution requirements for proposed developments or subdivisions to the City
Council. The exact amount of land or cash considerations to be dedicated shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
5.4.5 Land areas conveyed or dedicated to the City of Gem Lake, as a park or
recreation area, shall not be used in calculating the density requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance for the proposed development or subdivision, and shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for Planned Unit
Developments.
5.4.6 Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided for
in a proposed development, subdivision or Planned Unit Development and such
space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the
subdivision or PUD , such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the
City Council against the requirement for dedication for park and recreation
purposes, providing the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so and
that the following standards are met:
A) The yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space required to be
maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in
the computation of such private open spaces, and
B) That the public ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by written agreements, and
C) That the public open space is restricted for park and recreational
purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the
future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be eliminated
without the consent of the City Council, and
D) That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use
for park and recreations purposes, taking into consideration such factors as
size, shape, topography, hydrological conditions, geology, access and
location of private open space lands, and
E) That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance
with the provisions of the recreational element of the comprehensive plan,
and are approved by the City Council, and
F) That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall not exceed
forty (40.0%) percent of the park dedication requirements for the
development.
5.4.7 The City of Gem Lake shall maintain a separate fund into which all cash
contributions received in lieu of conveyance or dedication of land for park and
playground, public open space or trail purposes shall be deposited and shall make,
from time to time, appropriations from such fund for acquisition of land for park
and playground purposes, for developing existing park and playground sites, for
public open space and trails, or for debt retirement in connection with land
previously acquired for parks and playgrounds which benefit the residents of the
City.
5.4.8 If a developer or subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a commitment to
the City of Gem Lake as to the type of buildings that will be constructed on lots in
the proposed plat, then the land and cash requirement will be a reasonable amount
as determined by the City Council.
5.4.9 Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City of Gem
Lake shall not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the City.
SECTION 6. MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
6.1 When a subdivision is requested, if either or both of the following conditions exist,
the Zoning Administrator may bring the request and the completed Subdivision
Application form to the attention of the City Council without going through the complete
subdivision process outlined in this Ordinance:
6.1.1 The proposed subdivision will result in three (3) or fewer fully conforming
lots in an area where conditions are well defined. Only once shall a subdivision of
3 lots or less be allowed in any one (1) parcel of property. All lots proposed shall
have frontage on a street as required by the Zoning Ordinance.
6.1.2 In the case of a request to divide an existing lot, where the division is to
permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot, or to create two (2) lots,
and the newly created property line will not cause the other remaining portion of
the lot or any structure to be in violation with this Ordinance or the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
6.2 The applicant will be required to submit a plat prepared by a registered land surveyor
showing the original lot and the proposed subdivision. The newly created parcels also
shall meet all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. A preliminary site plan for the
proposed subdivided area showing building sites, driveway access points, drainage plans
and utility easements shall also be included.
6.3 The required filing fee for this Minor Subdivision shall be as established and, from
time to time, amended by the City Council as part of the Gem Lake Fee Schedule.
6.4 Prior to approval of a Minor Subdivision the City Council reserves the right to require
any or all sections of this Ordinance to be applied.
6.5 The Minor Subdivision created by these proceedings shall be recorded with the
County Register of Deeds within sixty (60) days after the date of approval by the City
Council. If not recorded within this time period, the approval of this subdivision by the
City shall be considered void.
SECTION 7. SEPARABILITY
7.1 It is the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this Ordinance are
separable and that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
SECTION 8. CONFLICT AND INTERACTION OF ORDINANCES
8.1 Whenever there is a conflict between minimum standards or dimensions specified
herein and those contained in other official regulations, resolutions, Codes or Ordinances
of the City, the most restrictive standards shall apply.
8.2 Ordinances which may affect this Ordinance include, but are not limited to, the
Zoning Ordinance, The Municipal Sanitary Sewer Ordinance, The Individual Sewage
Treatment Ordinance, and The Tree And Natural Barrier Protection And Preservation
Ordinance.
SECTION 9. REPEAL
9.1 The City of Gem Lake Ordinances Number 8 and Number 58A and 58C are hereby
repealed in their entirety and all conditions of the Ordinance are as incorporated herein.
SECTION 10. RULES AND DEFINITIONS
10.1 The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction.
10.1.1 The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
10.1.2 The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the
present.
10.1.3 The word “shall” is mandatory while the word “may” is permissive.
10.1.4 The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
10.1.5 Whenever a word or term defined herein appears in the text of this
Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition thereof.
10.1.6 All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a
foot.
10.2 The following words, and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance are defined
as follows:
APPLICANT - the legal owner of land proposed for subdivision or his legal
representative. The applicant must demonstrate that he has legal consent from the
owner for such subdivision.
BLOCK - an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets,
and/or by an exterior boundary of the subdivision, and/or by a river or lake.
BOULEVARD - the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and
the property line.
BUILDABLE AREA - the portion of the lot remaining after the required yards
have been provided and excluding in addition any areas where soil conditions are
inadequate for building.
BUILDING - any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels., or property of any kind.
CITY - the City of Gem Lake, MN.
CITY COUNCIL - the governing body of the City of Gem Lake.
CITY PLANS - the set of maps, documents and data on file with the Planning
Commission commonly known as the “Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal
Plan.”
CITY ENGINEER - a registered engineer appointed by the City Council to serve
on a part-time basis, consulting basis, or full-time, or in such a manner as the
Council shall prescribe.
COMMERCIAL BROADCAST SERVICES - Licensed commercial radio or
television services transmitting signals for reception by the general public.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES -
Licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular,
personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that
are marketed to the general public.
CONTIGUOUS - Areas of real property actually in contact with one another or
touching along a boundary and also touching or connected throughout in an
unbroken sequence. Real property separated by a body of water or designated wet
land shall not be considered contiguous regardless of whether the real property
under the body of water or wetland has common ownership. The routing of a
driveway through a parcel of real property shall not be considered as separating
same so as to make the portions created by the driveway not contiguous.
CURB LEVEL - The grade elevation as established by the City, of the curb in
front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established, the
City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this
Ordinance.
DESIGN STANDARDS - the specifications for use by land owners or
subdividers for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating
among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such
items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements and lots.
DEVELOPER - the person or firm designing and constructing the buildings,
streets and other construction activities needed to complete the subdivision.
DRAINAGE - the removal of surface water or groundwater from the land.
DREDGING - to enlarge or clean out a waterbody, water course or wetland.
DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE - a single or double lane road on a right-of-way not
less than thirty three (33) feet wide designed and built for vehicular traffic
between a public street and a single private residence located on a back lot,
constructed on land that is part of the residential lot served.
DWELLING - A building or one (1) or more portions thereof occupied or
intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purpose, but not including
rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents,
cabins or trailer coaches.
DWELLING, ATTACHED - A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling.
DWELLING, DETACHED - A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
EASEMENT - a grant by an owner of land for the use of that land or a specific
portion thereof for a specific limited purpose by a person or persons. The purpose
generally shall be for public utility facilities such as underground utilities,
including but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone
lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN - A plan developed in accordance with the
requirements of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Regional, State of MN and Federal
guidelines that includes all proposed alterations to real property and the methods
to be employed before undertaking the proposed alterations to prevent potential
erosion and contamination of shorelands, wetlands and watershed areas, streets
and by-ways, and adjacent private and public real property using accepted best
practices.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or
water transmission or distribution systems including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals or other similar
equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith, but not including buildings.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES - Structures including, but not limited
to, buildings such as telephone exchanges, substations, wells, pumping stations
and elevated tanks.
FAMILY - An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of
persons not so related, maintaining a common household and using common
cooking and kitchen facilities.
FEES - Charges established and, from time to time, amended by the City Council
by resolution for services, variances, permits, licenses or other activities.
FILLING - the act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand, or other material so
as to fill a waterbody, watercourse, wetland or other depression.
FINAL PLAT - the final plat of the subdivision that is presented to the City
Council for approval and that, if approved, will be submitted to the County
Register of Deeds.
GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION) - the level at which the
ground surface intersects the foundation of the building.
GRADING - changing the natural or existing topography of the land.
GRADE PLANE - A reference plane representing the finished ground level
adjoining the building at the exterior walls. Where the finished ground level
slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by
the lowest point within the area between the building and a point six (6) feet from
the building.
HEIGHT, STORY - The vertical distance from top to top of two successive
finished floor surfaces: and for the top most story, from the top of the finished
floor to the top of the ceiling joists, where there is not a ceiling to the top of the
roof rafters.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (ISTS) - a septic tank,
seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved on-site sewage
treatment device.
LOT - land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings,
together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, having not less than the minimum area required by the Zoning
Ordinance for a building site in the district in which such lot is situated and
having its principal frontage on a public street or in residential districts an
authorized private way.
LOT AREA - the area of the horizontal plane within the lot lines.
LOT AREA PER FAMILY - The number of square feet of lot area required per
dwelling unit.
LOT, BACK - a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, having not less than the minimum area
required by the Zoning Ordinance for a building site in the Zoning District in
which such lot is located and having primary access via a private driveway or
authorized private way which is on land that is part of the residential lot served.
LOT, CORNER - a lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single
street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less.
LOT, DEPTH - the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot.
LOT, FRONTAGE - the front of the lot shall be that boundary abutting the
public right-of-way or an authorized private way having the least length.
LOT, INTERIOR - a lot, other than a corner lot, including through lots.
LOT, THROUGH - A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2)
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both
street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this Ordinance.
LOT IMPROVEMENT - any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
LOT LINE - a property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of the
lot extends into the abutting street, the lot line shall be deemed to be the edge of
the street right-of-way.
LOT OF RECORD - Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat heretofore duly
approved and filed, or one (1) unit of an Auditor's Subdivision or a Registered
Land Survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered, for
which a Deed, Auditor's Subdivision or Registered Land Survey has been
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Ramsey
County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
LOT WIDTH - the maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the minimum building setback line.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET - a service drive or minor street that is parallel
and adjacent to a thoroughfare and that provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREET - a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the
abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
OUTLOT - a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is
intended as open space or other use, for which no development is intended and for
which NO building permit shall be issued.
OWNER - any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this Ordinance.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS - public land and open spaces in the City of
Gem Lake dedicated or reserved for recreational purposes.
PEDESTRIAN WAY - a public right-of-way or private easement across a block
or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and that may be used for the
installation of utility lines.
PERSON - any individual, firm, association, syndicate, or partnership,
corporation, trust, or any other legal entity.
PERCENTAGE OF GRADE - on the street centerline, the distance vertically
from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred (100) feet of
horizontal distance.
PLAN - a group of drawings and sketches that outlines the ideas for making a
subdivision of land. These shall include details on lot and street layout, physical
features of the land to be subdivided, locations of existing features, and details on
utilities such as water, sewer, electric and other utilities.
PLANNING COMMISSION - the City of Gem Lake Planning Commission.
PLAT - a map, chart or drawing prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor that
describes the completed field work, and establishing corner monuments for the
covered lots.
PRELIMINARY PLAN - the tentative drawings or maps of a proposed
subdivision meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT- any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other
facility for which the City of Gem Lake does or may ultimately assume
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or that may affect an improvement
for which local government responsibility is established.
RESERVE STRIPS - narrow strips of private property reserved exclusively for
the purpose of controlling or limiting access via public right-of-way to contiguous
properties.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS - contracts made between private parties as to
the manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
SETBACK - the distance between a building, structure or ISTS and a lot line or
designated right-of-way.
SHORELAND - Real property immediately adjacent to and abutting but not
contained within the mean high water mark of any Shoreline.
SHORELAND IMPACT PLAN - A plan detailing current and future use of
Shorelands and the potential impact of said uses; an assessment of current and
future conditions and impact on those conditions for: vegetation and trees, soil
and water, human and animal habitat, natural aesthetics and environmental
quality.
SHORELAND ZONE 1 - All real property located within and waterward of any
Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or
local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 2 - All real property located within and landward fifty
(50’) feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal,
state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such
determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 3 - All real property located within and landward fifty
(50’) feet to one hundred fifty (150') feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem
Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with
the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELINE - The mean high water mark of the body of water known as Gem
Lake and any lake, pond, or flowage in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a
federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such
determinations, along with all wetlands attendant to each body of water.
SKETCH PLAN - a general plan of a possible subdivision that includes the items
required by this Ordinance.
STREET - a public or private way not less than forty (40) feet in width that
affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR - a street that carries traffic from minor streets to
thoroughfares.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC - a local street with only one outlet.
STREET WIDTH - the shortest distance between the lines delineating the rightof-
way of a street.
SUBDIVIDER - any person commencing proceedings under this Ordinance to
effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another. (See definition
of Applicant).
SUBDIVISION - the division of an area, parcel, or tract of land into two (2) or
more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development that will require the creation of streets and roads, except for those
resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of lot lines by the relocation of a
common boundary. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of sub-dividing or to the land subdivided.
TANGENT - a straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve at the
point where the line meets the curve.
THOROUGHFARE - a street for fast or heavy traffic used primarily as a traffic
artery between relatively large or congested areas.
USE - The purpose or activity for which the land, structure, or building thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and
shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance
standards of this Ordinance. Uses shall be classified as principal or accessory and
as permitted, special, interim and prohibited.
USE, INTERIM. - A temporary use of real property requiring a permit issued by
the City which shall be allowed until a particular date, until the occurrence of a
particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer allow for said temporary
use.
USE, NONCONFORMING - A use of land, buildings or structures lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance which does not comply with all
the regulations of this Ordinance or any use of land, building or structure lawfully
existing prior to the adoption of an amendment which would not comply with all
of the regulations.
USE, PERMITTED - A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and
performance standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses.
USE, SPECIAL - Either a public or private use as listed which, because of it’s
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district. This includes those occupations, vocations, skills, arts,
businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning district,
which for the respective conduct or performance in such designated districts may
require reasonable, but special, unusual, or extraordinary limitations peculiar to
the use for the protection, promotion, and preservation of the general public
welfare, health, and safety as well as the integrity of the City’s Comprehensive
Municipal Plan. Consideration of each case of special use shall be given to impact
of such use on neighboring real property and of the public need for the particular
use at the particular location.
USABLE OPEN SPACE - a required ground area or terrace area on a lot that is
graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for
either active or passive recreation or both, available and accessible to and usable
by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their
guests. Such areas may be covered but only for recreational purposes. Roofs,
breezeways, driveways and parking areas shall not constitute usable open spaces.
VARIANCE - A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance such that deviation
will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to physical conditions
unique to the individual real property under consideration and not the results of
actions of the owner, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in an
undue hardship.
VEGETATION - the total sum of plant life in an area.
VERTICAL CURVE - the surface curvature on a street, road or highway center
line occurring between lines of different percentage of grade or slope.
WATERBODY - a body of water (such as a lake or pond) or a depression of land
or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water.
WATERCOURSE - a channel or depression through which water flows
continuously or intermittently, such as rivers, streams, or creeks.
WATERSHED - the area drained by a natural or artificial drainage system,
bounded peripherally by a ridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas.
WAY, AUTHORIZED PRIVATE - a road with a right-of-way not less than
forty (40) feet wide across private land designed and built for vehicular traffic
between a public street and two or more private residences. This road shall have
been authorized or approved by the City Council, to be built and maintained by
private interests. Authorized private ways are allowed only in R1 residential
districts.
WETLANDS - an area where water stands near, at or above the soil surface
during a significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting a
predominantly aquatic form of vegetation, and that may have the following
characteristics:
a. Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen, sedge
meadow, shrubland, and northern lowland forest (conifer swamp)
communities. (These communities correspond roughly to wetland types 1,
2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 described by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service, Circular 39, “Wetlands of the U.S.”).
b. Mineral soils with gley horizons or organic soils belonging to the
Histosol order (peat and muck).
c. Soil that is water logged or covered with water at least three (3) months
of the year.
d. Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows, and sloughs are
wetlands, and such property may be shallow waterbodies, the water of
which are stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may be at
times sufficiently dry to permit tillage, but would require drainage to be
made arable. The edge of a wetland is commonly that point where natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial.
YARD - A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed
by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as expressly
permitted in this Ordinance. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right
angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT - that area extending along the full length of a front lot line
between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way to
the depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which it is located. In
the case of a corner lot abutting one or more major roads, both yards shall be
considered front yards. A major road is any road that is of a collector designation
or greater.
YARD, REAR - that area extending the full length of the lot line between the
side lot lines and extending towards the front lot line for a depth as specified in
the yard regulations for district in which it is located.
YARD, REQUIRED - that distance specified in the yard requirements pertaining
to setbacks. Setbacks and required yards are used interchangeably.
YARD, SIDE - that area extending along the full length of a side lot line between
the front and rear lot lines and extending from the side lot line to the depth
required by the yard regulations for the district in which it is located.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR - that person appointed as set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance, to be responsible for enforcing and administrating the City of Gem
Lake Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 11. FILING AND REVIEW PROCEDURES OF PLANS
11.1 SKETCH PLAN. In order to insure that all applicants are informed on the
procedural requirements and minimum standards of this Ordinance and the requirements
or limitations imposed by other City Codes, Ordinances or Plans, the applicant shall
submit three (3) copies of a Sketch Plan to the Zoning Administrator. (see Section 12.1
for details of what is to be included in a Sketch Plan) The applicant also shall arrange a
pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission and
the City Engineer to review and discuss the proposed development.
11.2 PRELIMINARY PLAN
11.2.1 FILING - the subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator the
following:
A) A completed Subdivision Application form
B) Ten (10) copies of the Preliminary Plan and at least one reduced (8 ½ X
11 or 8 ½ X 14) Preliminary Plat.
C) The required fees. The base fee for a subdivision application shall be
established by the city council from time to time and published with all
other City fees and charges. This fee is non-refundable. In addition to the
base fee, the subdivider shall deposit funds with the City for payment of
expenses incurred through staff time and from all outside sources
including, but not limited to, engineers, attorneys, and outside consultants
employed specifically for review and processing the application. The
deposit shall be based on the city clerk’s estimate of staff and consultant
time required, but in no case shall the deposit exceed one percent (1%) of
the current-year market value of the land to be subdivided, as determined
by the Ramsey County Assessor. Any amount over the base fee not
expended by the city will be refunded within thirty (30) days of final
action on the application (i.e. final plat approval or application denial).
Expenses in excess of the filing fee and deposit that the City incurs shall
be borne by the subdivider and paid prior to final approval.
D) Any applications for Variances from the provisions of this Ordinance
or applications for Variances or Special Uses as provided for in the other
Gem Lake Ordinances and the required fee(s) for such action.
E) A list of all property owners located within three hundred fifty (350)
feet of the subject property, obtained from and certified by Ramsey
County or the City of Gem Lake.
F) An executed Cost Sharing Agreement indicating the applicants
understanding that he/she agrees to reimburse the City for all expenses
incurred through staff time and from all outside sources including, but not
limited to, engineers, attorneys, and outside consultants employed
specifically for review and processing the application.
11.2.2 ACTION ON REQUESTS. The Zoning Administrator shall upon receipt
of the Preliminary Plan:
A) Determine whether the Preliminary Plan includes the data required by
this Ordinance. The plan shall be considered as being officially submitted
when all the information required is supplied and all requirements of this
Ordinance are complied with.
B) Send a copy of the Subdivision Application and one copy of the
Preliminary Plan to each member of the Planning Commission and one
copy to the City Engineer.
C) The Zoning Administrator also shall refer copies of the Preliminary
Plan to the Park Advisory committee, Watershed Districts, County, State,
or other public jurisdictions for their timely review and comment, where
appropriate and when required.
D) The proposed plan shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible
Planning Commission meeting.
E) The City Engineer shall in a timely manner submit his report to the
Planning Commission. This report shall be on the feasibility of street
location and construction and on any drainage or other problems that
might be encountered. The absence of a report from the City Engineer
shall in no way invalidate the approval or disapproval by the City of the
Preliminary Plan.
F) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
Preliminary Plan and shall have notice of such hearing published in the
official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The
subdivider shall certify that all owners of property within 350 feet of the
property being subdivided have been notified by mail of the Public
Hearing.
G) Upon completion of the Public Hearing, the Planning Commission
shall prepare and submit it’s report, five (5) copies of the Preliminary
Plan, it’s recommendation for approval or disapproval, and
recommendations for conditions associated with approval to the City
Council in a timely manner that allows the City Council to take action
within the time limits established by law. If the report of the Planning
Commission has not been received so as to provide for compliance with
time limits established by law, the City Council may act without such a
report.
H) The City Council shall, within the time limits established by law,
approve with or without conditions or disapprove the Application For
Subdivision Preliminary Plat with said action being formally recorded in
the minutes of a properly convened meeting. Further, any disapproval of
the Application For Subdivision Preliminary Plat shall be noticed in
writing to the applicant.
I) Any modification or waiver of time limits established by law shall only
be made in writing to the City by the applicant except for extensions by
the City provided for by law.
11.3 FINAL PLAT. Within six (6) months following approval of the Preliminary Plan by
the City Council, unless the subdivider has requested an extension of that time from the
City Council, the following shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator:
11.3.1 FILING
A) Eight (8) copies of the Final Plat, including one reproducible copy are
required. This Final Plat shall incorporate all changes to and conditions
associated with the Preliminary Plan required by the City Council.
Otherwise, it shall conform to the Preliminary Plan. The Final Plat may
constitute only that portion of the Preliminary Plan that the subdivider
proposes to record and develop at this time. If the Final Plat is not
submitted within six (6) months, the approval of the Preliminary Plan shall
be considered void.
B) An up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property record
report and such other evidence as the City Council may require showing
title or control of the property in the subdivision by the applicant.
11.3.2 ACTION ON REQUESTS - the Zoning Administrator shall upon receipt
of the Final Plat:
A) Acknowledge receipt of the Final Plat to the applicant
B) Send three (3) copies of the Final Plat to the Planning Commission
C) The report of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the City
Council in a timely manner that allows the City Council to take action
within the time limits established by law after filing of the Final Plat. The
report shall state whether the proposed improvements conform to the
engineering standards and specifications established in this Ordinance. It
shall also state whether the Final Plat conforms to the Preliminary Plan as
approved by the City Council pursuant to Section 11.2.2 h).
D) The City Council shall act on the Final Plat within the time limits
established by law. It shall not approve a Final Plat unless it:
1) Conforms to the Preliminary Plan with all changes and
conditions associated with the Preliminary Plan approval by the
City.
2) Meets the design and engineering standards set forth in this
Ordinance,
3) Conforms to the plans of the City, as approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council.
4) All fees required to be paid to the City in connection with this
Plat have been paid.
E) If the Final Plat is approved by the City Council, the subdivider shall
record it with the County Register of Deeds within sixty (60) days after
the date of approval. If not recorded within this time period, the approval
of the Final Plat shall be considered void.
F) The subdivider shall immediately upon completion of recording,
furnish to the City Clerk two (2) prints of the Final Plat showing evidence
of recording.
SECTION 12 DATA REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANS AND PLATS
12.1 SKETCH PLAN. Sketch Plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
12.1.1 Plat Boundary
12.1.2 North arrow
12.1.3 Scale
12.1.4 Street layout on and adjacent to plat
12.1.5 Designation of land use and current proposed zoning
12.1.6 Significant topographical or physical features
12.1.7 Preliminary lot locations, numbers and layout
12.2 PRELIMINARY PLAN. The subdivider shall prepare and submit a Preliminary
Plan, together with any necessary supplementary information. The Preliminary Plan shall
contain the information set forth in the sections that follow.
12.2.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A) Proposed name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate or too closely
resemble names of existing subdivisions in Ramsey County.
B) Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter
section or quarter-quarter section line comprising a legal description of the
property.
C) Names and addresses of all persons having property interest, the
developer, designer and surveyor together with the surveyor’s registration
number.
D) Graphic scale of plat, not less than one (1) inch to one hundred (100)
feet.
E) Date and north arrow.
12.2.2 EXISTING CONDITIONS
A) Boundary lines and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly indicated.
B) Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the
subdivision.
C) Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets
or other public ways, showing type, width and condition of improvements,
if any; railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open
spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section and
corporate lines within the plat and to a distance of three hundred fifty
(350) feet beyond the tract.
D) Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of one hundred
(100) feet beyond the tract, Such data as grades, invert elevations and
locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants also shall be shown.
E) Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided and subdivided land, within
three hundred fifty (350) feet, identified by name and ownership,
including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider.
F) Topographical data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more
than two (2) feet. Water courses, wetlands, rock out-crops, power
transmission poles and lines and other significant features shall also be
shown.
G) In plats where public water and sewer are not available, the subdivider
shall file a report prepared by a registered civil engineer on the feasibility
of individual on-site sewer and waste systems on each lot, and shall
include soils boring analysis and percolation tests to verify conclusions.
12.2.3 PROPOSED DESIGN FEATURES
A) Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline
gradients, typical cross sections, and proposed names of streets in
conformance with City and County street identification policies. The name
of any street heretofore used in the City of Gem Lake or its environs shall
not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an already
named street, in which event the same name shall be used.
B) Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains.
C) Locations, dimensions and purposes of all easements.
D) Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and
blocks.
E) Minimum front and side street building setback lines.
F) When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building
setback line.
G) Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements,
intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of
such area or areas in acres.
H) Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of
an existing community system whenever feasible. Service connections
shall be stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire hydrants also
shall be provided. Extensions of the public water supply system shall be
designed so as to provide public water in accordance with the standards of
the City of Gem Lake. In areas where public water supply is not available,
individual wells shall be provided on each lot, properly placed in relation
to individual sewage treatment facilities on the same and adjoining lots.
Well plans must comply with the Minnesota State Well Code as may be
amended, and shall be submitted for the approval of the City Engineer.
I) Sewage Disposal, Public. Sanitary sewer mains and service connections
shall be installed in accordance with the standards and ordinances of the
State of MN, Ramsey County and the City of Gem Lake.
J) Sewage Disposal, Private. All on-site septic systems shall be installed in
accordance with the standards and ordinances of the State of MN, Ramsey
County and the City of Gem Lake.
12.2.4 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
A) Proposed restrictive covenants
B) An accurate soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a qualified
person.
C) Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings with
number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as to
reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion
of population.
D) If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for
the areas, including dimensions shall be shown, Such proposed zoning
plan shall be for information only and shall not vest any rights in the
applicant.
E) Provisions for surface water disposal, ponding, drainage and flood
control.
F) Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being
proposed for the subdivision, it shall be required that the subdivider
submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property so as to show the
possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and the future
subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be required to relate well
with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions.
G) Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots that
are subject to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical
way in which the lots could possibly be resubdivided in the future.
H) Proof that a plan for soil erosion and sediment control, both during
construction and after development, has been completed. The plan shall
include gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control
measures, design of sediment control measures, and landscaping of the
erosion and sediment control system along with any such requirements as
may be required of the applicant by watershed districts or other such
public agencies established to regulate sediment and erosion control.
I) A vegetation preservation and protection plan that shows those trees
proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and location of trees
and other vegetation that are to be planted, and which indicates
compliance with all attendant local ordinances.
J) When the City of Gem Lake agrees to install improvements in a
development, the developer shall furnish the City a Financial Statement
satisfactory to the City. When then City has not undertaken to install
improvements, the City may, at the City’s option, require the developer to
furnish a Financial Statement satisfactory to the City.
K) Such other information as may be required.
12.3 FINAL PLAT. The owner or subdivider shall submit a Final Plat together with any
necessary supplementary information. The Final Plat, prepared for recording purposes,
shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes, Ramsey
County regulations and the Final Plat shall contain the following information:
12.3.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A) Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate the name of any existing subdivision.
B) Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including
descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse,
giving angular and linear dimensions that must mathematically close. The
allowable error closure of any portion of a final plat shall be one (1) foot
in seventy-five hundred (7500) feet.
C) The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final
plat. Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to such reference points or monuments.
D) Locations of lots, streets, public highways, parks and other features,
with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length of
radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information necessary to
reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall be
shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines.
E) Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks are to be numbered, with
numbers shown clearly in the center of the block.
F) The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to be dedicated.
G) Location and width of all easements to be dedicated.
H) Name, address and registration number of the surveyor making the
plat.
I) Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale), date and
north arrow.
J) Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are served
over, under and along strips marked “utility easements.”
K) Statement dedicating all streets and other public areas not previously
dedicated as follows: Streets and other public areas shown on this plat and
not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated.
12.3.2 CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
A) Certification by a registered surveyor in the form required by Section
505.03, Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
B) Execution by all owners of any interest in the land or any lenders of a
mortgage thereon of the certificate required by Section 505.03, Minnesota
Statutes, as amended, and where certificate shall include a dedication of
the utility easements and other public areas in such form as approved by
the City Council.
C) Certifications showing that all taxes currently due on the property to be
subdivided have been paid in full.
D) An approval and review block to be filled in with the signature of the
Mayor and City Clerk. The form of this approval and review block is as
follows:
Approved by the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Minnesota
This ___ Day of _________________________, 20
Signed: ___________________________________
Mayor
Attest: ____________________________________
City Clerk
SECTION 13. DESIGN STANDARDS
13.1 BLOCKS
13.1.1 Block Length. In general, intersecting streets, determining block lengths,
shall be provided at such intervals so as to serve cross traffic adequately and to
meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions should not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1800) feet nor be less
than four hundred (400) feet in length, except where topography or other
conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than twelve
hundred (1200) feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block may be
required near the center of the block.
13.1.2 Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow
for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their
respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries.
13.2 LOTS
13.2.1 Area. The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that
established by the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of the Final Plat.
13.2.2 Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to
permit appropriate building setback from both streets as required in the Zoning
Ordinance.
13.2.3 Side lot lines. Other than for good reason, side lines of lots shall be
approximately at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.
13.2.4 Frontage. Every lot must have minimum frontage on a City approved
existing or platted street or road other than an alley, as required in the City of
Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance.
13.2.5 Setback lines. Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended
for residential use and shall not be less than the setback required in the Zoning
Ordinance.
13.2.6 Water courses. Lots abutting a water course, wetland, ponding area or
stream shall have additional depth and width, and other restrictions as required in
the Zoning Ordinance.
13.2.7 Features. In the subdividing of land, due regard shall be shown for natural
features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots or similar conditions
that if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
13.2.8 Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than being
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
13.2.9 Political boundaries. No singular plat shall extend over a political boundary
or school district line without documented notification to affected units of
government.
13.2.10 Frontage on two streets. Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2)
roughly parallel streets, shall be avoided except where lots back on an arterial
street or highways, or where topographic or other conditions render subdividing
otherwise unreasonable. Such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth
of at least twenty (20) feet in order to allow space for screen planting along the
back lot line.
13.2.11 Turn around egress. When proposed residential lots abut a collector or
arterial street, they should be platted in such a manner as to encourage turn around
egress on each lot.
13.3 STREETS
13.3.1 Streets, Continuous. Except for cul-de-sacs, streets shall connect with
streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, or provide for
future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a reasonable
projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. The arrangements of
thoroughfares and collector streets shall be considered in their relation to the
reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to run-off of storm
water, to public convenience and safety and in appropriate relation to proposed
uses of the area to be served.
13.3.2 Local streets, authorized private ways and Dead-end streets. Local streets
should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. Dead-end
streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be permitted where topography or other
physical conditions justify their use. Cul-de-sacs shall include a terminal turnaround
with a turn around radius of not less than sixty (60) feet.
13.3.3 Alleys. Alleys are not permitted in subdivisions in the City of Gem Lake.
13.3.4 Street plans for Future Subdivisions. Where the plat to be submitted
includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the
subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the
unsubdivided/subdivided portion shall accompany the plat.
13.3.5 Temporary Cul-de-sac. In those instances where a street is terminated
pending future extension in conjunction with future subdivision, a temporary turn
around facility shall be provided at the closed end as described in Section 13.3.2.
13.3.6 Street Intersections. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as
to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other
conditions justify variations. Under normal conditions, the minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be eighty (80) degrees. Street intersection jogs with an
offset of less than one hundred twenty five (125) feet shall be avoided.
13.3.7 Sidewalks. The Planning Commission, when it deems appropriate and
necessary, may require that sidewalks be provided on one or both sides of the
paved surface, and shall prescribe the minimum width of such sidewalks. In all
cases where sidewalks are specified, they shall provide handicapped access.
13.3.8 Half streets. Dedication of half streets shall not be considered for approval
except where it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and
in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations or where it will be
practical to require dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is
subdivided.
13.3.9 Private Streets. Private streets existing as of the date of this Ordinance are
permitted. Future private streets are permitted, but only when approved by the
City. The City may accept private streets as public streets, but only when such
streets have been upgraded to the standards set by this Ordinance.
13.3.10 Street Grades. The grades of all streets shall not be less than 0.3 percent
and should not exceed the following:
A) Collector Street Six (6%) percent
B) Minor Street Eight (8%) percent
13.3.11 Curb Radius. The minimum curb radii for thoroughfares, collector streets,
local streets, and alleys shall be as follows:
A) All Streets Ten (10') feet
13.3.12 Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except under conditions accepted by the City Council.
13.3.13 Street Right-of-Way Width. For all public streets hereafter dedicated and
accepted, the minimum right-of-way widths of streets shall be as shown in the
City of Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan and where not shown therein,
the minimum right-of-way width for streets, arterial highways or pedestrian ways
included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for
each classification as follows:
A) Principal Arterial Highway (As required by MNDOT)
B) Intermediate Arterial Highway 100 feet
C) Minor Arterial Highway 80 feet
D) Collector Street 70 feet
E) Minor Street 60 feet
F) Authorized Private Way 40 feet
G) Private Driveway 33 feet
H) Pedestrian Way 10 feet
13.4 EASEMENTS
13.4.1 Width and Location. Necessary easements of appropriate width for utilities
(including extension of main water and sewer lines) shall be provided (and shown
on the plat), preferably along lot lines or as necessary across lots.
13.4.2 Continuous Utility Easement Locations. Utility easements shall connect
with easements established in adjoining properties. These easements, when
approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City
Council.
13.4.3 Guy Wires. Additional easements for pole guys should be provided, where
appropriate, at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to
bisect the existing angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.
13.5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
13.5.1 The development of this subdivision shall conform to the natural limitation
presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil
erosion.
13.5.2 Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the
different stages of construction. Appropriate control measures shall be installed
prior to and maintained throughout development when necessary to control
erosion.
13.5.3 Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate
erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. The
smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one (1) period of time.
13.5.4 When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period
of time, as specified in the development agreement.
13.5.5 Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for
respreading over the developed area. Topsoil shall be restored or provided to a
depth of four (4) inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality
prior to development.
13.5.6 Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever practical.
13.5.7 Run-off water shall be diverted to a sediment basin before being allowed to
enter the natural drainage system.
13.5.8 The erosion and sediment control plan shall be subject to review and
approval of the applicable Watershed District and the City Engineer. The City
may request a report from the Ramsey Soil and Water Conservation District
regarding soil erosion control measures. The City may require a soil erosion cash
deposit to guarantee erosion control measures are taken.
13.6 STORM DRAINAGE
13.6.1 All subdivision designs shall incorporate adequate provisions for storm
water run-off subject to review and approval of the applicable Watershed District
and the City Engineer.
13.6.2 The grade and drainage requirements for each plat shall be approved by the
applicable Watershed District and the City Engineer at the expense of the
applicant for the subdivision. Every plat presented for final signatures shall be
accompanied by certifications by the City Engineer that the grade and drainage
requirements have been met. In an area not having municipal storm sewer trunks,
the applicant shall be responsible for providing a storm water disposal plan that
will operate without damage to properties outside the platted areas.
13.6.3 No plat shall be approved by the City Council before the storm water
disposal plan is approved by both the City Engineer and the Watershed District.
13.6.4 The use of dry wells for the purpose of storm water disposal is prohibited
in the City of Gem Lake.
13.7 PROTECTED AREAS
13.7.1 Where land proposed for subdivision is found to be environmentally
sensitive by the City, due to the existence of wetlands, drainage ways, water
courses, floodable areas or steep slopes, the design of said subdivisions shall
clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to insure against adverse
environmental impact.
13.7.2 Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive areas,
the City shall determine whether said protection will be accomplished through lot
enlargement and redesign or dedication of these sensitive areas in the form of
outlots.
13.7.3 Measures of protection shall include design solutions that allow for
construction and grading involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive areas.
Where these areas are to be incorporated into lots within the proposed
subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to demonstrate that the proposed
design will not require construction of slopes over eighteen (18) percent or result
in significant alteration in the natural drainage system such that adverse impact
cannot be continued within the plat boundary.
SECTION 14. REQUIRED BASIC IMPROVEMENTS
14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
14.1.1 Before a Final Plat is returned to the subdivider by the City, the subdivider
of the land covered by said plat shall pay all fees required and execute and submit
to the City Council a developer’s agreement that shall be binding on his or their
heirs or personal representatives. This agreement shall declare that the subdivider
will start no private construction on the lands within said plat, nor will the
subdivider file or cause to be filed any application for building permits for such
construction until all improvements required by this Ordinance have been made or
arranged for in the manner and conforming to the requirements set forth on the
Final Plat.
14.1.2 Prior to the delivery of the approved Final Plat, the subdivider shall deposit
with the City Treasurer an amount equal to a minimum of one hundred twenty
five (125) percent of the City Engineer’s estimated cost of the required
improvements within the plat, either in a cash escrow fund, performance and
indemnity bond, or letter of credit. The surety involved in said financial
guarantees shall be approved by the City. The cash escrow, letter of credit or
performance and indemnity bond shall be conditioned upon:
A) The making and installing of all of the improvements required by the
terms and conditions set forth by the City within one (1) year.
B) Satisfactory completion of the work the subdivider has agreed to in the
developer’s agreement referred to in Section 14.1.1.
C) The payment by the subdivider to the City of all expenses incurred by
the City in connection with this subdivision proposal, shall include not be
limited to: expenses for engineering, fiscal, legal, construction and
administration. In instances where a cash escrow is submitted in lieu of a
letter of credit or performance and indemnity bond, there shall be a cash
escrow agreement that shall provide that in the event the required
improvements are not completed in one year, all amounts held under the
cash escrow agreement shall be automatically turned over and delivered to
the City and applied by the City to the cost of completing the required
improvements. If the funds available within the said cash escrow
agreement are not sufficient to complete the required improvements, the
necessary additional cost to the City shall be assessed against the
subdivision. Any balance remaining in the cash escrow fund after such
improvements have been made and all expenses therefore have been paid,
shall be returned to the subdivider. In instances where a letter of credit is
used in lieu of a cash escrow or performance and indemnity bond, the said
letter of credit shall be in a form satisfactory to the City, and the terms
thereof shall substantially comply with all requirements as set forth in
Minnesota Statutes as amended, which statutes relate to Surety Bonds.
14.1.3 The City of Gem Lake shall where appropriate, require of a subdivider
submission of a Warranty/Maintenance Bond in the amount equal to the original
cost of the improvements, which shall be in force for one year following the final
acceptance of any required improvements and shall guarantee satisfactory
performance of the said improvements.
14.1.4 Reproducible “as built drawings” as required by the City Engineer, shall be
furnished to the City by the subdivider giving details on all required
improvements. Such “as built drawings” shall be certified to be true and accurate
by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of the improvements.
14.1.5 All the required improvements to be installed under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be approved by and subject to the inspection of the City Engineer.
All of the City’s expenses incurred as the result of the required improvements
shall be paid either directly, indirectly or by reimbursement to the City by the
subdivider.
14.2 MONUMENTS FOR FINAL PLAT
14.2.1 Official monuments, as designated and adopted by the Ramsey County
Surveyors Office and approved by the Ramsey County District Court for use as
judicial monuments, shall be set at each corner or angle on the outside boundary
of the Final Plat or in accordance with a plan as approved by the City Engineer.
The boundary line of the property to be included with the plat is to be fully
dimensioned; all angles of the boundary excepting the closing angle to be
indicated; all monuments and surveyor’s irons to be indicated, each angle point or
the boundary perimeter to be so monumented.
14.2.2 Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at each lot and at each intersection of
street center lines. All United States, State, County or other official bench marks,
monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in the precise position they were and shall be recorded on the plat. All
lot and block dimensions shall be recorded on the plat and all necessary angles
pertaining to the lots and blocks shall be shown, as an aid to future surveys. No
ditto marks will be permitted when indicating dimensions.
14.2.3 To insure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place following the
final grading of a plat, a second monument shall be required. Proof of the second
monumentation shall be in the form of a surveyor’s certificate and this
requirement shall additionally be a condition for the Certification of Occupancy
as provided for in the Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended.
14.3 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
14.3.1 The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, in accordance with the
provisions for construction as outlined in the section of this Ordinance, titled
Design Standards.
14.3.2 All street shall be improved in accordance with the City of Gem Lake
standards and specifications for street construction or as required by the City
Council.
14.3.3 All streets to be surfaced shall be of an overall width in accordance with
the standards and specifications for construction as approved by the City Council.
The portions of the right-of-way outside the area surfaced shall be sodded or
riprapped by the developer if deemed necessary by the City.
14.3.4 Where required, curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications for street construction as set forth and approved
by the City Council.
14.4 TREES AND BOULEVARD SODDING
14.4.1 Where street trees do not exist, trees having a trunk diameter of not less
than two (2) inches, measured twelve (12)inches above the ground, shall be
planted on both sides of all streets in the subdivision in locations approved by the
Planning Commission, but no more than sixty (60) feet apart. Trees of equal
standard shall be planted in the required front yards at an average minimum
density of one (1) tree per forty (40) feet of right-of-way.
14.4.2 Tree species shall be as approved by the Planning Commission and must
survive one full growing season or be replaced at the subdivider’s expense.
14.4.3 Boulevards shall be sodded as required by the Planning Commission in
conformance with generally accepted standards and specifications.
14.5 STREET SIGNS, LIGHTING AND DRIVEWAYS
14.5.1 Street signs, of suitable design approved by the City Council, shall be
installed at each street intersection.
14.5.2 Driveway approaches and sidewalks of standard design or pedestrian
pathways, as may be required by the City Council, shall be installed.
14.5.3 Street lighting fixtures, as may be required and approved by the City
Council, shall be installed.
14.6 SANITARY SEWER AND WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS
14.6.1 Sanitary sewers and water facilities shall be installed in accordance with
standards and specifications as required by the City Council and subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
14.6.2 Where City sewer and water facilities are not available for extension into
the proposed subdivision, the Council may permit the use of individual water and
sewer systems in accordance with all appropriate state and local regulations.
14.7 PUBLIC UTILITIES
14.7.1 All new electric distribution lines (excluding main line feeders and high
voltage transmission lines), telephone service lines, Cable TV and other services
constructed within the confines of and providing service to customers in a newly
platted residential area shall be buried underground, unless the City Council
specifically shall find, after study and recommendation of the Planning
Commission that:
A) The placing of utilities underground would not be compatible with the
development planned;
B) Topographical, soil or any other conditions make underground
installation unreasonable or impractical.
14.7.2 Where telephone, Cable TV, electric and/or gas service lines are to be
placed underground entirely, conduits or cables shall be placed within easements
or dedicated public ways, in such a manner so as not to conflict with other
underground services.
14.7.3 All drainage and other underground utility installations that cross privately
owned property shall be protected by easements.
14.7.4 All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear
line easements when carried on overhead poles. The Planning Commission may
recommend, and the City Council require, that the type of overhead pole used be
of a quality and durability aesthetically in conformance with the nature of the
residential development.
14.7.5 The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this
section, and shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a written record from the
utilities showing that the necessary arrangements with the utility involved for
installation of said facilities have been made.
14.8 ELECTION OF CITY TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS
14.8.1In accordance with the policy of the City of Gem Lake, it is the
subdivider’s responsibility to install all required improvements except that the
City reserves the right to elect to install all or any part of the improvements
required under the provisions of this Ordinance in lieu of requiring the subdivider
to install such improvements.
14.9 RAILROAD CROSSINGS
14.9.1 No street dedications will be accepted that require a crossing of a railroad
right-of-way unless sufficient land, as determined by the City Council, is
dedicated to insure a safe view.
SECTION 15. VARIANCES FROM THIS ORDINANCE
15.1 The City Council may grant a variance in any particular case where the
applicant can show that by reason of exceptional topography or other physical
conditions the strict compliance to this Ordinance could cause an exceptional and
undue hardship on the enjoyment of substantial property right. Such relief may be
granted provided there is no detriment to the public welfare and no impairment of
intended purpose of this Ordinance.
15.2 An application for any such Variance shall be made on an official application
form available from the Zoning Administrator and shall be submitted at the same
time as the Preliminary Plan is filed for consideration. Such application shall be
accompanied by the required fee(s). Such application shall state fully all facts
relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or
additional data that will aid the City in the analysis of the proposed project.
15.3 Upon receiving such application, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the
application, along with all related information, to the Planning Commission for
consideration at a duly convened public hearing, a report and recommendation to
be sent to the City Council.
15.4 The applicant or a representative of the applicant shall appear before the
Planning Commission at its next regular meeting in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed Variance.
15.5 The Planning Commission shall have the authority to request additional
information from the applicant concerning the Variance or to retain expert
testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning said
Variance, where said information is declared necessary to insure preservation or
health, safety and general welfare.
15.6 The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend to
the City Council in writing such actions or conditions relating to the request as it
may deem necessary to carry out the intent and the purpose of this Ordinance and
shall do so in a timely manner that allows the City Council to take action within
the time limits established by law.
15.7 If the report of the Planning Commission has not been received so as to
provide for compliance with time limits established by law, the City Council may
act without such a report.
15.8 Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall place the matter on the agenda for the next regular meeting.
The Council shall within the time limits established by law make a written finding
of fact and impose any conditions it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. A Variance to this Ordinance shall require a four/fifths
(4/5ths) vote of the full City Council. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly
notify the applicant of the Council’s decision in writing.
SECTION 16. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY
16.1 SALE OF LOTS FROM UNRECORDED PLATS
16.1.1 It shall be unlawful to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of
land as a part of, or in conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision
or area located with the jurisdiction of this Ordinance unless said plan, plat or
replat shall have first been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Ramsey
County.
16.2 MISREPRESENTATION AS TO CONSTRUCTION, SUPERVISION OR
INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
16.2.1 It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning an addition
or subdivision of land within the City of Gem Lake to represent that any
improvements upon any of the streets, or avenues of said addition or subdivision
or any sewer or water system in said addition or subdivision has been constructed
according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council, or has
been supervised or inspected by the City, when such improvements have not been
so constructed, supervised or inspected.
16.3 PENALTY
16.3.1 Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a
misdemeanor prescribed under State Law. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 17. ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
17.1 The Ordinance changes represented in this revision of Ordinance No. 58A were
reviewed by the Planning Commission and discussed at a public hearing duly convened
on August 1, 2005 with all public comments considered and included where deemed
appropriate. The changes, drafted as a separate document titled “Ordinance No. 58B
Redline” and included with the minutes of the public hearing, are incorporated in this
revision and are forwarded to the City Council with the Planning Commissions
recommendation for adoption.
17.2 This Ordinance No 58B incorporating all changes recommended in “Ordinance No.
58B Redline” was unanimously adopted with amendments thereto by the City Council of
the City of Gem Lake on this the 15th day of August in the year 2005 and was summarily
ordered for publication in the City’s official legal publication, said date of publication to
be the official date of enactment.
CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 58 LEGEND
The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the City
of Gem Lake as Ordinance No. 1 on 17 November 1959. Ordinance No. 58 repealed all
prior versions of the Subdivision Ordinance upon its adoption on September 17, 1990.
Since that time, the Planning Commission and City Council have proposed and adopted
several amendments to the Ordinance in keeping with the changing times as well as the
needs and wishes of the community. The following table is added to Ordinance No. 58 as
an historic reference to all changes made since the adoption of the original Subdivision
Ordinance in 1959. All changes shown have been incorporated into the text of Ordinance
No. 58C, the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance.
ORDINANCE
NO.
TITLE & DESCRIPTION DATE
ENACTED
01 An Ordinance Regulating The Subdivision Of Land In
The City Of Gem Lake
11/17/1959
08 An Ordinance Repealing Ordinance No. 01 And
Regulating The Subdivision Of Land
10/15/1963
58 An Ordinance Repealing Ordinance No. 08 And
Regulating The Subdivision Of Land In The City Of
Gem Lake
09/17/1990
58B An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 58A And
Incorporating Changes Regarding Elimination of
Subdivision Headings For Definitions, Elimination of
Most Time Lines Identified And Subject To Control By
State Statute, Elimination of Fees Specific and
Referencing The Gem Lake Fee Schedule
08/15/2005
58C An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 58B And
Incorporating The Addition Of Section 5.4 Regarding
Provisions For Park Land Dedication As Provided For
By Minnesota Statute §462.358, subdivision 2b.
07/24/2006
89 An Ordinance Amending Section 11.2.1 (C) of
Ordinance No. 58C to Require Escrow for Payment of
City Expenses During Subdivision Review
10/21/2008
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 60
AN ORDINANCE REPLACING ORDINANCE NO. 59 WHICH REPLACED ORDINANCE
NO. 47 AND RELATED TO GAMBLING BY ALLOWING OPERATION AND SALE OF
GAMBLING DEVICES IN ONSALE LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS.
Section 1. Title. The title of this ordinance shall be "Gambling and Operation of Gambling
Devices by Charitable Organizations in 'On-Sale' Liquor Establishments."
Section 2. Purpose. This ordinance is adopted for the purposes of:
Section 2.1. Allowing licensed "on-sale" liquor establishments to operate gambling
devices when such activity is licensed by the State of Minnesota.
Section 2.2. Defining the types of lawful gambling devices that can be operated in the
City of Gem Lake.
Section 2.3. Describing the charitable organizations which can operate these devices.
Section 3. Rules and Definitions.
Section 3.1. Rules of Construction. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may"
is permissive.
Section 3.2. Definitions of Terms.
(a) Lawful Gambling Devices. Lawful gambling devices are paddlewheels, pulltabs,
raffles, and tipboards.
(b) Employee. An employee is a person who is currently under the employment
of the licensee and is at that time on duly or scheduled to perform labor or
services and who shall be paid for said labor and services.
(c) Charitable Organization. A religious, fraternal, veterans, or other nonprofit
organization duly existing under the laws of the State of Minnesota and no part of
the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual. The said organization shall have been in existence for at least three (3)
years, and shall have at least thirty (30) active members. It must be organized to
operate in the Gem Lake/White Bear Lake area with not less than sixty percent
(60%) of its members Gem Lake/White Bear Lake residents. If the charitable
organization is state or nationally chartered, its charter must designate the Gem
Lake/White Bear Lake area as its location.
Section 4. Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
several provisions of this ordinance are separable and that if any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge any provision of this ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgement
shall not affect any other provisions of this ordinance not specifically included in said
judgement.
Section 5. Intoxicating Liquor: Gambling Devices on Licensed Premises.
Section 5.1. "On-sale" licensees may request permission of the City Council to permit
qualified charitable organizations, as defined in this ordinance, to operate or sell lawful
gambling devices only on the licensed premises. The licensee shall make application for
permission to the City Council and shall pay therewith the specified fee. if the application
is granted, the liquor license shall contain an endorsement specifying this approval, and
the gambling endorsement may be considered for renewal at the same time as the City
Council considers renewal of the "on-sale" license.
Section 5.2. Gambling endorsements on "on-sale" licenses shall be subject to the
following regulations which shall be deemed a part of the license, and failure of
compliance may constitute grounds for revocation.
(a) Application for gambling endorsements must be made by the liquor licensee
and must state the name of the qualified charitable organization. The application
must also show evidence that the qualified charitable organization is licensed by
the State of Minnesota pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349 and any
appropriate rules of the State of Minnesota.
(b) Use of the licensed premises shall be by means of a written lease agreement
between the licensee and the
charitable organization. The lease shall be for a term o f at least one year, a copy
shall be filed with the City Council, and a copy must also be kept on the premises
and available for public inspection upon request. Leases shall be governed by the
following:
I. The maximum rental fee for leased premises shall not exceed the
maximum amount established by Minnesota state statutes related to
charitable gambling and amended from time to time. Rental fees shall be
established on an annual calendar year basis for a period of not less than
twelve (12) months and shall be approved by the City Council.
II. Rental payments may not be based on a percentage of profits from
gambling.
III. The charitable organization may not reimburse the licensee for any
license fees or other gambling related expenses incurred by the licensee.
IV. The only form of gambling that shall be permitted on the licensed
premises shall be lawful gambling devices approved by the City Council.
V. Lawful gambling devices shall only be operated or sold from a booth
used solely by the charitable organization, and shall neither be sold from
the bar area nor sold by employees of the licensee unless said employees
are: 1) duly licensed by the State of Minnesota, and; 2) not simultaneously
employed by the licensee at the time of sale. Licensed premises with a
seating capacity of 50 or less may elect to have a “bar operation” in which
the licensee’s employees may sell and redeem approved games from the
bar area. Any licensed premises electing to use a “bar operation” must
notify the City of the change within 10 days of switching mode of
operation, and thereafter apply for renewal as a “bar operation.”
VI. The construction and maintenance of the booth used by the charitable
organization shall be the sole responsibility of the charitable organization.
VII. The lease shall contain a provision permitting the licensee to
terminate the lease if the charitable organization is found guilty of any
violation of state or local gambling statutes, ordinances or rules and
regulations.
(c) Only one charitable organization shall be permitted to operate or sell lawful
gambling devices on the licensee's premises.
(d) The licensee may not be reimbursed by the charitable organization for any
license or permit fees, and the only compensation which the licensee may obtain
from the charitable organization is the rent fixed in the lease agreement.
(e) The licensee and the charitable organization must commit to a minimum of
twenty (20) hours per week of operation or sale of lawful gambling devices.
(f) The licensee shall be responsible for the charitable organization's conduct of
operating and/or selling lawful gambling devices. The City Council may suspend
the licensee's permission to allow gambling on the premises for a period of up to
sixty (60) days for any violation of state or local gambling laws or regulations that
occur on the premises. A second violation within a sixty (60) day suspension, and
any additional violations within a twelve (12) month period, shall result in the
revocation of the gambling permission, and may also be considered by the City
Council as grounds for suspension or revocation of the "on-sale" liquor license.
Section 6. One Time Events. Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance to the contrary,
the City Council may permit an "on-sale" licensee to permit the holding of a single event, such as
a banquet, that includes the sale of raffle tickets as part of the event activity, provided that such
events are separate from the public areas of the licensed establishment, not open to the general
public, and the raffle is conducted by a charitable organization licensed by the State of
Minnesota.
Section 7. Other Gambling Devices. No licensee shall keep, possess, or operate, or permit the
keeping, possession, or operation of any slot machine, dice, or any gambling device or apparatus,
on the licensed premises or in any room adjoining the licensed premises and shall not permit any
gambling therein, except that lawful gambling devices may be operated or sold on licensed
premises when such activity is licensed by the state pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349,
and conducted pursuant to the regulations contained in this ordinance.
Section 8. Raffles and Gambling Devices: License Required, Application.
Section 8.1. No person shall directly operate a gambling device or conduct a raffle,
except as authorized by statute and this ordinance and unless a license from the State of
Minnesota to do so has first been obtained. Licenses for the conduct of operation of
raffles or gambling devices shall be issued only to a qualified charitable organization.
Section 9. Records and Reports: Charitable Organizations. All qualified charitable
organizations selling or operating gambling devices in the City of Gem Lake shall keep monthly
financial records as required by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349, and shall submit certified
copies of said records to the City no later than January 30, April 30, and October 30 for the three
(3) prior calendar months. Additionally, the qualified charitable organization shall report on or
before the dates above the exact purpose and location of contributions made from the gambling
proceeds.
Section 10. Profits From Gambling Devices. Profits from the operation of gambling devices or
the conduct of raffles shall be used solely for lawful purposes as defined in this ordinance and as
authorized at a regular meeting of the organization. Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
profits from the operation of gambling or conduct of raffles earned by charitable organizations
shall be used for lawful purposes directly benefiting the residents of the Gem Lake/White Bear
Lake area.
Section 11. Additional Requirements: In addition to satisfying the qualifications set forth in
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349, the following requirements and qualifications must be
complied with by all licensed charitable organizations who will be operating gambling devices in
the City of Gem Lake:
Section 11.1 Charitable Organizations shall
(a) not have a gambling license in more than two establishments in the City of
Gem Lake.
(b) register with the State Gambling Board all equipment and supplies used in a
licensed "on sale" liquor establishment.
(c) not use a lawful gambling device which does not return to the players a
minimum percentage of sixty percent (60%) nor a maximum percentage of
eighty-five percent (85%), which percentage shall include free plays awarded.
Section 12. Proceeds to City From Gambling Devices. Any qualified charitable organization
selling and/or operating gambling devices in "on-sale" liquor establishments located in the City
of Gem Lake shall remit quarterly to the City two percent (2%) of its net receipts (gross receipt
less prizes equals net receipts) from the sale or operation of gambling devices. The City shall
place said revenue in a dedicated fund that will be used for “public needs” or will distribute the
proceeds to other charitable organizations.
Section 13. Licensee Fee: Charitable Gambling. The fee for a charitable gambling license in
an "on-sale" liquor establishment shall be defined in the City of Gem Lake “Fee Schedule”
which is revised from time to time.
Section 14. Enactment. This Ordinance No. 60 was enacted and placed in full force and effect
on 13 May 1991 by a unanimous vote of the Gem Lake City Council.
ENACTED:
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor
ATTEST:
Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 60 LEGEND
The Ordinance allowing operation and sale of gambling devices in on-sale liquor establishments
was originally enacted by the City Council as Ordinance Number 60 on 13 May 1991. Since that
time, the City Council has made amendments to the Ordinance in keeping with changes in State
law and the wishes of the community. The following table indicates the original ordinance and
the said amendments.
ORDINANCE DESCRIPTION ENACTMENT
60 An ordinance allowing the operation and sale of gambling
devices in on-sale liquor establishments (repealed Ordinance 59
and Ordinance 47).
05/13/1991
102 An ordinance amending Ordinance No. 60, by adding
provisions to Section 5.2(b)(V) which allow “bar operation”;
eliminating the requirement in Section 12 to put City revenue in
a dedicated park/playground fund; and inserting the reference to
the City’s fee schedule in place of a specific fee.
10/21/2008
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 64E
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE OPERATION OF THE MUNICIPAL
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; REQUIRING CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE TO THE
MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS AS TO
TYPE AND KINDS OF WASTE THAT MAY BE DISPOSED OF IN THE MUNICIPAL
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; PROHIBITING THE DISCHARGE OF ANY TYPE OR
KIND OF SURFACE WATERS INTO THE MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER
SYSTEM; PRESCRIBING RATES AND CHARGES FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SERVICES; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR AND
SUPERVISION OF ALL CONNECTIONS TO THE MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER
SYSTEM; PRESCRIBING CERTAIN MATERIALS AND METHODS TO BE USED
FOR SAID CONNECTIONS; PROVIDING FOR LICENSING OF SEWER
CONTRACTORS; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS ORDINANCE.
The City Council of the City of Gem Lake does ordain:
Section 1 Repeal Of Other City Ordinances
Section 1.1 This Ordinance shall replace Ordinances # 18, 25 and 32A of the City of
Gem Lake.
Section 2 Separability
Section 2.1 It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the several
provisions of this Ordinance are separable and that if any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included
in said judgment.
Section 3 Rules And Definitions
Section 3.1 Rules of Construction
Section 3.1.1 The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
Section 3.1.2 The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
Section 3.1.3 Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Ordinance, its meaning
shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof.
Section 3.1.4 The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the
present.
Section 3.2 Definitions Of Terms: The following words and terms, whenever they occur in
this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
Assessment. A charge made to affected property owners for improvements that increases
or maintains their property’s value or enhances the health and safety of their
neighborhood.
Connection. The physical connection between the sewer piping in a residence or
building and the Municipal sanitary sewer system.
Connection Permit. A permit, issued by the City of Gem Lake, which allows connection
to the Municipal sanitary sewer system.
Extension. An addition to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System determined to be added
by petition, decree or for health and safety reasons.
Industrial Strength Charge. An additional charge levied to the City of Gem Lake by the
MCES to treat certain industrial wastes.
Inspection Fee. A fee paid to the City of Gem Lake to cover the costs of inspecting the
new connection to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System.
ISTS. Individual Sewage Treatment System
Maintenance. The scheduled inspection, flushing and minor repairs to the Municipal
Sanitary Sewer System done on a regular basis.
MCES. Metropolitan Council Environmental Services, the primary operator of the
regional sewer system and its successors and assigns.
Municipal Sanitary Sewer System (MSSS). The sanitary sewer system owned and
operated by the City of Gem Lake as a public utility and convenience from which
revenues will be derived.
Permit, Changeover. A permit that allows changing from an on-site individual sewage
treatment system (ISTS) to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. This permit requires
that the on-site system be properly disconnected and sealed.
Replacement. Replacing or rebuilding of sections of the sanitary sewer system, that may
be found necessary due to age, damage or changing surface conditions.
SAC Charge, Gem Lake. A charge levied to each new user of the Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System to help pay for continued maintenance of the system.
SAC Charge, MCES. A charge levied to the City of Gem Lake by MCES to reserve
unused capacity in the sewage treatment and metro collection system.
Sewer Contractor. A person engaged in the business of Contractor building or repairing
that portion of the house or building sewer extending from the house or building to the
main sewer or other outlet.
Surface Water. Roof, storm, surface, ground water or water discharged from an air
conditioning unit or system.
Unit. A method of measuring the sewage put into the sanitary sewer system as well as a
method for calculating the costs for use of the system.
Section 3.3 Title
Section 3.3.1 This Ordinance shall be known as the “Municipal Sanitary Sewer System
Ordinance” of the City of Gem Lake.
SECTION 4 DESCRIPTION AND OPERATION OF THE MUNICIPAL SANITARY
SEWER SYSTEM.
Section 4.1 General Operation
Section 4.1.1 The entire Municipal Sanitary Sewer System , operated by the City of Gem
Lake shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenues will be
derived. It is recognized that this sewer system might be available to only portions of the
city, and that it will serve only where individual sewage treatment systems are
unavailable or impractical. The Municipal Sanitary Sewer System operated by the City of
Gem Lake exists to serve the users of the system who have connected to this system. As
defined by the State Auditor, the accounting will be as an Enterprise Fund separate from
the General Fund of the City of Gem Lake. It is expected that the users of the system
shall pay for its construction, maintenance, any rebuilding or repairing needed and its
operation.
Section 4.2 Connection Required
Section 4.2.1 Any buildings used for human habitation or use and located on property
adjacent to a municipal sewer main, or in an area through which the system extends, shall
be connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System within one (1) year if buildings are
commercial or ten (10) years if buildings are residential from the time a connection is
available to any such property.
Section 4.2.2 Any buildings used for human habitation or use and located on property
adjacent to a municipal sewer main, or in an area through which the system extends,
which have an IST S determined to be failing shall be connected to the Municipal
Sanitary Sewer System within six (6) months from the date said ISTS is determined to be
failing.
Section 4.2.3 All buildings constructed on property adjacent to a municipal sewer main
or in an area through which such system extends, shall be provided with a connection to
the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System for the disposal of all human wastes.
Section 4.3 Use Of Certain Buildings Restricted
Section 4.3(1) No person, firm or corporation shall use any building, nor allow any other
person to use such building, which building is not connected to the Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System as required by Section 4.2 of the Ordinance.
Section 4.4 Types Of Wastes Prohibited
Section 4.4.1 Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to discharge any of the
following described materials into the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System.
a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one-hundred fifty
(150°F) degrees Fahrenheit.
b) Any water or waste containing more than 100 parts per million of weight of fat,
oil or grease.
c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
d) Any garbage that is not properly shredded.
e) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shaving, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
plastic, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage system.
f) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or which
constitutes a hazard to humans or animals or creates any hazard in the receiving
water of the sewage treatment plant.
g) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at
the sewage treatment plant.
h) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
i) A grease, oil and sand interceptor shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, that it is necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amount, or any inflammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential dwelling units which discharge only normal wastes therefrom. Such
grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial construction, water-tight and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place, shall be gastight
and water-tight. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
Section 4.5 Industrial Wastes
Section 4.5.1 It shall be unlawful to discharge, in the City of Gem Lake Municipal
Sanitary Sewer System, any industrial wastes unless the prior approval of the City
Council is obtained. The City Council may allow the discharge of industrial wastes if it
finds that the proposed wastes will not be of an unusual amount or character.
Section 4.6 Discharge of Surface Wastes Prohibited
Section 4.6.1 No person shall cause to be discharged into the Municipal Sanitary Sewer
System, either directly or indirectly, any roof, storm, surface or ground water of any type
o r kind. No water discharged from an air conditioning unit or system shall be allowed.
Section 4.7 Tampering With The Municipal Sanitary Sewer System
Section 4.7.1 No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System.
Section 4.8 Certain Connections Prohibited
Section 4.8.1 No buildings located on property lying outside the City limits of the City of
Gem Lake shall be connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System unless express
authorization for such connections is obtained from the City Council of the City of Gem
Lake.
Section 4.9 Entry Upon Private Property
Section 4.9.1 The officials and duly authorized agents of the City of Gem Lake, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter upon
all properties in the city for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in connection with the operation of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer
System.
Section 4.10 Rates and Charges
Section 4.10.1 The annual charge for the use of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System for
residential users shall be the amount established by resolution of the City Council at its
first meeting in January of each year.
Section 4.10.2 The annual charge for use of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System for
commercial, industrial, institutional and all other users who are not residential users shall
be that amount established by resolution of the City Council at its first meeting of each
year.
Section 4.10.3 The annual charge for use of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall
be based upon a UNIT system, with one unit being equal to 100,000 gallons of flow or
part thereof. The following types of structures or business shall have UNIT ratings based
as shown in Table 4.10(3) and as follows:
Section 4.10(3) TABLE I
TYPE OF STRUCTURE OR BUSINESS UNIT BASIS
Single Family Residence 1 Unit(s)
Multi Family Residence (Each Living Unit) 1 Unit (s)
Multi Family Assisted Living (Each Living Unit) 1.25 Unit(s)
Store 6 Unit(s)
Take-Out Food Store 7 Unit(s)
Shopping Center 7 Unit(s)
Office ½ per 1,000 sq. ft., minimum 3 Unit(s)
Bar-Restaurant 8 Unit(s)
Hospital/Medical Office 12 Unit(s)
Hotel/Motel 1.75 units per room, minimum 6 Unit(s)
Gas Station 6 Unit(s)
Auto Dealer (1-5 Employees) 1 Unit(s)
Auto Dealer (6-50 Employees) 6 Unit(s)
Auto Dealer (51 or more Employees) 12 Unit(s)
Auto Wash Rack (Per Wash Rack) 10 Unit(s)
Laundromat 10 Unit(s)
School 6 Unit(s)
* Table based upon information provided by the U. S. Department of Energy
Section 4.10.4 The sewer rates for commercial, industrial, institutional and all other users
not covered in the rate table above shall be as follows:
a) For users who have municipal water, the sewer charge will be based on each
one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof of water consumption. The sewer
use rate, per each 1,000 gallons of water, will be set by resolution of the City
Council at its first meeting in January. A minimum charge for each quarter also
will be set by resolution of the City Council at its first meeting in January.
b) For a commercial, industrial, institutional or other user that does not have
municipal water, the charges shall be as follows:
1) The user may, at his own expense, install a meter, approved by the City
Plumbing Inspector, to measure the amount of water consumption. This
meter shall be installed by a Licensed Plumber and inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector before any use is allowed. The rate for each 1,000
gallons will be set by resolution of the City Council at its first meeting in
January.
c) If the commercial, industrial, institutional or other user has more than one
source of water for one building or use, each of the sources must be metered and
the total amount of water metered be used for calculating sewer rates.
Section 4.10.5 If the industrial or commercial user does not discharge considerable
waste, as a part of its essential operation, then the requirement for metering may be
waived upon recommendation of the City Engineer and approval of the City Council. In
such event, the charge for waste discharge of this user, shall be established by resolution
of the City Council establishing the number of units to be charged for this type of user.
4.11 Strength Charges For Industrial Users.
Section 4.11.1 The MCES has imposed an industrial user sewer strength charge upon
users of the Metropolitan disposal system. The City of Gem Lake Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System feeds into this disposal system. In order for the City to pay such costs,
based upon strength of industrial discharge that are allocated to it by the MCES each
year, it is necessary to establish a City system sewer strength charge and a formula for
computation of that charge for all industrial users using the City of Gem Lake Municipal
Sanitary Sewer System.
Section 4.11.2 There is established, in addition to sewer charges based upon the volume
of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person receiving waste treatment services within
or served by the City, based upon strength of industrial waste discharged into the
Municipal Sanitary Sewer System operated by the City of Gem Lake.
Section 4.11.3 For the purpose of computation of the strength charge, the same strength
charge formula designated by the governing body of MCES on June 15, 1976 and as
amended from time to time, shall be used by the City of Gem Lake.
Section 4.11.4 The strength charge established by this section of this Ordinance shall be
paid by each industrial user receiving waste treatment services from the system operated
by the City of Gem Lake. It will be billed in the same manner as the regular use charge
for sewer service and be subject to the same penalties for late payment.
Section 4.12 Payment Of Sewer System Charges
Section 4.12.1 Sewer use charges shall be billed quarterly. Statements for sewer charges,
for the preceding quarterly period, shall be mailed to each user of the system on or before
the 10th of January, April, July and October of each year. Such statements shall be due
and payable to the City Treasurer on or before the last day of the month following the
quarterly period covered by such statement.
Section 4.12.2 If the sewer charge is not paid when due, then the following penalty shall
be added to the next billing:
a) For residential sewer users, a penalty charge for each billing period of four
dollars ($4.00) or ten (10) percent of the amount due, whichever is greater.
b) For all other sewer users, a penalty charge for each billing period of ten (10)
percent if paid within the first month of arrearage. After one month of arrears, the
penalty charge will be twenty (20) percent of the amount due.
Section 4.13 Action To Collect Late Charges
Section 4.13.1 If any two quarters of sewer charges have not been paid when due, or if
over one hundred dollars ($100.00) of sewer charges are overdue, then a penalty charge
in addition to that on Section 4.12, in the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
arrearage up to $250.00 and fifty dollars ($50.00) for arrearage above $ 250.00 shall be
added to the amount due.
Section 4.13.2 All charges may be collected by action brought for that purpose in the
name of the City of Gem Lake, or the City Clerk may certify to Ramsey County the
amounts due (with penalties) together with a legal description of the premises served and
the County shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on said premises to
be collected during the ensuing year.
Section 4.14 Starting Of Sewer Charges
Section 4.14.1 The sewer charges, described in this Ordinance, shall start thirty (30) days
after a sewer connection is applied for.
SECTION 5 CONNECTIONS TO THE MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Section 5.1 Connection Permit
Section 5.1.1 Any person desiring to connect to the City of Gem Lake M unicipal
sanitary sewer system, shall request such connection on a Connection Permit Application
Form provided by the City Clerk. This request shall be accompanied by the required fee,
plus plans, specifications and any such information as might be necessary to identify how
and by whom the connection will be made.
Section 5.2 Connection And Inspection Fees
Section 5.2.1 Each Connection Permit application shall be accompanied by a Connection
Fee and an Inspection Fee payable to the City of Gem Lake. The fee rate for a
Connection Permit and Inspection shall be set annually by resolution of the City Council
at its first meeting in January. If re-inspection of a connection is necessary after the initial
inspection, a Re-inspection Fee will be charged. As provided for by Minnesota Statutes,
§ 444.075, subd. 3e, any unpaid connection charge or fee shall be certified to the county
auditor for collection as other taxes are collected.
Section 5.3 Need for Changeover Permit
Section 5.3.1 When a request is made for a residential sewer Connection Permit, where
an Individual Sewage Treatment System (IST S) is now being used, a Changeover Permit
shall also be required. Both the Connection Permit and the Changeover Permit shall be
issued at the same time. This Changeover Permit is to ascertain that the existing
Individual Sewage Treatment System is properly disconnected and sealed. The
Changeover Permit Fee shall be as set annually by resolution of the City Council at its
first meeting in January.
Section 5.4 Additional Requirements For Connection Permits
Section 5.4.1 The following conditions shall also be certified by the City Clerk for each
connection request, before a Connection permit is issued:
a) That the lot or tract of land to which the connection will be made has been
assessed for the cost of construction of the Municipal sanitary sewer system; and
b) If no assessment has been levied for such construction costs, the proceedings of
levying such assessment have been or will be completed in due course; or
c) If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings will be
completed in due course, that a sum equal to the portion of the cost of
constructing said sanitary sewer main, which would be assessable against said lot
or tract, has been paid to the City; or
d) If an assessment for the construction cost of the sewer has been levied, which
included a UNIT connection charge for each structure then in existence, that a
monetary sum equal to such unit connection charge has been paid for structures
not in existence at the time of the assessment. The amount of the UNIT
assessment charge shall be as established in the assessment proceedings, or if not
so established for any particular type of structure, the UNIT connection charge
shall be based on the following formula, using a single family residential dwelling
as one UNIT.
Section 5.4.1 d) TABLE II
TYPE OF STRUCTURE # UNITS
Each Single Family Dwelling 1 Unit(s)
Each Hotel Or Motel Unit 1/3 Unit(s)
One Mobile Home Unit Or Apartment Unit ½ Unit(s)
Industrial Or Commercial structures
(per 1,000 s.f. area)
½ Unit(s)
Minimum 2 Unit(s)
Section 5.4.2 If no certification can be issued by the City Clerk, no permit to connect to
the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall be issued, unless the applicant agrees to pay
an assessable cost, to be determined by the City Engineer, upon the same basis as any
assessment previously levied against other properties for said sanitary sewer construction.
If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable cost will be determined upon the
basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which would be charged for similar
construction of such a sewer main, determined on the basis of total assessable cost of
such main allocated using one of the following basis or combination thereof as
determined by the City Council:
a) Front Footage basis whereby the total cost of the project is divided by the total
front footage of the project (each side of the street for frontage) to yield a per
front foot charge which is then multiplied by the front footage of each benefitted
property to determine the benefitted real property owner’s share of the cost; or
b) Acreage basis whereby the total cost of the project is divided by the total
acreage served to yield a per acre charge which is then multiplied by the acreage
of each benefitted property to determine the benefited property owner’s share of
the cost; or
c) Benefitted Property basis where the total cost of the project is divided by the
total number of benefited properties times their sewer unit basis from Section
4.10(3), Table I to determine the benefitted property owner’s share of the cost.
Section 5.5 Restrictions On Connection Permits
Section 5.5.1 Connection permits shall be issued only to property owners or to such
persons, who are duly licensed by the City of Gem Lake, to engage in the business as
Sewer Contractors and who have filed bonds and insurance as required by section 9.4 of
this Ordinance.
Section 5.6 Expiration Of Connection Permits
Section 5.6.1 All connection permits shall expire ninety (90) days after the date of
issuance, and any and all fees forfeited, unless the work planned and authorized is in
actual progress.
Section 5.7 Supervision And Inspections Of Connections
Section 5.7.1 The Senior Building Official or Plumbing Inspector shall supervise all
connections made to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. The Plumbing Inspector shall
approve all plans, specifications and materials and be responsible for checking all
excavations made for the purpose of installing or repairing these connections.
Section 5.7.2 The inspection of all sewer connections will be done by the Plumbing
Inspector.
SECTION 6 SAC CHARGES
Section 6.1 Definition Of SAC Charge
Section 6.1.1 The MCES has determined a need to reserve extra capacity in the
Metropolitan sewage treatment system. The City of Gem Lake sewage collection system
connects to this system. A Service Availability Charge (SAC) shall be charged to the City
of Gem Lake by the MCES for each new building that will be connected to the sewage
collection system or for each building connected to newly constructed sewage collection
systems.
Section 6.1.2 The City of Gem Lake has determined a need to reserve additional
maintenance charges for future maintenance of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. A
City Service Availability Charge (SAC) shall be charged by the City of Gem Lake for
each new building that will be connected to the sewage collection system or for each
building connected to newly constructed sewage collection systems.
Section 6.2 How The SAC Charge Is Paid
Section 6.2.1 Both the MCES and the Gem Lake SAC charges shall be payable to the
City of Gem Lake upon the issuance of a Building Permit for a new building that will
connect to the sewage collection system or for a Connection Permit, but no charge need
be paid upon the issuance of a Connection Permit if a charge was paid upon issuance of a
Building Permit. SAC charges will only be made once per building, but additional SAC
charges may occur if building use changes.
Section 6.3 Definition Of A SAC Unit
Section 6.3.1 One SAC unit equals two-hundred seventy-four (274) gallons of maximum
potential daily wastewater flow volume. Single family houses, townhouses and each unit
of a multi-family dwelling equal one (1) SAC unit. Public housing units equal 75% of
one unit.
Section 6.3.2 Apartment buildings, without potential laundry facilities in each unit, may
apply for a reduction of 20%.
Section 6.3.3 Commercial buildings are assessed SAC units based on maximum potential
daily wastewater flow. The minimum capacity for such a building is one (1) SAC unit.
Section 6.3.4 Industrial buildings are assessed SAC units based on maximum normal
daily wastewater flow volume. The number of SAC units is based on the completed
Industrial Sewer Connection Application (MCES 90-B).
Section 6.4 Administration
Section 6.4.1 The City Council shall annually, by resolution at it’s first meeting in
January, determine the SAC charge for each building or connection and shall order the
City Clerk or Treasurer to collect the applicable charge before issuance of a permit. The
MCES will help determine SAC units if necessary and will make the final decisions
regarding the correct number of units to assess.
Section 6.4.2 The number of SAC unit charges collected each year shall be recorded by
the City Clerk, and shall be made available to the MCES upon request. If after filing the
required yearly report to the MCES, it is determined that a greater number of SAC units
should have been assigned to a building, any additional amount of cost shall be paid by
the person or company to whom the permit for that building was granted.
SECTION 7 MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION, MAJOR MAINTENANCE AND/OR
REPLACEMENT OF THE EXISTING MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Section 7.1 Maintenance And Inspection Responsibilities
Section 7.1.1 The City of Gem Lake City Council shall be responsible for the cost and
scheduling of minor maintenance, flushing and inspection of all of the Municipal
Sanitary Sewer System to include:
a) Bi-annual flushing of sewer mains.
b) Maintaining necessary records to determine location, age and condition of all
of the existing sewer mains.
c) Video or other means of inspection of the Municipal sanitary sewer system, at
least once every 15 years, or as determined by system problems or reports from
flushing operations.
Section 7.1.2 The costs of the maintenance and inspection operations shall be paid from
the revenues collected from the billings for the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System
operations. As this system is operated as a public utility, all costs must be paid from
funds collected from user fees and accounted for in a separate Enterprise Fund for the
utility and not from the General Fund of the City of Gem Lake. Rates for system users
shall be set with the costs of these maintenance and inspection operations in mind.
Section 7.2 Costs For Major Repairs Or Replacement
Section 7.2.1 The costs for major repairs or replacement of portions or all of the existing
Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall be borne by the end users of the system. The
system is operated as a public utility and exists to serve it users.
Section 7.2.2 If a major repair or replacement of the existing system is necessary, all
costs of replacement or major repair of any and all parts of the system shall be assessed
against the properties served and buildings connected to the existing system. Whenever
possible, a project for major repair or replacement will be initiated by the City Council,
the City Engineer will prepare specifications, bids taken, and public hearings will occur
before major repair or replacement would start.
Section 7.2.3 In cases of emergency replacement or repair of the system, the City
Council will initially arrange for payment for such replacement or repair and then assess
all costs of such repairs or replacement to the system users.
SECTION 8 METHODS TO DETERMINE IF EXTENSIONS OF THE MUNICIPAL
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM ARE NEEDED OR NECESSARY
Section 8.1 Capabilities To Expand System
Section 8.1.1 The City of Gem Lake Municipal Sanitary Sewer System may be expanded
to serve additional areas of the City and may be expanded to collect the amounts of
sewage flow as provided to the Metro Council and the MCES in the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan of the City. The values of current flow and expected flow and the areas of
the city served by the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System are updated to the MCES
regularly.
Section 8.2 Methods To Do Extension Projects
Section 8.2.1 If any of the following events occur, the City of Gem Lake City Council
may start a project for an expansion or extension of the Municipal sanitary sewer system:
a) A legal petition, signed by two-thirds (2/3) majority of the residents of a
defined area in the City of Gem Lake, is received by the City Council. The
"defined area" shall be the smallest practical area in which an extension may be
installed, as determined by the City Engineer.
Section 8.2.2 The results of the Bi-Annual inspection of the Individual Sewage
Treatment Systems, as outlined in Ordinance No. 67 of the City of Gem Lake, indicates
that the Municipal sanitary sewer system must be extended into a defined area due to
health or pollution problems.
Section 8.2.3 Receipt of a binding decree from the County, Regional, State or Federal
authorities that an extension must be made.
Section 8.3 Methods Used To Start An Extension Project
Section 8.3.1 If a valid request or requirement for a system extension is received by the
City of Gem Lake City Council, the City Engineer will be instructed to estimate the costs
of a sewer extension project for the defined area. These costs and the extent of the project
will be presented to the affected property owners at public hearings.
Section 8.3.2 All costs of sewer extension projects shall be assessed to the properties that
will be affected and gain or retain value by this project. The health and welfare of the
affected parties and their neighborhoods should also be considered. The assessment may
be done using one of the following basis or combination thereof as determined by the
City Council:
a) Front Footage basis whereby the total cost of the project is divided by the total
front footage of the project (each side of the street for frontage) to yield a per
front foot charge which is then multiplied by the front footage of each benefitted
property to determine the benefitted property owner’s share of the cost; or
b) Acreage basis whereby the total cost of the project is divided by the total
acreage served to yield a per acre charge which is then multiplied by the acreage
of each benefitted property to determine the benefited property owner’s share of
the cost; or
c) Benefitted Property basis where the total cost of the project is divided by the
total number of benefited properties times their sewer unit basis from Section
4.10(3), Table I to determine the benefitted property owner’s share of the cost.
Section 8.3.3 As this sanitary sewer system is operated as a public utility from which
revenues will be derived, no City of Gem Lake funds, other than sewer system funds,
shall be used for such projects.
SECTION 9 LICENSING OF SEWER CONTRACTORS
Section 9.1 Eligibility
Section 9.1.1 Any person who has had at least three (3) years of experience in
responsible charge of minor sewer work involving a knowledge of trenching, bracing,
tunnel work, pipe laying in public streets and all other matters pertaining to and
incidental to such sewer work and is a Licensed Plumber or an Unlicensed Plumber who
has received and provides copies of a contractor’s bond in the amount of $25,000 issued
by the State of Minnesota Department of Health for doing sewer work is eligible to
receive a license as a Sewer Contractor in the City of Gem Lake.
Section 9.2 Application For License
Section 9.2.1 Any person desiring to become a sewer contractor shall make application to
the City Clerk and shall, if necessary, be required to submit himself to an examination as
to his qualifications before the City Engineer or Plumbing Inspector.
Section 9.3 Examination And Licensing
Section 9.3.1 The City Council may approve or reject said application, or may refer the
same to the City Engineer or the Plumbing Inspector, for examination as to the applicant's
qualifications. If the City Council approves the application, a license authorizing the
applicant to engage in the business of sewer contracting shall be issued, but only after the
execution and filing of the bond and insurance requirements and payment of the fee is
accomplished.
Section 9.4 Bond And Insurance
Section 9.4.1 Before the Sewer Contractor’s License is issued, the licensee shall file,
with the City Clerk, the following Bond and Insurance certificate:
a) A bond in favor of the City of Gem Lake, as obligee, with an approved
Corporate Surety, in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the
conditions of which bond shall be that the licensee shall keep the obligee harmless
from all costs and charges that may accrue on account of the doing of any work
authorized or permitted in making sewer connections in the City of Gem Lake per
this Ordinance, that the licensee shall save the obligee harmless from any loss or
damage by reason of improper or inadequate work performed by the licensee on
projects done per this Ordinance and further that the licensee shall save the
obligee harmless from any damage to utility lines, curbs, street, street surfaces or
sidewalks.
b) A certificate that insurance is in force covering the licensee for the period
covered by the licensee in the following minimum amounts: Property damage,
one hundred thousand dollars ($ 100,000.00); Public Liability, two-hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($ 250,000.00) each person; and five-hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for each accident. The certificate shall state that the policies
covering the licensee shall not be canceled without ten (10) days written notice to
the City of Gem Lake. 3) A certificate that worker's compensation insurance is in
force covering any employee of the licensee for the period covered by the
insurance.
Section 9.5 Re-examination
Section 9.5.1 Should the applicant not be approved by the City Council, he may file a
second application for subsequent consideration by the City Council, with such
examination as to qualifications as the City Council may require, but no applicant shall
file more than two (2) applications with a period of one (1) year.
Section 9.6 Fees
Section 9.6.1 The annual license fee shall be that set annually by the City Council at its
first meeting in January. Any person allowing his license to expire shall not be permitted
to do any of the work authorized under said license during the time between expiration
and the issuance of a new license.
Section 9.7 License Not Transferable
Section 9.7.1 A Sewer Contractor's license shall not be transferable. No person holding a
license shall allow his name to be used by any other person for the purpose of obtaining
permits or to do any of the work for which said license is issued.
Section 9.8 Revocation O f License
Section 9.8.1 The City Council shall have the power to revoke any license upon
satisfactory proof that the holder of said license has willfully violated any of the
provisions of this Ordinance. A revoked license shall not be re-instated in any manner for
a period of six (6) months. The failure to pay, within sixty (60) days, any legitimate claim
the City of Gem Lake may have against a sewer contractor shall constitute cause for
revocation of a license.
Section 9.9 Connection To The Municipal Sanitary Sewer System
Section 9.9.1 License Required. Only contractors who are licensed as Sewer Contractors
by the City of Gem Lake may install sewer pipe materials for commercial/industrial
structures and make final connections to the municipal sanitary sewer system for all types
of structures.
Section 9.9.2 No License Required. No license shall be required of contractors or
homeowners installing the sewer pipe materials from residential structures to the
connection point.
SECTION 10 MATERIALS TO BE USED
Section 10.1 The materials and construction methods described in this section of this
Ordinance shall be exclusively used in making sewer connections to the Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System of the City of Gem Lake:
Section 10.1 (1) TABLE III
DESCRIPTION CLASS SPECIFICATION JOINT
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Sewer Pipe
SDR 35 ASTM D3034 Elastomeric Gasket
Vitrified Clay Sewer Pipe Extra Strength ASTM D1785 ASTM C425
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Sewer Service Pipe
Schedule 40 ASTM D1785 Gasket
Cast Iron Soil Service Pipe Service Weight ASTM A-74 Gasket
Section 10.1.2 Unless otherwise stated, a sanitary sewer main of eight (8 ") inch diameter
shall be expected as the minimum size and service connection pipe shall be at least four (4")
inches in diameter. The service connection pipe shall be installed at grades approved by the
City Engineer.
Section 10.2 Joints And Connections
Section 10.2.1 Joints for cast iron pipe and vitrified clay sewer pipe or for joints or
connections between different types of pipe shall be in the manner and of a kind
prescribed by the City Engineer. The City shall provide a list of various types and kinds
of joints and connections which are approved by the City Engineer and the types and
kinds of joints that are prohibited.
Section 10.3 Grades
Section 10.3.1 Unless otherwise authorized, all house sewers shall have a grade of not
less than one-eighth (1/8") inch per foot. A grade of one-quarter (1/4") inch should be
used whenever practical. The contractor shall check grades before construction proceeds
and he shall install the house sewer by exposing the wye at the sewer main or the service
stub and at the property line. He shall connect to the wye or service stub and shall lay the
house sewer line from the wye or service stub to the building. Whenever possible the
connecting sewer shall joint the building at an elevation which is below the basement
floor of such building.
Section 10.4 Alignment
Section 10.4.1 No connecting sewer shall contain bends or a combination of bends which
at any point shall be greater than forty-five (45°) degrees and no more than two (2) bends,
regardless of angle, shall be permitted in any single house connection except where
manholes or clean-outs are constructed at such points and in the manner as directed by
the City Engineer. No connecting sewer shall be laid parallel to any bearing wall or
footing unless it is placed at least three (3') feet from any such bearing wall or footing.
No connecting sewer shall be laid within twenty (20') feet of any existing well unless cast
iron soil pipe is used.
Section 10.5 Trenching And Backfilling
Section 10.5.1 All excavations shall be open trench work unless otherwise authorized by
the City Engineer. The foundation of the trench shall be formed to prevent any
subsequent settlement of the pipes. If the foundation is good and firm earth, the earth
shall be pared and molded to give a full support to the lower third (1/3) of the pipe. Bell
holes shall be dug to provide sample space for bells. Care must be exercised in back
filling below the center line of the pipe in order to give it proper support. Back filling
shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped or packed to two (2') feet above the pipe.
Back filling shall not be done until the section to be back filled has been inspected by the
City Engineer, his representative and the Plumbing Inspector.
Section 10.6 Use Of Old House Sewers
Section 10.6.1 Old house sewers or portions thereof may be approved for use by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer may request that the old sewer be excavated for the purpose
of facilitating inspection.
Section 10.7 Existing Individual Sewage Treatment System
Section 10.7.1 No house sewer shall be laid across or over any existing cesspool or septic
tank unless the existing cesspool or septic tank shall first be pumped clean and filled with
earth to the surrounding ground level. Where a sewer connection is laid across or over an
existing cesspool or septic tank, only cast iron solid pipe, confirming to ASTM Standard
Specifications shall be used for that portion of the connecting sewer.
Section 10.7.2 The contents of the existing cesspool or septic tank shall not be discharged
into the City of Gem Lake Municipal Sanitary Sewer System, but must be disposed of
outside the City Limits.
Section 10.8 Connections At Wye only
Section 10.8.1 Every connecting sewer shall be connected to the Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System at the wye designated for the property served by the connection, except
where otherwise expressly authorized by the City Engineer. All connections made at
point other than the designated wye shall be made only under the direct supervision o f
the City Engineer and in such a manner as he may direct.
Section 10.9 Tunneling
Section 10.9.1 Tunneling for a distance of not more than six (6) feet is permissible in
yards, courts or driveways of any building site. When pipes are driven, the drive pipe
shall be at least one size larger than the pipe to be laid.
Section 10.10 Independent System Required
Section 10.10.1 The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new
work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of
any other building except where provide for in Section 10.11 of this Ordinance. Every
Building shall have an independent connection with the sanitary sewer system when such
is available.
Section 10.11 Exception To Requirement Of Independent System
Section 10.11.1 Where one building stands to the rear of another building on an interior
lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building drain from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole will be considered as one building drain.
Where such a building is extended, a clean out shall be provided immediately inside the
rear wall of the front building.
Section 10.12 Repair Of Public Right-Of-Way
Section 10.12.1 For each connection permit issued, a deposit of five hundred dollars
($500.00) shall be paid to the City Clerk, for restoration of public right-of-way before
starting of the project. This deposit will be returned upon satisfactory completion of the
connection. Forfeiture of the deposit does not exonerate the permit holder from
satisfactory completion of the work.
Section 10.13 Costs And Expenses For Installation And Connection
Section 10.13.1 All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection to the
Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City of Gem Lake for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the sewer connection, including the restoring of streets
and street surface.
SECTION 11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Section 11.1 The City of Gem Lake shall have the right to enforce all sections of this
Ordinance by injunction or by any other legal remedy, including the right to prohibit the
use of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System by a person violating or operating contrary
to these provisions.
Section 11.2 Any person, firm, corporation or voluntary association which violates or
refuses to comply with any of the pro visions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be subject to a find of not more than One
Hundred Dollars ( $100.00) and cost for every offense or to imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
SECTION 12 APPEALS
Section 12.1 Application. Application to appeal a sewer bill shall be made on forms
provided by the City Clerk, who shall forward completed applications that include the
required information to the City Council, which shall act as the Board of Appeals for
review.
Section 12.2 Deadline for Application. Appeals must be made in writing and submitted
to the City Clerk within 15 business days of the date the sewer bill was placed in the
United States Mail by the City.
Section 12.3 Review Process. The City Clerk shall refer the Applications to the City
Council and establish a date for hearing on the Application. All Applications shall be
processed within 30 days of receipt of the Application by the City Clerk.
Section 12.4 Notice. Notice of the purpose, time and place of a hearing shall be mailed at
least 10 days before the date of the hearing to the Applicant.
Section 12.5 Decision. The decision of the City Council acting as Board of Appeals to
grant or deny the appeal requires majority vote of the members present. Decisions of the
City Council on appeals shall be final.
SECTION 13 ADOPTION, AMENDMENT AND ENACTMENT
Section 13.1 Adopted by the City of Gem Lake City Council this 28th day of March, in
the year 1994 and placed in effect on the 28th day of March in the year 1994.
Section 13.2 Amended by the City of Gem Lake City Council this 21st day of January, in
the year 2003 and placed in effect on the 12th day of February in the year 2003.
Section 13.3 Amended by the City of Gem Lake City Council this 14th day of July, in
the year 2004 and placed in effect on the 28th day of July in the year 2004.
Section 13.4 Amended by the City of Gem Lake City Council this ____ day of
____________, in the year 2013 and placed in effect on the ____ day of ____________
in the year 2013.
ENACTED: ATTEST:
Robert Uzpen William Short
Robert Uzpen, Mayor William Short, City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 64 LEGEND
The Sanitary Sewer System Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the
City Council as City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 64 on 28 March 1994. Since that time, the City
Council has adopted several changes in keeping with the changing times and needs and wishes of
the community. The following table is added to Ordinance No. 64 as an historic reference to
those changes. All changes shown below have been incorporated into Ordinance No. 64 and
placed in the public domain or made available to the public following the dates shown.
ORDINANCE ORDINANCE TITLE & DESCRIPTION REVISED
64 An Ordinance Regulating The Operation Of The Municipal Sanitary Sewer
System; Requiring Connections To Be Made To The Municipal Sanitary
Sewer System; Establishing Regulations As To Type And Kinds Of Waste
That May Be Disposed Of In The Municipal Sanitary Sewer System;
Prohibiting The Discharge Of Any type Or Kind Of Surface Waters Into
The Municipal Sanitary Sewer System; Prescribing Rates And Charges For
Sewage Disposal Services; Providing For The Issuance Of Permits For and
Supervision Of All Connections To The Municipal Sanitary Sewer System;
Prescribing Certain Materials And Methods To Be Used For Said
Connections; Providing For Licensing Of Sewer Contractors; and,
Prescribing Penalties For The Violation Of The Provisions Of This
Ordinance
03/28/1994
81 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 64 By Recodifying And Expanding
Section 3.2 Definitions, Upgrading References To The Metropolitan
Council Environmental Services, Recodifying Table 5.41(4)d, and
Providing For Administration Of The Ordinance.
01/21/2003
64D City Clerk Magnuson recodified by adding the word Section to each section
and subsection consistent with other ordinances and amended section
numbering of Section 13 to properly reflect codification. Section 12 was
added for purposes of codification only. No words, language or content
were amended in any way that would affect the content of this ordinance.
04/06/2004
64E 64E An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 64 By Adding and Amending
Definitions, Connection Requirements, Rates and Charges, Contractor
Licensing and Cost Assessment and incorporating changes into Ordinance
No. 64 as Ordinance No. 64E.
07/14/2004
93 An Ordinance amending Ordinance 64E by adding a provision to the
existing text of Section 5.2.1 providing for the certification of unpaid
connection charges to the County Auditor.
02/10/2009
1
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 65
AN ORDINANCE LICENSING AND REGULATING THE SALE AND CONSUMPTION OF
NONINTOXICATING LIQUOR AND PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
Section 1. Title.
Section 1.1. This ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as the “Non-
Intoxicating Liquor ordinance”, except as herein referred to as this ordinance.
Section 2. Scope and Purpose.
Section 2.1. It is deemed in the interest of the public and the residents of the City of Gem
Lake that any person, firm or corporation who engages in the business of selling nonintoxicating
liquor for consumption on or off the premises, as defined in this ordinance,
shall first secure a license therefor as provided herein.
Section 2.2. The ordinance shall establish definitions related to the ordinance, regulate
the application for and granting of licenses and the fees related thereto, provide for
financial responsibility on the part of the applicants, establish conditions under which
licenses shall be granted and revoked, stipulate restrictions related to the sale of nonintoxicating
liquor, and define penalties for violation of the ordinance.
Section 3. Definitions.
Section 3.1. The term “non-intoxicating liquor” shall be deemed to include beer or malt
liquor with an alcoholic content of more than one-half (0.5%) percent by volume and not
more than three and two-tenths (3.2%) percent by weight.
Section 3.2. The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this ordinance, are
defined as follows:
a) On-Sale(s): The sale of non-intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises.
b) Off-Sale(s): The sale of non-intoxicating liquor for consumption off the
premises.
c) Applicant: A person, firm, or corporation who makes application for a license
with the City.
d) Licensee: A person, firm, or corporation to whom the City has issued a nonintoxicating
liquor license.
e) Minor: A person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
2
Section 4. License Required.
Section 4.1. No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized
under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale any nonintoxicating
liquor without first having received a license to do so as provided in this
ordinance. Licenses shall be “On-Sale(s)” and “Off-Sale(s)” and shall be issued as “Non-
Intoxicating Liquor License” valid for sales any day except Sunday and “Special Sunday
Non-Intoxicating Liquor License” for “On-Sale(s)” on Sundays only.
Section 4.2. "On-Sale(s) Licenses" and “Special Sunday On-Sale(s) Licenses” shall be
issued only to restaurants, clubs, and exclusive "On-Sale(s)" liquor stores and shall
permit "On-Sale(s)" of non-intoxicating liquor only.
Section 4.3. "Off-Sale(s) Licenses” shall be issued only to "Off-Sale(s)" retail stores and
shall permit "Off-Sale(s)" of non-intoxicating liquor only.
Section 5. Application for License.
Section 5.1. Every application for a license to sell liquor shall be verified and filed with
the City Clerk. It shall state the name of the applicant, his age, representations as to his
character, with such references as may be required, his citizenship, whether the
application is for "On-Sales", “Special Sunday On-Sale(s)”, or "Off-Sale(s)", the business
in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location and type of
building, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long he has
been in that business at that place, and such other information as the council may require
from time to time. In addition to containing such information, each application for a
license shall be in the form prescribed by the City Clerk of the City of Gem Lake. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.
Section 5.2. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by the minimum proof
of financial responsibility consistent with those required by Minnesota Statutes Section
340A.409 (subd. 1) and any amendments thereto or substitutes therefor that may from
time to time become effective covering intoxicating liquor sales.
Section 5.3. The proof of financial responsibility offered under Subdivision 2 shall be
approved by the City Council. Liability insurance policies shall be approved as to form
by the City Attorney. The operation of such “Off-Sale(s)” or “On-Sale(s)” nonintoxicating
liquor business without having on file at all times with the municipality the
proof of financial responsibility required in Subdivision 2 shall be grounds for immediate
revocation of the license.
Section 6. License Fees.
Section 6.1. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from the
City Treasurer for payment in full of the required fee for the license. All fees shall be
3
paid into the general fund of the municipality. Upon rejection of any application for a
license, the treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
Section 6.2. All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each year. Each
license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if a portion of the license year
has elapsed when the initial application is made, a license may be issued for the
remainder of the year. However, the fee shall be annual only and shall not be pro-rated.
Section 6.3. (Repealed by Ordinance 94, adopted 2/10/2009).
Section 6.4. No refund of any fee shall be permitted except as authorized b y the City
Council.
Section 7. Granting of Licenses.
Section 7.1. The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application.
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the
license. After such investigation and hearing, the City Council shall grant or refuse the
application in its discretion. No non-intoxicating liquor license shall become effective
until it, together with the proof of financial responsibility furnished by the applicant, has
been approved by the City Council.
Section 7.2. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only. Each license shall be
issued only for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred
to another person or to another place without the approval of the City Council.
Section 8. Persons Ineligible for License.
Section 8.1. No license shall be granted to or held by any person made ineligible for such
a license in accordance with procedures set forth by state law for intoxicating liquor
licenses.
Section 9. Places Ineligible for License.
Section 9.1. No license shall be issued for any place or for any business ineligible for
such a license under guidelines established by the City Council.
Section 9.2. No license shall be issued to any business until it has been in operation
continuously for six (6) months.
Section 9.3. No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.
Section 9.4. No license shall be granted within a reasonable distance of any school,
church, or private home at the determination of the City Council.
4
Section 10. Conditions of License.
Section 10.1. Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the following
subdivisions and all other provisions of this ordinance and of any other applicable
ordinance of the City or state law.
Section 10.2. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his place of business
and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed
premises authorized to sell or serve intoxicating liquor shall be deemed the act of the
licensee as well and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this ordinance
equally with the employee.
Section 10.3. No sale of liquor shall be made to anyone on credit provided solely by the
establishment.
Section 10.4. Any peace officer, health officer, or any properly designated officer or
employee of the City shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search the
premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
Section 11. Restrictions on Serving, Purchase, and Consumption.
Section 11.1. No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing,
consuming or serving non-intoxicating liquor.
Section 11.2. No person shall induce a minor to purchase, consume or serve nonintoxicating
liquor.
Section 11.3. No person shall mix, prepare or serve non-intoxicating liquor for
consumption in any public place or place of business not licensed to sell non-intoxicating
liquor "on sale" and no person shall consume non-intoxicating liquor in any such place.
Section 11.4. No non-intoxicating liquor shall be sold or consumed on a public highway
or in an automobile.
Section 12. Revocation.
Section 12.1. The City Council may suspend or revoke any non-intoxicating liquor
license for violation of any provision or condition of this ordinance or any state law
regulating the sale of non-intoxicating liquor. Except in the case of a suspension pending
a hearing on revocation, revocation or suspension shall be preceded by written notice to
the grantee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least eight (8) days notice of the
time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.
The City Council may, without any advance notice, suspend any license pending a
hearing on revocation for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days.
5
Section 13. Penalty.
Section 13.1. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $700.00
or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than ninety (90) days or both plus the
costs of prosecution in either case.
ENACTED BY A UNANIMOUS VOTE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
GEM LAKE AND PLACED IN EFFECT AT 12:00 MIDNIGHT THIS 19TH DAY OF
JUNE IN THE YEAR 1995.
ATTEST: ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
DATED: 19 June 1995 DATED: 19 June 1995
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 65 LEGEND
The Non-Intoxicating Liquor Ordinance was originally enacted by the City Council as Ordinance
Number 65 on 19 June 1995. Since that time, the City Council has made amendments to the
Ordinance in keeping with changes in State law and the wishes of the community. The
following table indicates the original ordinance and the said amendments.
ORDINANCE DESCRIPTION ENACTMENT
65 The Non-Intoxicating Liquor Ordinance 6/19/1995
94 An ordinance establishing procedures for review and revocation
of all City licenses, and amending Ordinance No. 65 by: a)
Deleting wine with less than 14% alcohol by volume from
definition of “non-intoxicating liquor”; and b) deleting
Section.6.3, which set fees, in favor of reference to annual fee
schedule.
2/10/2009
1
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 66
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING TREE AND NATURAL BARRIER PROTECTION
AND PRESERVATION AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
The City of Gem Lake does ordain as follows:
Section 1 - Title
1.1 This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the TREE AND NATURAL
BARRIER PROTECTION ORDINANCE, except as referred to herein, where it shall be
know as "this ordinance".
Section 2 - Purpose
2.1 The purpose of this Ordinance is to preserve and protect the unique natural environment of
the City of Gem Lake and provide for minimal tree loss and mitigation of tree removal in
wooded areas of the City. It also provides for protection of natural barriers provided by trees
or shrubs along the borders of our city, along major roads and between differing land uses.
2.2 Tree cover and natural barriers are beneficial in terms of aesthetics, screening, cooling,
wildlife habitat protection, watershed control, air quality enhancements, erosion control and
preservation and enhancement of property values. Land alteration that causes destruction of
trees or shrubs diminishes and impairs the public health, safety and general welfare. The
intention of this Ordinance is to provide regulations relating to the cutting and removal of
trees in areas where the natural vegetation or topography are to be altered.
Section 3 - Separability
3.1 It is the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this Ordinance are
separable and that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this
Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions or this Ordinance not specifically included in such judgment.
Section 4 - Interaction Between This Ordinance And Other Ordinances
4.1 This Ordinance is written to complement the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance and the
City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance. In the event of conflicting requirements imposed
by this Ordinance or by other Ordinances of the City of Gem Lake, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
Section 5 - Wording Of This Ordinance
5.1 Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; the singular includes the
plural; and the plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and the "may" is
permissive. The masculine gender includes the feminine.
2
Section 6 - Definitions
6.1 Applicant The person or entity proposing land alteration as described in this Ordinance.
6.2 City Council The City of Gem Lake City Council.
6.3 City Forester A forester appointed by the City of Gem Lake.
6.4 Coniferous/Evergreen Tree A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least thirty (30') feet
in height, with a single trunk, fully branched to the ground, having foliage on the outermost
portion of the branches year round.
6.5 Deciduous Tree A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twenty (20') feet in height,
with a single trunk, un-branched for several feet above the ground, having a defined crown
which loses leaves annually.
6.6 Land Alteration Any modification, tree cutting or removal, grading, clearing, filling or
other change to any parcel of land including a woodland, shore land or natural barrier within
a five (5) year period which may initially or cumulatively result in:
6.61 The movement of more than four-hundred (400) cubic yards of earth where significant
trees are present; or
6.62 Any alteration of land of:
A. more than one (1') foot from the natural contour of the ground; or
B. any contiguous four-hundred fifty (450 sf) square feet of ground where
significant trees are located; or
C. any cutting, removal or killing of trees equal to or greater than twenty
(20%)percent of the significant trees on any parcel of land; or
6.63 Any cutting, removal or killing of trees equal to or greater than twenty (20%)
percent of the significant trees on any parcel of land; or
6.64 Any destruction or disruption of tree cover equal to or greater than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the total tree cover on any parcel of land; or
6.65 Any changes in the Natural Barriers provided by trees or shrubs along the borders
of the City, along major roads or between differing land uses, or
6.66 Any intensive vegetation clearance (clear cutting) within a shore land area or on
steep slopes; or
6.67 Any other significant change in the natural character or topography of the land.
3
6.7 Natural Barrier Screening provided by a tree or shrubbery barrier that acts as a visual or
noise barrier from roads, railroads and differing land uses, said barrier not to exceed thirty
(30') feet in barrier depth. When a Natural Barrier is part of a Woodland, the Natural Barrier
shall be considered the first thirty (30') feet of the Woodland.
6.8 Preservation Area A delineated area which designates trees and vegetation which will be
preserved during the construction and land alteration process.
6.9 Performance Bond A bond with good and sufficient sureties, approved by the City Council,
which is conditioned upon satisfactory implementation of an approved plan and which names
the City as obligee.
6.10 Critical Root Zone An area under a tree equal to one and one-half (1'6") feet of radius for
every one (1") inch of tree diameter (e.g A 20" tree has a critical root zone of 30' radius or
60' diameter).
6.11 Shore Land That area surrounding Gem Lake or any other recognized wetland and
extending horizontally seventy-five (75') feet back from the mean high water line.
6.12 Significant Tree A healthy deciduous tree measuring eight (8") inches or greater in
diameter, at a point four and one half feet above grade, or a healthy coniferous tree measuring
ten (10') feet in height or greater.
6.13 Steep Slopes. A slope with greater than a thirty-three (33%) percent change in elevation or
a 3:1 grade (3 parts horizontal to 1 part vertical).
6.14 Woodland. An area of at least one-half (½) acre in size of land, utility easements, or
rights-of-way, with at least twenty (20) significant trees on the parcel or with tree cover over
at least thirty-five (35%) percent of the total land area.
Section 7 - Protection Standards.
7.1 No land alteration shall occur until the City finds that the planned land alteration complies
with the following:
7.11 Maximum Possible Preservation.
A. All land alteration shall be conducted so that the maximum amount of
woodland and natural screening and barriers are preserved by the clustering
of structures wherever possible, or by the use of other appropriate methods.
Measures shall be taken to protect and preserve all trees and shrubs in the
preservation area as described.
7.12 Protection Of Root Zones.
A. Grading, contouring, paving and any excavation or trenching shall not
detrimentally affect the aeration or permeability of the root zone in the
preservation area.
4
7.13 Data Submission.
A. The applicant shall submit data to the City, at the time of a preliminary plat
submission or whenever land alteration (as described in this Ordinance) is
planned, that outlines the conformance to this Ordinance. This submission
shall include:
1. The name and address of the person preparing the plan and applying
for a permit to do this alteration, and
2. The name and address of the person who owns the land that is to be
altered, and
3. The estimated period of time within which this land alteration will be
conducted, and
4. A topographical map of the land on which the proposed land alteration
is to occur having a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and showing
the ground elevation contours at two foot intervals. The map
shall also show:
a. The land as it exists prior to the proposed land alteration
including, a minimum one-hundred (100') feet of the abutting
properties; and
b. The proposed ground elevation contours at 2 foot intervals on
the land when the proposed land alteration is complete, and
c.. A re-grading, drainage and planting plan, if appropriate.
B. A statement relating to the proposed use of the land including the type of
building or structure situated thereon or to be constructed, and
C.. A tree inventory, certified by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect
or forester depicting the size, species, condition and location of each
significant tree by species, diameter and condition, and
D.. Identification of significant trees that will be lost due to the proposed land
alteration and those which will be preserved, and
E.. Identification of all significant trees within 30 feet of the grading limit, and
F.. Identification of all natural barriers of trees or shrubs.
Section 8 - Removal Thresholds
8.1 Although the applicant must retain the maximum amount of woodland possible, the City
recognizes that a certain amount of significant trees and tree cover removal is an inevitable
consequence of the urban development process.
5
8.2 Therefore, in the following Zoning areas or Zoning Districts listed in Column I, a percentage
of the woodland may be removed without any obligation for reforestation, but only up to and
including the threshold percentage of Woodland listed in Column II. If the land alteration
results in woodland removal that exceeds the percentage listed in Column II, then the
applicant shall be responsible to replace the trees in accordance with Section 9 of this
Ordinance.
8.3 Natural borders may not be removed or altered without the written permission of the City.
8.4 Intensive vegetation clearance within the shore land area and on steep slopes is prohibited.
8.5 TABLE OF ZONING DISTRICT AND TREE REMOVAL THRESHOLD
Tree removal in excess of the thresholds shown requires Planning Commission and City
Council approval and reforestation.
COLUMN 1
ZONING AREA OR DISTRICT
COLUMN II
REMOVAL THRESHOLD
R1 - Residential 25%
R2 - Residential 25%
R3 - Residential 25%
R4 - Residential 25%
GB, GB II, RB, LDB - Commercial 25%
SHORE LAND - All Districts 10%
NATURAL BARRIER - All Districts 0%
Section 9 - Reforestation
9.1 Tree Removal Beyond The Removal Threshold.
9.11 If the land alteration results in tree removal beyond the tree removal threshold in
Section 8 of this Ordinance, or as defined in Section 6.6 of this Ordinance, or a
natural barrier is to be altered or removed, the applicant shall be required to submit
a reforestation plan. The reforestation plan must be submitted and approved by the
City Forester prior to final plat approval, if a subdivision is being done, or before the
work of land alteration is begun. The reforestation plan shall include:
A. Location of proposed reforestation, and
1. Species and size of proposed plantings, and
B. Quantity of proposed plantings.
9.2 Reforestation Plan
9.21 The reforestation plan shall comply with the following criteria:
6
A. Tree replacement will be predicated on the total number of diameter inches
of significant trees removed beyond the threshold limits.
B. Actual replacement quantities shall be adjusted based on the type of trees
removed in accordance with the following guidelines:
1. Class A Conifer or Softwood- predominantly Poplar, Box Elder,
Cottonwood, Aspen and Conifers: 75 %
2. Class B Mixed Hardwoods - predominantly species other than Oak
including, but not limited to, Cherry, Birch, Walnut, Elm, Ironwood,
Maple, Basswood, Ash: 100 %
3. Class C Hardwood - Predominantly mature Oaks : 125%
9.3 Where trees are to be located.
9.31 Trees to be provided as part of a reforestation plan shall be located adjacent to the
development or proposed structures in areas such as yard setbacks, on outlots or
common areas, at the project entrance area, in buffer zones between different land
uses or roads, or at other locations as directed by the City. Reforestation shall occur
in such a way as to replace trees removed with desirable trees of the same or similar
species and/or densities. These trees must be planted based on the frequency and
density as determined by the City Forester.
9.4 Sizes and type of replacement trees.
9.41 Replacement trees must be no less than the following sizes:
A. Deciduous trees
1. No less than two and one-half (2½") inches in diameter on steep
slopes, or
2. No less than three (3") inches on all other grades.
B. Coniferous trees
1. No less than six (6') feet high on steep slopes, or
2. No less than seven (7') feet high on all other grades.
Section 10: Construction Damage To Significant Trees In Or Near The Preservation Area.
10.1 Significant trees which are within thirty (30) feet of the proposed grading limit shall be
surveyed by the applicant. Any significant tree that the applicant commits to preserve that
is subsequently damaged, during or as the result of construction, shall be replaced by the
applicant on a one for one diameter inch basis.
7
Section 11 - Agreement To Replace Trees
11.1 The developer or applicant, prior to the approval of, or issuance of a permit for any land
alteration in connection with which trees are required to be replaced by the provisions in this
Ordinance, shall
11.11. enter into such written agreements or arrangements with the City of Gem Lake in
such form and substance as shall be approved by the City, whereby the applicant shall
undertake to comply with the provisions and conditions imposed by this Ordinance
and in connection with any such approval or issuance of a permit and shall further
provide that the applicant shall indemnify the City against any loss, cost or expense,
including an amount as and for reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in enforcing the
terms of such agreement or agreements; and
11.12 provide security for the performance of its obligations pursuant to such agreement or
agreements. The security may consist of a bond, letter of credit, cash, or escrow
deposit, all in such form and substance as shall be approved by the City.
A. The amount of this security shall be $ 1,000 or 150% of the estimated cost to
furnish and plant the replacement trees (estimated cost) which ever is greater.
The estimated cost shall be at least as much as the reasonable amount charged
by nurseries for furnishing and planting of replacement trees. The estimated
cost shall be subject to approval by the City, and in the event the estimated
cost is not approved, the City shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to
determine the escrow amount.
Section 12: Collector And Arterial Roads And Trunk And Lateral Utility Construction
12.1 When This Section Applies.
12.11 This section shall only apply to collector and arterial road and trunk and lateral utility
construction projects. All interior roads and utility services will be required to adhere
to applicable zoning district thresholds.
12.2 Road And Utility Construction.
12.21 Significant trees shall not be destroyed or removed within the right-of-way unless
such destruction or removal is absolutely necessary because of engineering, safety,
sight distances, or maintenance requirements and acceptable alternate means of
construction or alternate routes are not possible. Such reasons must be submitted for
review by the City.
12.3 Reforestation.
12.31 If the road or utility construction destroys or removes fifty (50%) percent or less of
the significant trees or tree cover in the right-of-way, then the person or entity
conducting the construction shall not be responsible for reforestation. If, however,
more than fifty (50%) percent of the significant trees or tree cover within the
easement or right-of-way are destroyed or removed, the person conducting the
construction shall be responsible for the following:
8
A. Filing a landscape bond pursuant to Section 11; and
B. Replacement of trees that exceed the fifty (50%) percent threshold shall be
in accordance with Section 9 of this Ordinance. The replacement trees shall
be planted on the adjoining setback areas, assuming the adjoining
landowners consent. Otherwise, the replacement trees shall be planted at
locations as determined by the City.
Section 13 - Exceptions To This Ordinance
13.1 The requirements of this Ordinance shall not apply to the removal of trees which are dead,
diseased, seriously damaged by storm, or other acts of nature.
Section 14 - Tree Replacement
14.1 Replacement trees shall be planted not later than 12 months after the date the land alteration
has commenced. If the applicant is prevented from performing within this time limit,
because of unforeseen circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, the City Forester may
extend the time for performance. The applicant shall inform the City Forester when all
replacement trees have been planted, at which time the City Forester shall inspect the site.
14.2 Replacement trees shall consist of "certified nursery stock" as defined by Minnesota Statues
Section 18.46 or other trees ("wilding trees") so long as the wilding trees comply with the
following standards. A wilding tree measured in diameter inches shall not exceed the
maximum height as shown below:
TABLE 14.3
DIAMETER OF TREE IN INCHES MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF TREES IN FEET
Two (2.0") Inches Eighteen (18') Feet
Two and One-Half (2.5") Inches Eighteen (18') Feet
Three (3") Inches Twenty (20') Feet
Three and One-Half (3.5") Inches Twenty (20') Feet
Four (4") Inches Twenty-Four (24') Feet
Five (5") Inches Twenty-Eight (28') Feet
14.4 The lowest branch of a wilding tree shall be at a height above the surface of the ground not
more than one-half of the total height of the tree. (Example, a 16 foot tree must have a branch
within 8 feet of the surface of the surrounding ground.)
14.5 Trees planted in place of missing, dead or un-healthy replacement trees shall consist of only
"certified nursery stock" as defined by Minnesota Statues, Section 18.46.
9
Section 15 - Release And Retention Of Performance Security
15.1 Release Of Performance Security
15.11 The performance security shall remain in effect for not less than one (1) year after the
date that the last replacement tree has been planted. The City may release the
performance security at that time unless the City Forester, upon inspection, finds that
any of the replacement trees have died or are unhealthy, or if there was any
encroachment upon the protective fencing surrounding any tree to be saved.
15.12 If the applicant supplies proof of a nursery guarantee which is approved by the City
Forester, then the performance security posted by the applicant shall be released upon
planting of the last guaranteed tree. The nursery guarantee shall remove liability
from the applicant and responsibility will be placed upon the nursery or current land
owner.
15.2 Retention Of All Or Portion Of Performance Security
15.21 The City may retain the portion of the performance security equal to the cost of
removing dead or unhealthy trees and replanting replacement trees.
Section 16 - Penalty
16.1 Any person violating or refusing to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and prosecuted and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than Seven Hundred and no/100 ($700.00) dollars or by imprisonment not
to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. The costs of prosecution may also be added.
Adopted by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on this 16 day of October in
the year 19 95 and placed into effect upon publication / 12:00 am on the day following
enactment by the City Council.
ATTEST: ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Enacted: 16 October 1995 Enacted: 16 October 1995
file: ordinanc\ordno66.doc
C E R T I F I E D C O P Y
CITY OF GEM LAKE
COUNTY OF RAMSEY
STATE OF MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 66
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING TREE AND NATURAL
BARRIER PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION AND
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
Enacted by the City Council of Gem Lake on the
16th day of October in the year 1995.























Page 1 of 8
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 68
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE SALE, DISTRIBUTION, POSSESSION, AND USE OF TOBACCO,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE AND TO
PROVIDE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS AND TO REDUCE THE ILLEGAL SALE, DISTRIBUTION,
POSSESSION, AND USE OF SUCH ITEMS TO AND BY MINORS.
The City Council of the City of Gem Lake does hereby ordain:
Section 1.
Section 1.1. Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority granted in the United States FDA
Tobacco Regulations of 1996 and M innesota Statutes along with amendments which, from time to time, may
be made thereto.
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent.
Section 1.2.1. The purpose of this O rdinance is to recognize that the sale, distribution, possession, and
use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices to Minors under the age of eighteen (18)
is in violation of the laws of the State of Minnesota and the United States and to protect and promote
the health, safety, and general welfare of the both the general public and minors by recognizing that
smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place
a financial burden on all levels of government.
Section 1.2.2. The intent of this Ordinance is to accomplish the purpose through regulation of the sale,
distribution, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices thus
enforcing and furthering existing laws including, but not limited to, Minn Stat. § 144.391.
Section 1.3 Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Tobacco Regulation Ordinance” of the City of Gem
Lake.
Section 2.
Section 2.1 Interpretation In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, its provisions shall be held
to be minimum requirements and shall not be construed so as to fully effect its purpose and shall not be deemed
a limitation or repeal of any other power established by law or Ordinance except as specifically provided herein.
In the event that conflicting requirements are imposed by this Ordinance or by other Ordinances of the City of
Gem Lake, the more restrictive provisions shall ap ply.
Section 2.2 Construction of Wording. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; the
singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and the word
"may" is permissive; the masculine gender includes the feminine.
Section 2.3 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall
be given their commonly accepted definitions. The following terms shall have definitions given to them:
2.3.1. Administrator. The City Clerk or that Person designated by the City Clerk to act on his behalf
shall administer this Ordinance.
2.3.2 Applicant. A Person who submits an application to the C ity for a license to sell Tobacco,
Tobacco Products, or Related Tobacco Devices.
Page 2 of 8
2.3.3. Compliance C hecks. “Compliance Checks” shall mean the system the City of Gem Lake uses
to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Tobacco
Related Devices are in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Compliance Checks shall
involve the use of Minors as authorized by this Ordinance and shall also mean the use of Minors who
attempt to purchase Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Related Tobacco Devices for educational,
research, and training purposes as authorized by State and Federal laws. Compliance Checks may also
be conducted by other units of government for purpose of enforcing appropriate Federal, State, or
local laws and regulations relating to Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Related Tobacco Devices.
2.3.4. Individually Packaged. “Individually Packaged” shall mean the practice of selling any
Tobacco or Tobacco Products wrapped individually for sale and shall include, but not be limited to,
single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.
2.3.5 Licensed Premises. The real property upon which a Retail Establishment whose owner or
officer, as Licensee, has been authorized under this Ordinance to sell Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or
Related T obacco Devices.
2.3.6. Licensee. “Licensee” shall mean a person who has attained the age of eighteen (18) years, firm,
corporation, or other legal entity with a fixed Retail Establishment location in the City of Gem Lake
who has been granted a license by the City of Gem Lake Council for a license to sell Tobacco,
Tobacco Products, and/or Related Tobacco Devices based upon submittal to the City of a completed
application for said license and the fees associated thereto
2.3.7. Loosies. “Loosies” shall mean the common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.
2.3.8. Minor. “Minor” shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen (18)
years.
2.3.9. Moveable Place of Business. “Moveable Place of Business” shall mean any form of business
operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a
fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure used for sales transactions.
2.3.10. Person.. An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, or other legal entity
excluding the City of Gem Lake, the state or any other political subdivision or other governmental
entity.
2.3.11. Retail Establishment. “Retail Establishment” shall mean any place of business where
Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Related Tobacco Devices are available for sale to the general public
and shall include, but not be limited to: grocery stores; convenience stores; bars and lounges;
restaurants; gas and service stations.
2.3.12. Sale. “Sale” shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
2.3.13. Self-Service Merchandising. “Self-Service Merchandising” shall mean open displays of
Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Tobacco related Devices in any manner where any person shall have
access to said items without the assistance or intervention of the Licensee or an employee of the
Licensee, said assistance or intervention entailing the actual physical exchange of Tobacco, Tobacco
Products, or Tobacco related Devices between the Licensee or employee of the Licensee.
2.3.14. Self-Service Sales. “Self-Service Sales” shall mean any sale of Tobacco, Tobacco Products,
or Tobacco Related Devices where there is not an actual physical exchange of said items between the
customer and the Licensee or an employee of the Licensee.
Page 3 of 8
2.3.15. Tobacco or Tobacco Products. “Tobacco” or “Tobacco Products” shall mean any substance
or item containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to: cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff;
fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, read yrubbed,
and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping
tobaccos; refuse scraps; clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of
tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking.
2.3.16. Tobacco Related Devices. “Tobacco Related Devices” shall mean any tobacco product as well
as pipes, rolling papers, or other devices intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner
which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of Tobacco or Tobacco Products.
2.3.17. Vending Machine. “Vending Machine” shall mean any mechanical, electric or electronic, or
other type of device which dispenses Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Related Devices upon
the insertion of money, tokens, or other forms of payment directly into the machine by the person
seeking to purchase Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Related Devices.
Section 3.
Section 3.1 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any Person to sell or offer for sale any Tobacco,
Tobacco Products or Tobacco Related D evices without first having obtained a license to do so from the City
of Gem Lake.
Section 3.2. Application. An application for a license to sell Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Related
Devices shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk of the City of Gem Lake and shall be submitted
to the City Clerk along with fees as required by this Ordinance. The app lication shall contain the full name of
the applicant, the applicants title as part of the Retail Establishment, the name of the Retail Establishment for
which the license is sought, the applicant’s residential and Retail Establishment addresses and telephone
numbers, a complete list of all officers, owners, and/or shareholders of the Retail Establishment and the owners,
officers and/or shareholders residential addresses and telephone numbers.
Section 3.2.1. Moveable Place of Business. The City shall not process any application received from
a Moveable P lace of Business for a license in accordance with this Ordinance and said application
shall be immediately returned to the Applicant with a notice that said Applicant is ineligible for a
license in accordance with Section 4.1.6 of this Ordinance.
Section 3.3 Procedures for Review of Application. Upon receipt of an application by the City, the
Administrator shall employ the following procedures in the issuance of the license:
Section 3.3.1. Complete Application. The City Clerk shall review all information contained in any
application received to determine that same is complete and, if found incomplete, shall return the
application to the Applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the Application
complete.
Section 3.3.2. Investigation. Upon receipt of a complete app lication, the Administrator shall forward
same to the City’s law enforcement agency within seven (7) days for a background investigation of
the Applicant and the Retail Establishment and it’s officers and owners, said background investigation
to be completed within ten (10) days at which time the results of the background check shall be
provided to the Administrator.
Section 3.4. Action. Upon receipt of the background investigation, the Administrator shall advise the City
Clerk to place consideration of the Application and approval or denial by the City of Gem Lake Council on the
agenda of the next meeting of said Council.
Section 3.5. License Fees. No license shall be issued in accordance with this Ordinance until the appropriate
fee shall be paid in full, said fees being as authorized in Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 227 and as
established by the City of Gem Lake Council by resolution and, from time to time, amended.
Page 4 of 8
Section 3.5.1. Partial Term Fees. Fees prescribed for issuance of a license in accordance with this
Ordinance shall not be prorated when an application is received at a time that would provide an initial
term following approval of less than one (1) calendar year.
Section 3.6. Term of License. All licenses issued under this Ordinance shall be valid for the term of one (1)
calendar year commencing on the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December.
Section 3.6.1. Partial Term. If an original application is received and subsequently approved during
a calendar year, the term of license shall not extend beyond the end of the calendar year in which the
application was approved.
Section 3.7. Transfers of License. All licenses issued in accordance with this Ordinance shall be valid only
on the premises of the Retail Establishment for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom
the license was issued. Any change in ownership of the Retail Establishment for which the license was issued
shall require submittal of a new Application for license to the City and be subject to the same manner of
examination and investigation as an original application.
Section 3.8. License on Display. All licenses issued in accordance with this Ordinance shall be posted and
prominently displayed on the premises of the licensed Retail Establishment so as to be in plain view of the
general public. A sign not smaller than eight (8") inches by eight (8") inches stating in fonts greater than thirtysix
(36) point that “Sales To Or Attempted Purchase Of Tobacco & Related Products By Minors Is Prohibited
By Law” shall also be prominently displayed.
Section 3.9. License Renewals. The renewal of a license issued in accordance with this Ordinance shall be
handled in the same manner as the original application, except that the application for renewal shall be made
at least thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the current license.
Section 3.10. Revocation or Suspension of License. Any license issued in accordance with this Ordinance may
be revoked or suspended as provided for in Section 11.1.1 of this Ordinance.
Section 4.
Section 4.1. Basis for Denial of License. The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal
of a license in accordance with this Ordinance; however, except as may be provided by law, the existence of
any particular ground for denial does not mean that the City of Gem Lake must deny the license. If a license
is mistakenly issued or renewed to a Person, it shall be immediately revoked upon the discovery that the Person
was ineligible for the license under this Section.
Section 4.1.1. M inors. No license shall be issued to any Applicant under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
Section 4.1.2. Convicted Persons. Licenses may be denied any Applicant who has been convicted
within the past five (5) years of any violation of a Federal, State, or local law, ordinance provision,
or other regulation relating to Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Related Devices.
Section 4.1.3. License Revocations. A license may be denied any Applicant who has had a license
to sell Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Related Tobacco Devices revoked with the twelve (12) month
period preceding the effective date of receipt of Application.
Section 4.1.4. Information. A license may be denied to any Applicant who fails to provide all
information required on the Application or who provides false or misleading information on the
Application or to City officials.
Section 4.1.5. Prohibited by Others. A license shall be denied any Applicant who is prohibited by
Federal, State or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding such a license.
Section 4.1.6. Moveable Place of Business. A license shall be denied any Applicant whose Retail
Establishment is a Moveable Place of Business.
Page 5 of 8
Section 5.
Section 5.1. Prohibited Sales. It shall be unlawful for any Person to sell or offer for sale any Tobacco, Tobacco
Products, or Related Tobacco Devices as follows:
Section 5.1.1. Sales To Or By Minors. To any person or by any employee or clerk under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
Section 5.1.2. Vending Machines. By means of any type of vending machine unless access by Minors
to the premises of the licensed Retail Establishment are prohibited by law and the premises of and
vending machine in the licensed Retail Establishment are under the direct and constant control of the
Licensee or employees of the Licensee who are over the age of eighteen (18) years.
Section 5.1.3. Self-Service Sales and Merchandising. By means of self-service methods as defined
in Sections 2.3.3 and 2.3.4 and whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written
request to the Licensee or an employee of the Licensee, except as defined in Section 6.1.1.
Section 5.1.4. Loosies. By means of Loosies as defined in Section 2.3.7.
Section 5.1.5. Controlled Substances. Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or otherwise controlled
substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an
otherwise lawful manufacturing process.
Section 5.1.6. Other M eans. By any other means, to any person, or in any other manner or form
prohibited by Federal, State, or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation.
Section 6.
Section 6.1. Self-Service Sales. It shall be unlawful for a Licensee under this Ordinance to sell or offer for sale
Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Related Tobacco Devices by any means whereby the customer may have access
to such items without having to make a verbal, written, or other request of the Licensee or an employee of the
Licensee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the Tobacco, Tobacco Products, or Related Tobacco
Devices between the customer and the Licensee or an employee of the Licensee. All Tobacco, Tobacco
Products, and Related Tobacco Devices shall be stored behind a counter, in a case, or other closed storage area
not freely accessible to the general public.
Section 6.1.1. Exemptions for Cartons or Multi-Packs. Under State law, the self-service sale of
cartons and multi-packs shall be allowed until such time as the FDA regulations take full effect at
which time this Section may be repealed.
Section 6.1.2. Exemptions for Restricted Areas. Under State law, the self-service restrictions
described in 6.1 shall not ap ply to Retail Establishments where access by Minors to the premises of
the licensed Retail Establishment are prohibited by law and the premises of the licensed Retail
Establishment are under the direct and constant control of the Licensee or employees of the Licensee
who are over the age of eighteen (18) years.
Section 6.1.3. Other Exemptions. Under State law, the self-service restrictions described in 6.1 shall
not apply to Retail Establishments which derive at least ninety (90%) percent of their total revenue
from the sale of Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Related Tobacco Devices and where access by
Minors to the premises of the licensed Retail Establishment are prohibited by law.
Section 6.2. Conversion of Premises. Licensees under this Ordinance shall, within sixty (60) days of the
effective date of this Ordinance but not later than the 28th day of February in the year 1998 shall bring their
licensed premises into compliance with this Section, unless otherwise directed in writing by the Administrator.
Page 6 of 8
Section 7.
Section 7.1. Responsibility. All Licensees under this Ordinance shall be responsible for the actions of their
employees in regard to the Sale of Tobacco, Tobacco Products, and Related Tobacco Devices on the premises
of the licensed Retail Establishment, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by
the Licensee. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the City from also subjecting the
employee of the Licensee to whatever penalties are appropriate und er this Ordinance, State or Federal law, or
other applicable law or regulation.
Section 8.
Section 8.1. City Compliance Checks and Inspections. From time to time, but not less than once during each
term of the license, the City or it’s authorized agent shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the
written consent of their parents or guardians, Minors over the age of fifteen (15) years but less than eighteen
(18) years, to enter upon the premises of the licensed Retail Establishment and to attempt to purchase Tobacco,
Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Related D evices as follows:
Section 8.1.1. Right of Entry. All premises of licensed Retail Establishments shall be open to
inspection by the City’s law enforcement agency or other authorized City official or agent of the City
during regular business hours.
Section 8.1.2. Supervision. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised
by designated law enforcement officers or other authorized personnel of the C ity.
Section 8.1.3. Hold Harmless. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall not be guilty
of the unlawful purchase or attempted purchase nor the unlawful possession of Tobacco, Tobacco
Products, or Related Tobacco Devices when such items are obtained or attempted to be obtained as
part of a compliance check.
Section 8.1.4. False Identification. No M inor used in a compliance check shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the Minor’s age and all Minors engaged in a compliance check shall
answer all questions about the Minor’s age asked by the Licensee or an employee of the Licensee and
shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which the Minor is asked.
Section 8.2. Licensee Notification. Immediately following a compliance check performed in accordance with
this Ordinance by the City or it’s authorized agents, the Licensee shall be notified of the results of the
compliance check.
Section 8.3. Inspection by Others. Nothing in this O rdinance shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by
State or Federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a
particular State or Federal law.
Section 9.
Section 9.1. Other Illegal Acts. Unless otherwise provided for herein, the following acts shall be considered
unlawful and in violation of this Ordinance:
Section 9.1.1. Illegal Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise provide any
Tobacco, Tobacco Product or Related Tobacco Device to any Minor.
Section 9.1.2. Illegal Possession. It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in their possession any
Tobacco, Tobacco Product, or Related Tobacco Device unless such Minor is lawfully engaged in a
compliance check under this Ordinance.
Section 9.1.3. Illegal Use. It shall be unlawful for any Minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use
any Tobacco, Tobacco Product, or Related Tobacco Device.
Page 7 of 8
Section 9.1.4. Illegal Procurement. It shall be unlawful for any M inor to purchase or attemp t to
purchase or otherwise obtain any Tobacco, Tobacco Product, or T obacco Related Device and it shall
be unlawful for any Person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a Minor. Further,
it shall be unlawful for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a Minor to illegally purchase, attempt
to purchase, or otherwise obtain or use any Tobacco, Tobacco Product, or Tobacco Related Device.
This Section shall not apply to Minors lawfully involved in a compliance check under this Ordinance.
Section 9.1.5. Fa lse Identification. It shall be unlawful for any Minor to attempt to disguise their true
age by the use of any false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person
or one upon which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older
than the actual age of the person.
Section 10.
Section 10.1. V iolations. The following procedures shall be implemented regarding alleged violations of this
Ordinance, should the City elect to proceed with an administrative violation:
Section 10.1.1. Notification of Violation. Upon discovery of an alleged violation, the alleged violator
shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which
shall inform the alleged violator of their right to be heard on the accusation.
Section 10.1.2. Hearings. If a Person accused of violating this Ordinance so requests, a hearing before
the City of Gem Lake Council shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and
provided to the accused violator.
Section 10.1.3. Findings. If the City of Gem Lake Council finds that a violation of this Ordinance did
occur, that decision, along with the Council’s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be
imposed under Section 11. of this Ordinance, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be
provided to the accused violator. If the Council finds that no violation has occurred or finds grounds
for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted
accused violator.
Section 10.1.4. Appeals. Appeals of any Findings made in accordance with Section 10.1.3. shall be
filed in Ramsey County district court for the jurisd iction of the City in which the alleged violation
occurred.
Section 10.1.5. Misdemeanor Prosecution. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the City from
seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this Ordinance. If the City elects
to seek misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.
Section 10.1.6. C ontinued Violation. Each violation and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues to occur shall constitute a separate violation.
Section 11.
Section 11.1. Administrative Penalties. Any Person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance which
prescribe that certain action is unlawful and in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to the following
penalties:
Section 11.1.1. Licensees. Any Licensee and any employee of the Licensee found to have violated
this Ordinance shall be charged an administrative fine of Seventy-Five ($75.00) Dollars for a first
violation of this Ordinance; Two-Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for a second offense at the same premises
of the licensed Retail Establishment within a twenty-four (24) month period; and, Two-Hundred Fifty
($250.00) Dollars and a license suspension of not less than seven (7) days for each subsequent offense
at the same premises of a licensed Retail Establishment within a twenty-four (24) month period.
Page 8 of 8
Section 11.1.2. Other Individuals. Other individuals, other than Minors regulated by Section 11.1.3,
found in violation of this Ordinance shall be charged an administrative fine of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars.
Section 11.1.3. M inors. Minors found to have violated this Ordinance shall be subject to an
administrative fine of twenty (20) hours of community service approved by the City for a first violation
of this Ordinance; and, an administrative fine of forty (40) hours of community service and completion
of a tobacco related education or diversion program approved by the City.
Section 11.1.4. Misdemeanor. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this Ordinance.
Section 11.2. Criminal Penalties. Any Person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance which
prescribe that certain action is unlawful and in violation of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon prosecution and conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed One-Hundred ($100.00)
Dollars or imprisonment of ten (10) days or both for a first violation of this Ordinance; and, fined in an amount
not to exceed Two-Hundred F ifty ($250.00) Dollars or imprisonment up to thirty (30) days or both for each
subsequent violation within a twenty-four (24) month period. Each violation and every day in which a violation
occurs or continues to occur shall constitute a separate violation.
Section 12.
Section 12.1. Exceptions and Defenses. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the providing of Tobacco,
Tobacco Products, or Tobacco Related Devices to a Minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual,
or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this Ordinance for a person to have
reasonably relied upon proof of age as described by State law.
Section 12.2 Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City of Gem Lake that the provisions
of this Ordinance are severable. If any provisions or the application thereof to any Person or circumstances is
held to be illegal or invalid, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect other provisions of this Ordinance or
the application of said provisions to any other Person not specifically included in said determination. To this
end, the provisions of this Ordinance and the various applications thereto are declared to be severable.
Section 13.
Section 13.1 Enactment and Effective Date. This Ordinance No. 68 was adopted by the City Council of the
City of Gem Lake on the 23rd day of February in the year 1998 and ordered to be placed in full force and effect
upon publication in the City’s legal publication, but not later than the 13th day of March in the year 1998.
ATTEST: ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Dated February 23rd, 1998 Dated February 23rd, 1998
file: ordinanc/Ordinance68S
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 69
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING GEM LAKE ORDINANCE NO. 12 AND
REGULATING THE KEEPING OF DOGS, CATS, HORSES, AND OTHER
ANIMALS, INCLUDING WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS, WITHIN THE CITY
OF GEM LAKE
The City of Gem Lake does hereby ordain:
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT, INTERACTION, TITLE AND SCOPE
Section 1.1 Authority. This Ordinance is enacted by the City Council of the City
of Gem Lake following determination of need, examination of content to purpose,
presentation at a duly convened public hearing, and due consideration of public
comment.
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to
protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of Gem
Lake and adjacent communities as well as the health and general welfare of all
animals owned, possessed or harbored within the City. This Ordinance regulates
the number and type of animals, which may be kept, and the manner in which
they shall be kept.
Section 1.3 Interaction with Other Ordinances.
1.3.1 Amendment and Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances. This Ordinance, upon
effective date of publication, shall supersede all other ordinances and parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith and all such ordinances specifically referenced
as follows shall be repealed.
A) Repeal of Ordinance No. 12. Ordinance No. 12 titled “Regulating the
Keeping of Dogs” is specifically repealed by this Ordinance.
1.3.2 Interaction with Other Ordinances.
A) This Ordinance is to define the subject covered “The regulating of
keeping dogs, horses and other animals within the City” and does not
change any provisions regarding animals or the housing of animals
defined in the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
B) Amendments to Ordinance No. 16 . The Nuisance Ordinance. The
definitions and regulations referenced in this Ordinance and related to
keeping animals, kennels and stables are hereby incorporated by reference
into Ordinance No. 16.
Section 1.4 Separability. It is the intent of the City Council that the several
provisions of this Ordinance are separable and that if any court of competent
jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to
be invalid, such judgment shall not effect any other provisions of this Ordinance
not specifically included in said judgment.
Section 1.5 Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the “Animal Control
Ordinance” of the City of Gem Lake and here within will be referenced as “this
Ordinance”.
Section 1.6 Scope. This Ordinance shall govern and apply to all animals owned,
kept, or found within the City of Gem Lake.
SECTION 2 - INTERPRETATION, CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
Section 2.1 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance,
its provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall not be
construed so as to fully effect its purpose and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other power established by law or Ordinance except as specifically
provided herein. In the event that conflicting requirements are imposed by this
Ordinance or by other Ordinances of the City of Gem Lake, the more restrictive
pro visions shall apply.
Section 2.2 Construction of Wording in this Ordinance. W ords used in the
present tense include the past and future tense; the singular includes the plural;
and the plural includes the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word
“may” is permissive. The masculine gender includes the feminine.
Section 2.3 Definitions.
Animal, Agricultural. Any common farm animal including but not limited to any
horse, mule, donkey, cow, goat, sheep, pig, emu, llama, or any other animal
typically confined on a farm and the like, except for domestic fowl.
Animal Control Officer. Any person, firm or agency hired or otherwise engaged
by the City to act in the performance of their duties as defined herein and to
enforce this Ordinance.
Animal, Domestic. Any domesticated dog whose breed is recognized by the
American Kennel Club and any cat whose breed is recognized by the
International
Animal, Service: Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit
of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other
mental disability.
Cat Association providing neither can be defined as an exotic or wild animal as
defined by this ordinance.
Animal, Exotic or Wild. Any mammal, amphibian, reptile or bird which is of a
species not usually domesticated or of a species which, due to size, wild nature
or other characteristics, is dangerous to humans or would ordinarily be confined
in a zoo or found in the wild. The term includes animals and birds, the keeping of
which is licensed by the State or Federal Government, such as wolves, bears,
large cats, raptors, game birds and waterfowl. The term also includes the
following by way of example but not of limitation:
A) Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers, jaguars,
cougars, leopards, bobcats, lynxes and ocelots or any cross-breed
thereof, except commonly accepted domesticated house cats.
B) Any member of the family Canidae such as wolves, coyotes, dingoes,
and jackals, except domesticated dogs.
C) Any crossbreed between wild or wild and domestic animals such as
crossbreeds between dogs and coyotes, dogs or wolves, house cats and
bobcats, etc.
D) Any snake that is a member of the pit viper or bloedae family,
including but not limited to, copperheads, water moccasins, rattlesnakes,
fer-de-lances, bushmasters, asps, cobras, mambas, kraits, coral snakes,
sea snakes, South American anacondas, Asian reticulated pythons, boa
constrictors, tree boas and sand boas.
E) Any other snake or reptile which by it’s size, vicious nature or other
characteristic is dangerous to human beings.
F) Any skunk, raccoon, badger, weasel, ferret, wild ferret, mink, badger,
woodchuck, or fox and the like whether captured in the wild, domestically
raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or not
vaccinated against rabies.
G) Any bear or deer, elk, antelope, caribou, bison, buffalo, water buffalo,
wild horse, wild boar and the like.
H) Any member of the monkey family including but not limited to any
ape, gorilla, monkey, orangutan, lemur, baboon and the like.
I) Any raptors including any eagle, falcon, hawk, owl and the like.
j) Any migratory waterfowl or game bird including any duck, goose,
pheasant, partridge, grouse, wild turkey and the like.
K) Any other animal, reptile or bird which is commonly considered wild
and not domesticated, prohibited by Federal or Minnesota law, or typically
confined in a zoo.
Animal Shelter. Any premises designated by action of the City Council for the
purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large or
requiring quarantine.
At Large. An animal shall be termed “at large” when it is not under direct
restraint as defined herein.
Dangerous Dog: Any dog that has committed any of the acts set forth below:
(1) Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property;
(2) Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the
owner's property; or
(3) Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively
bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.
Domestic Fowl. Chickens, ducks, turkeys, peacocks, and other commonly
domesticated fowl, excluding ostrich, emu, or other large birds.
Exposed to Rabies. Any animal that has been bitten by or otherwise exposed to
any other animal known to be or have been infected with Rabies.
Harborer. Any person, group of persons, corporation, or other legal entity having
custody of one or more dogs, cats, or other animals or who permits one or more
dogs, cats or other animals to be kept or to stay on or about the harborer’s
premises for a period of three (3) or more consecutive days.
In Heat. The period of time during which a female animal is in it’s Oestrus
Cycle.
Kennel, Personal. Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house
up to three (3) domestic animals of various types which are owned by the
occupants of the premises and which is located on and maintained by the
occupant of the premises in residential districts for personal use only.
Kennel, Commercial. Any confinement or structure designed to contain and
house more than three (3) domestic animals of various types which is owned by a
person, group of persons, corporation or other legal entity who own and/or harbor
said animals in the City of Gem Lake for other than personal use. This type of
kennel relates to a land use matter covered by the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance.
It is defined and may only be operated within the Special or Interim use
regulations of the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
Owner. Any person, group of persons, corporation or other legal entity owning
animals.
Pasture. An area or portion of a single parcel of real property upon which
agricultural animals are allowed to range and graze and which is suitably fenced
to contain such animals.
Pigeon. A member of the family Columbidae, and shall include “Racing
Pigeons”, “Fancy Pigeons” and “Sporting Pigeons” as defined in this ordinance.
Pigeon - Fancy Pigeon. A pigeon which, through past breeding, has developed
certain distinctive physical and performing characteristics as to be clearly
identified and accepted as such by the National Pigeon Association, the American
Pigeon Club, or the Rare Breeds Pigeon Club. Examples: Fantails, Pouters,
Trumpeters.
Pigeon - Loft. A structure for the keeping or housing of pigeons.
Pigeon - Mature Pigeon. A pigeon aged six months or older.
Pigeon - Racing Pigeon. A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has
developed the distinctive physical and mental characteristics as to enable it to
return to its home after having been released a considerable distance therefrom,
and which is accepted as such by the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc. or the
International Federation of Racing Pigeon Fanciers. Common names are Racing
Homer, Homing Pigeon, or Carrier Pigeon.
Pigeon - Sporting Pigeon. A pigeon which, through selective past breeding, has
developed the ability to fly in a distinctive manner, such as aerial acrobatics or
endurance flying. Examples: Rollers, Tipplers.
Police. The police officers of the City or any person, firm or agency hired or
engaged by the City to act in the capacity of police.
Potentially Dangerous Dog: Any dog that has committed any of the acts set
forth below:
(1) When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property;
(2) When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack;
or
(3) Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
Provocation: An act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a dog to
attack or bite.
Restraint. An animal shall be considered under restraint if:
A) In the case of a dog or cat, it is controlled by a leash; or, confinement
within a vehicle being driven or parked; or, confinement within a suitably
fenced area within the boundaries of the owners’ or harborers’ premises.
B) In the case of horses, it is controlled by: a competent rider; or, a
competent person using bridle or other suitable harness device attached to
a leash suitable for the animals’ size; or, confinement within a suitably
fenced area within the boundaries of the owners’ or harborers’ premises.
C) In the case of all other animals, it is contained within a suitable cage,
fenced area, or other structure that prevents the animals’ release without
direct control of the owner or harborer.
Running At Large. An animal found outside the boundaries of the property of its
owner or harborer when not under direct restraint.
Secure Enclosure: “Secure enclosure” means securely confined indoors or in a
securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from
escaping and providing protection from the elements for the dog. A secure
enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other
structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or
structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the
only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting.
Stable, Personal. Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house up
to three (3) horses which is located on and maintained by the occupant of lands in
residential districts for personal use only.
Stable, Commercial. Any confinement or structure designed to contain and
house more than three (3) horses or two (2) agricultural animals as described in
Section 3.8.1 of this ordinance which is owned by a person, group of persons,
corporation or other legal entity who own and/or harbor said animals in the City
of Gem Lake for other than personal use. This type of stable relates to a land use
matter covered by the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance. It is defined and may only
be operated within the Special or Interim use regulations of the Zoning or Land
Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
Vicious Habits. Any animal, which has attacked or bitten any human being or
which habitually attacks other animals or habitually destroys or damages
property.
SECTION 3 - ANIMAL CONTROL
Section 3.1 Running at Large. It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer of
any animals to allow said animal to be at large within the City of Gem Lake and
animals shall at all times be under direct restraint of the owner or harborer.
Section 3.2 Chasing. It shall be unlawful for any owner or harborer to allow any
animal to chase or aggressively approach pedestrians, bicycles, vehicles or other
animals on any street, roadway, bridle path, park or parkway within the City.
Section 3.3 Destruction of Property. It shall be unlawful for any owner or
harborer of any animal to allow said animal to molest, defile or otherwise destroy
any property, public or private, within the City.
Section 3.4 Confinement of Certain Animals. The owner or harborer shall confine
within a building or secure enclosure any fierce, dangerous, or vicious animal and
shall not permit such animal out of such confinement unless and until it is
securely muzzled and in direct control of a competent person. The additional
requirements and regulations of Section 7 may also apply to such animals.
Section 3.5 Animals in Heat. Any female animal in heat shall be kept confined
indoors or impounded for the duration of her season (Oestrus Cycle) at the sole
cost of the owner or harborer.
Section 3.6 Rabies And Other Vaccinations Required. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own, possess, or harbor any animal within the City unless said animal
has had all vaccinations for rabies and other diseases within the time required
under standard veterinary practices.
Section 3.7 Animals Creating Nuisances Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or harborer to keep or harbor any animal which barks, howls, or the like
continuously for a period of five (5) minutes without a thirty (30) second pause or
whose general conduct otherwise constitutes a nuisance.
Section 3.8 Certain Animals Regulated. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor in
the City any of the following animals or animals of allied genera without first
obtaining a written Conditional Use Permit therefore from the City of Gem Lake:
3.8.1 Agricultural animals including, but not limited to: horses; cows;
sheep; goats; swine; llamas; ostrich, emu and other large birds; and other
animals not otherwise permitted by this Ordinance which may be
classified as agricultural animals.
3.8.2 Wild or exotic animals, provided however that such Conditional Use
Permits shall be for a period not to exceed ten (10) days and shall be
limited to entities that are properly licensed to harbor, transport and
display such animals for entertainment, exhibition or other such show
purposes and who can demonstrate appropriate containment procedures.
3.8.3 Animals of all types to be harbored and otherwise used within any
bona fide research or veterinary facility provided applicable zoning
requirements are met.
3.8.4 Permits for these regulated animals are available from the City Clerk
at a fee as set by the City Council.
Section 3.9 Certain Animals Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to own or
harbor any of the following animals or animals of allied genera in the City,
including, but not limited to:
3.9.1 Any wild or exotic animal or any animal of a predatory nature not
typically recognized as a domestic animal, the keeping of which in
captivity is prohibited by any State, Federal, or other local Ordinance, law
or regulation.
Section 3.10 Guard Dogs. It shall be unlawful for any owners to maintain a guard
dog(s) which has been specifically trained for security purposes unless a notice of
the presence of said dog(s) has been posted at each entrance to the property with
said signs not smaller twelve (12") wide and twelve (12") inches high with letters
not smaller than three (3") inches high.
Section 3.11 Housing And Keeping Of Animals. It shall be unlawful for any
owners and harborer of animals to fail to provide and maintain suitable shelter
and care for the animals as prescribed herein.
3.11.1 Shelter. Shelter for the keeping of animals shall include a moisture
and wind proof structure of suitable size and construction to:
accommodate the animal and appropriate bedding materials; and, protect
against cold and to allow and promote retention of body heat; and, protect
against moisture and dampness; and, provide shade from direct sunlight
during the months from May through September.
3.11.2 Maintenance of Shelter. All shelters and other areas used by the
animal shall be properly maintained in such a manner that the shelter and
other areas do not pose a sanitation or other health problem or nuisance
to the occupants of the premises, adjacent property owners, or the
community. All animal wastes shall be properly contained and disposed of
on a regular basis and, where and when necessary, appropriate measures
shall be taken to insure sanitation of the areas.
3.11.3 Care of Animals. All animals shall be properly cared for including,
but not limited to, regular feeding of appropriate food stuffs for the animal
and regular medical care by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine.
Section 3.12 Keeping of Pigeons. The keeping, breeding, maintenance and flying
of pigeons may be permitted subject to the following:
3.12.1 A loft must be constructed and maintained to keep and confine the
pigeons. The loft must provide at least nine cubic feet of space per bird.
The loft must be enclosed with wire netting or equivalent material that will
prevent pigeons from escaping the confines of the loft. Lofts must be
elevated a minimum of six inches and a maximum of twelve inches above
grade to ensure free-way beneath the loft. Lofts shall rest upon concrete
footings, cement blocks, or other suitable foundation material. A loft may
have a maximum height of nine feet.
3.12.2 The loft must be constructed and maintained so as to be rodent
proof.
3.12.3 The owner may construct pigeon lofts up to a cumulative
maximum floor area of 200 square feet. Any single loft with over 120
square feet in floor area requires a building permit, as with other
accessory structures.
3.12.4 Pigeon lofts may be located in the rear yard only and shall be at
least 50 feet from adjacent habitable structures.
3.12.5 Pigeons shall be confined to the loft except when they are released
for exercise, performance, training, or to return from areas outside the City
of Gem Lake for the purpose of engaging in a race or returning from
training flights.
3.12.6 All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft on the
premises on which the pigeons are housed.
3.12.7 All grains and food stored for the use of the pigeons on a licensed
premises shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.
3.12.8 Pigeons must be banded in a way to identify each pigeon as kept
by its owner.
3.12.9 All premises on which pigeons are kept or maintained shall be kept
reasonably clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract
rodents. The loft and its surroundings must be cleaned daily.
3.12.10 No one shall release pigeons to fly for exercise, training or
competition within the City of Gem Lake except an owner of pigeons who
is a member in good standing of an organized pigeon club, such as the
American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., the International Federation of
Racing Pigeon Fanciers, the National Pigeon Association, the American
Tippler Society, the International Roller Association, the Rare Breeds
Pigeon Club, or a local club which has rules that will help preserve the
peace and tranquility of the neighborhood.
Section 3.13 Keeping of Domestic Fowl. The keeping of domestic fowl may be
permitted subject to the following:
3.13.1 A structure must be constructed and maintained to keep and
confine the birds. The structure must provide at least five square
feet of floor space per bird. The structure must provide shelter from
the elements for all kept birds. The structure would be built of
suitable foundation material or built in such a way that it allows for
air flow and it is suitable for cleaning.. A structure for domestic fowl
shall have a minimum of four feet of interior space from floor to
ceiling, and may have a maximum height of nine feet.
3.13.2 The bird structure must be constructed and maintained so as
to be rodent-proof.
3.13.3 The owner may construct bird structures up to a cumulative
maximum floor area of 200 square feet. Any single bird structure
with over 120 square feet in foundation floor area requires a
building permit, as with other accessory structures.
3.13.4 Bird structures may be located in the rear yard only and shall be at
least 50 feet from adjacent habitable structures.
3.13.5 An area outside of the bird structure must be designated and
reserved for the birds to exercise and forage outside of the bird
structure. The designated area must provide a minimum of 11
square feet per bird.
3.13.6 All grains and food stored for the use of the domestic fowl on a
licensed premises shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.
3.13.7 All premises on which domestic fowl are kept or maintained shall
be kept reasonably clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which
attract rodents. The bird structure and its surroundings must be cleaned
daily.
SECTION 4 - ANIMAL LICENSING AND IDENTIFICATION
Section 4.1 Dog Licensing and Identification Required.
4.1.1 Dog Licensing and Identification. No person shall own, keep, or
harbor any dog over the age of six (6) months within the City of Gem Lake
without first obtaining a city issued license for each animal as herein
provided.
A) Dog licenses are issued by the City Clerk. Each dog license is
valid for a period of one year at a fee set by the City Council. The dog
license issued will be in the form of a “tag” that shall be attached to the
dog to identify its owner or harborer. Applicant shall give the following
information on forms provided by the City:
1) Owner’s name and home address; and
2) Dog’s name, breed (if known), date of birth (if known), color and sex.
Proof that rabies and other vaccinations have been done must be
supplied when the license is applied for.
The provisions of this Section shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are
visitors temporarily in the City for sixty (60) days or less.
B)It is also suggested that one of the following identification
methods may be used to further identify each dog:
1) Commercially available tags not less than 1" square or
diameter which identify the owner by name and/or address
and/or phone number; or
2) Permanent brands or tattoos placed on the animal in
accordance with accepted practices and which carry
appropriate owner or harborer registration information; or
3) Such electronic identification methods including implants,
provided a tag or other identification device identifies
electronic registration.
4.1.2 Other Domestic Animal Identification. No person shall own, keep, or
harbor any other domestic or agricultural animal (other than a dog) over
the age of six (6) months within the City of Gem Lake without providing a
method of identification for each animal as herein provided.
A) Commercially available tags not less than 1" square or diameter
which identify the owner by name and/or address and/or phone
number; or
B) Permanent brands or tattoos placed on the animal in accordance
with accepted practices and which carry appropriate owner or
harborer registration information; or
C) Such electronic identification methods including implants,
provided a tag or other identification device identifies electronic
registration.
Section 4.2. Pigeon Keeping License. No person shall own, keep or harbor pigeons
within the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining a license. Applicant shall complete
an application form provided by the City. The application shall include, but not be limited
to the following information: a site plan showing the location and size of the premises,
and the location size and type of all pigeon lofts, and demonstration that said lofts will
comply with City zoning requirements; a statement of the maximum number of pigeons
to be kept on the premises at one time; and an agreement by the applicant that the
premises may be inspected by the City at all reasonable times so as to assure
compliance with the conditions outlined in Section 3.12. Only one license may be issued
per property.
4.2.1 Duration of License; Fee. Each license issued hereunder shall expire one
(1) year after issuance unless sooner revoked. A license must be renewed
annually to continue the keeping of pigeons. The City Council shall set the
annual fee for a license by ordinance with other City fees. Fees shall be paid at
the time of the making of the application for license or renewal.
4.2.2 Number of Animals. The number of pigeons permitted to be kept under an
approved license is calculated by dividing the volume of loft space by nine
(minimum space per bird). The maximum number of pigeons allowed to any
licensee, regardless of capacity, is 120 birds from March 1 to May 31, and 90
birds during the rest of the year.
4.2.3 Denial or Revocation. The pigeon-keeping license may be revoked, or
renewal denied, if the licensee fails to comply with limits on number of pigeons
or any of the conditions outlined in Section 3.12.
Section 4.3. Domestic Fowl Keeping License. No person shall own, keep or harbor
domestic fowl within the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining a license. Applicant
shall complete an application form provided by the City. The application shall include,
but not be limited to the following information: a site plan showing the location and size
of the premises, and the location size and type of all structures for housing the birds,
and demonstration that said structures will comply with City zoning requirements; a
statement of the maximum number of domestic fowl to be kept on the premises at one
time, by type; and an agreement by the applicant that the premises may be inspected
by the City at all reasonable times so as to assure compliance with the conditions
outlined in Section 3.13. Only one license may be issued per property.
4.3.1 Duration of License; Fee. Each license issued hereunder shall expire one
(1)year after issuance unless sooner revoked. A license must be renewed
annually to continue the keeping of domestic fowl. The City Council shall set the
annual fee for a license by ordinance with other City fees. Fees shall be paid at
the time of the making of the application for license or renewal.
4.3.2 Number of Animals. The number of domestic fowl permitted to be kept
under an approved license is calculated by dividing the area of floor space in
approved structures by five (minimum space per bird). Exceeding the number of
birds allowed by the permit may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the
permit, and denial of subsequent applications for renewal. In addition to any
action taken against a license, the person responsible for keeping birds in excess
of the maximum stated may be referred for prosecution under State laws
prohibiting animal cruelty.
4.3.3 Denial or Revocation. The domestic fowl keeping license may be revoked,
or renewal denied, if the licensee fails to comply with any of the conditions
outlined in Section 3.13.
SECTION 4.4 Animal Licensing: Review, Revocation and Appeal
4.4.1 License Application Review. The City shall review the license application. The City may deny an
applicant’s license application for any reason reasonably related to the regulation of animals
within city limits, including but not limited to; protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. Convictions for violations of City Ordinance # 69 or any applicable state statutes within
the preceding three years shall be considered evidence of a threat to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.
4.4.2 The City may revoke licenses previously issued upon the same grounds. If a license is denied or
revoked, the City shall notify the applicant, in writing, and provide information regarding the
applicant’s right to appeal under paragraph 2 of this section.
4.4.3 Appeal. An applicant may appeal the City’s determination by filing written notice with the City
Administrator within ten (10) days of the applicant’s receipt of the City’s notice. Failure to file a
timely appeal results in a waiver of the appeal. If the applicant files a timely appeal, a hearing will
be held before an impartial hearing officer as soon as practicable after the City’s receipt of the
appeal. The rules of evidence do not apply at the hearing and any reports and records of the
Ramsey County Animal Control officer shall be considered without further foundation. The
hearing officer will make written findings of fact. The hearing officer’s decision will be personally
served upon the owner or a person of suitable age at the residence of such owner and is the final
decision of the City.
SECTION 4.5 Service Animal Registration Required.
4.5.1 Service Animal Registration. All service animals kept, harbored or maintained within the City shall
be registered. There shall be no fee for service animal registration. The applicant shall give the
following information on forms provided by the City:
1) verify that the animal is required because of a disability; and
2) identify what work or task the animal has been trained to perform.
If this information is not provided, the animal shall not be considered a service animal and is
subject to the license and registration requirements of §4.1.1(A). The registrant shall also give
the following information on forms provided by the City:
1) Owner’s name and home address; and
2) Dog’s name, breed (if known), color, and sex.
Proof that rabies and other vaccinations have been done must be supplied when the license is
applied for.
Service animals are not considered animals for the calculation under § 5.1.1.
SECTION 5 - STABLE AND KENNEL OPERATION
Section 5.1 PERMITTED OPERATIONS
5.1.1 Personal Kennel Operation. Personal kennels that harbor no more than three
(3) domestic animals of various types and which animals are solely owned by the
occupants of the premise and which are over the age of six (6) months are allowed
in the residential districts of the City of Gem Lake. The operators of such kennels
are responsible to operate these kennels in compliance with all of the terms and
regulations defined in this Ordinance.
The kennel structure shall be made of suitable fencing or other materials
suitable for containment of the animal based upon the size and weight of
the animal.
The kennel structure shall be placed so as to be located as far as possible
from neighboring residences and not less than fifty (50') feet from adjacent
property lines.
5.1.2 Personal Stable Operation. Personal stables for permitted and
allowed agricultural animals, as defined in Section 3.8.1 of this Ordinance,
and which animals are solely owned by the occupants of the premises and
which are over the age of six (6) months are allowed in the residential
districts of the City of Gem Lake. The operators of such stables are
responsible to operate these stables in compliance with the terms and
regulations defined in this Ordinance, and specifically:
A) Stables shall only be operated on properties of one (1) fenced
acre or greater with not less than one-half (½) acre of pasture land.
B) The ratio of animals to acreage shall not exceed one (1) animal
per onehalf (½) acre of fenced pasture land.
C) A stable shall only exist with the written consent of all abutting
property owners and all other property owners within three-hundred
fifty (350) feet of the property upon which the stable is located.
D) On lots smaller than three (3) acres, all pasture land must lie not
less than fifty (50') feet from the dwelling and/or front yard of the lot.
Section 5.2 Sanitation Requirements For Kennels and Stables. All
owners or operators of kennels and stables, shall provide for
sanitation of the premises, including but not limited to:
5.2.1 Removal of Manure and Waste. All manure, feces, and
other waste material generated by the kennel or stable must
be handled in such a manner as to not create endangerment
to the animals(s) being harbored or to become a public
nuisance, to control offensive odors, flies and rodents,
and must be removed from the property, where the kennel or
stable is located as follows:
A) From the property in total not less frequently than
once quarterly for Personal Use Kennels and Stables;
and
B) No persons shall permit accumulations of manure
from any animal under his control to remain on any
street, sidewalk, or alley, nor upon any open area or
lot in any residential area in the City.
C) Commercial kennels and stables shall also be
subjected to additional conditions regarding this
subject as outlined in the Special or Interim use
permit issued for this activity.
D) Pastures and housing structures must be situated
not less than fifty (50') feet from any well or individual
sewage treatment system (septic system).
E) Manure piles must be situated not less than twohundred
fifty (250’) feet from any well.
Section 5.3 Care and Maintenance of Animals. No animal shall be treated cruelly,
or inhumanely, by any person or in violation of Minnesota Statutes, Section
346.20-346.26, relating to cruelty to animals.
SECTION 6 - IMPOUNDING ANIMALS
Section 6.1 Impounding Animals. All law enforcement or animal control officers
of the City or under contract to the city are hereby authorized and empowered to
use such force as is reasonably necessary to take up, capture, or restrain and
impound any animal found in violation of this Ordinance. All animals shall be
impounded at a facility which is under contract with the City. Such law
enforcement or animal control officer may enter upon private premises where it
appears that there is reasonable cause to believe that an animal is not being
kept, confined, or restrained as herein required.
Section 6.2 Notice to Owner or Harborer. Immediately upon impounding of an
animal wearing any type of identification, the police, animal control officer or
impounding facility officer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner
or harborer of such impoundment, and the conditions whereby the owner or
harborer may regain custody of the animal. Verbal notice shall be immediately
confirmed in writing by the city’s official.
Section 6.3 Reclaiming Impounded Animals.
6.3.1 Any non-regulated domestic animal impounded hereunder may be
reclaimed by the owner or harborer of same within ten (10) days after
receiving notice of such impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays, upon payment to the City of an impounding fee as
established by the city from time to time together with the actual costs
incurred for boarding. 6.3.1 Any regulated animal impounded hereunder
may be reclaimed by the owner or harborer of same within five (5) days
after receiving notice of such impoundment, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays, upon payment to the City of an impounding
fee as established by the city from time to time together with the actual
costs incurred for boarding.
Section 6.4 Selling of Impounded Animals
6.4.1 Any non-regulated domestic animal taken up and impounded that
has not been reclaimed within the time provided herein, or if the owner or
harborer cannot be located, then within five (5) days, the person in charge
of the pound shall give five (5) days notice of the time and place where
said animal will be sold by posting notices in the office in charge of the
pound, the office of the City Clerk, and in a conspicuous place at the
pound. Should the person in charge of the pound be unable to sell said
animal, for want of bidders or otherwise, that person cannot sell or to
otherwise dispose of such animal thereafter without notice to the City.
6.4.2 Any regulated animal taken up and impounded hereunder may be
that is not reclaimed by the owner or harborer of same within five (5) days
after receiving notice of such impoundment, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays, the animal may be sold or destroyed and the
impounding fees to the City together with the actual costs incurred for
boarding, notices and other such expenses along with reasonable legal and
administrative fees shall be assessed to the owners’ or harborers’ property.
Section 6.5 Biting Animals Quarantined. Whenever any animal, other than a dog
subject to the regulations of Section 7 of this Ordinance, has bitten a person, the
owner or harborer of such animal, having been so notified, either orally or in
writing, shall immediately quarantine said animal at the owners’ or harborers’
home or other suitable place of confinement, as directed by the law enforcement
or Animal Control officer of the City for a period of fourteen (14) days after the
occurrence. During the quarantine period, the animal shall be securely confined in
a building or in a yard enclosed by a fence so constructed that the animal cannot
escape or otherwise leave said enclosure, and which will not permit other animals
or persons to enter, for the purpose of preventing the animal from biting or
otherwise coming in contact with persons or animals.
6.5.1 Rabid Animals. Upon a reasonable suspicion that an animal may be
rabid, the animal shall be subjected to the necessary tests by a doctor of
veterinary medicine for the purpose of determining if it is infected with
rabies. The confinement, testing, and treatment, in addition to all other
expenses incurred as the result of an animal biting a person shall be the
sole expense to the owner or harborer of said animal.
Section 6.6 Animals Which Cannot Be Impounded. If an animal is rabid, or
otherwise diseased, vicious, or dangerous, and cannot be impounded after a
reasonable effort or without serious risk to the law enforcement or Animal
Control officer, impound employees, or others, such animal may be immediately
killed.
SECTION 7 - DANGEROUS/POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
7.1 Incorporation of Statute. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Sections
347.50 through 347.56, inclusive, are hereby adopted as the potentially
dangerous and dangerous dog regulations for the City. Where a conflict exists
between the provisions of the City Ordinances, and the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes, Sections 347.50 through 347.56, inclusive, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
7.2 Initial Determination. The City’s designated Animal Control Authority shall
be responsible for initially determining (“Initial Determination”) whether a dog is
a potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog. The Animal Control Authority
may retain custody of a dog which has been initially determined to be a
dangerous dog pending the hearing as hereinafter provided. The Initial
Determination shall be conclusive unless the owner appeals the Initial
Determination as hereinafterprovided.
7.2.1 Notice of Initial Determination. The Notice of Initial
Determination shall be personally served on the owner of the dog or on a
person of suitable age at the residence of such owner. The Notice of Initial
Determination shall describe the dog deemed to be potentially dangerous
or dangerous; shall identify the time, place and circumstances under
which the dog was declared dangerous; shall identify the officer making
the Initial Determination; and shall inform the owner of the owner’s right to
appeal the Initial Determination within 14 days of the date of notice. The
notice shall
also inform the owner that compliance with 7.4.1 and 7.4.3 of this
Ordinance until the appeal is decided, and that all actual costs of care,
keeping and disposition of the dog are the responsibility of the owner.
7.2.2 Request of Hearing and Hearing. An owner may appeal the Initial
Determination by filing a Request for Hearing with the City Administrator
within fourteen (14) days of the owner’s receipt of the Notice of Initial
Determination. A hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days after the
City’s receipt of the Request for Hearing. The City Administrator shall
assign a Hearing Officer who shall not be the person who made the Initial
Determination. At the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall consider the
reports and comments of the Animal Control Authority, the testimony of
any witnesses, witness statements, and the comments of the owner of the
dog. After considering all of the evidence submitted, the Hearing Officer
shall make written findings and shall determine whether the dog is a
potentially dangerous dog or a dangerous dog (Final Determination). The
Hearing Officer shall apply the definitions of Section 2.3 in making a
determination, but shall not declare a dog dangerous if the evidence at
hearing shows it is more likely than not that the threat, injury, or damage
was sustained by a person:
(1) who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort
upon the premises occupied by the dog;
(2) who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog
or who has repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused or
assaulted the dog; or
(3) who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
The findings shall be made within ten (10) days of the date of the
hearing and shall be personally served upon the owner of the dog
or upon a person of suitable age at the residence of the owner. If
the Hearing Officer upholds the dangerous dog determination, the
dog’s owner shall be responsible for paying the actual costs of the
hearing, up to $1,000.
7.3 Dangerous Dog Restrictions.
7.3.1 Registration Required. No person may keep a dangerous dog in
e City of Gem Lake unless the dog is registered with the Animal Control
Authority as provided in this chapter. The Animal Control Authority shall
issue a certificate of registration to the owner of the dangerous dog if the
owner presents the following information:
(a) Secure Enclosure. A Secure enclosure exists for the dangerous dog
and there is a posting on the premises with a clearly visible warning sign,
including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous
dog on the property.
(b) Bond/Insurance. A surety bond issued by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in the State of Minnesota in a form
acceptable to the Animal Control Authority in the sum of at least
$300,000.00, payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog, or a
policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to
conduct business in the State of Minnesota in the amount of at least
$300,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog.
(c) Registration fee. The owner shall pay a dangerous dog registration
fee of $500.00, in addition to standard dog licensing fees.
(d) Microchip. The owner has had a microchip identification implanted
in the dangerous dog, and the name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the Animal
Control Authority. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may
be implanted by the Animal Control Authority with the costs borne by the
dog’s owner.
(e) Warning Symbol. The owner has posted a warning symbol to
inform children that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The design
of the warning symbol must have been approved by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety.
7.3.2 Tag. The dangerous dog must have a standardized, easily identifiable
tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the Uniform Dangerous
Dog symbol, affixed to the dog’s collar at all times.
7.3.3 Photograph. The owner of the dangerous dog shall make the dog
available to be photographed for identification by the Animal Control
Authority at a time and place specified by the Animal Control Authority.
7.4 Dangerous Dog Regulations.
7.4.1 Muzzling. A dangerous dog shall be kept in a secure enclosure while
on the owner’s property. If the dangerous dog is outside a Secure Enclosure,
the dog must be muzzled and restrained by substantial chain or leash and be
under the physical restrains of a responsible person. The muzzle must be
made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal
but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration.
7.4.2 Annual Renewal. The owner of a dangerous dog must renew the
registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased. The owner of a
dangerous dog shall pay the fee set forth in section 7.3.1(c) above, in addition
to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a renewal certificate of registration
for a dangerous dog under this section. If the dog is removed from the City, it
must be registered as a dangerous dog in its new jurisdiction.
7.4.3 Death/Transfer from City. The owner of any dangerous dog must
notify the City in writing of the death of the dog; of its transfer to a residence
outside of the City of Gem Lake or of its transfer within the City within thirty
(30) days of the death or transfer
.
7.4.4 Notice to Landlord. The owner of a dangerous dog who rents property
from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner,
prior to entering into the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal,
that the person owns a dangerous dog that will reside at the property.
7.4.5 Transfer of Ownership. The owner of a dangerous dog must notify any
new owner, whether by purchase, donation or other transfer, that the City has
identified the dog as a dangerous dog. The transferring or selling owner must
also notify the Animal Control Authority in writing of the sale and provide
the Animal Control Authority with the new owner’s name, address, and
telephone number.
7.4.6 Sterilization. The Animal Control Authority shall require a dangerous
dog to be sterilized at the owner’s expense. If the owner does not have the
dangerous dog sterilized within 30 days of a final determination, the Animal
Control Authority may have the animal sterilized at the owner’s expense.
7.5 Potentially Dangerous Dog Restrictions.
7.5.1 Registration Required. No person may keep a potentially dangerous
dog in the City of Gem Lake unless the dog is registered with the Animal
Control Authority as provided in this section. The Animal Control Authority
shall issue a Certificate of Registration to the owner of a potentially dangerous
dog if the owner presents the following information:
(a) Microchip. The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in
the dangerous dog, and the name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the Animal
Control Authority. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may
be implanted by the Animal Control Authority with the costs borne by the
dog’s owner
.
(b) Warning Symbol. The owner has posted a warning symbol to inform
children that there is a potentially dangerous dog on the property. The
Animal Control Authority shall approve the warning symbol and its
location on the property.
(c) Registration fee. The owner shall pay a dangerous dog registration fee
of $250.00, in addition to standard dog licensing fees.
7.5.2 The Animal Control Authority may also require any of the following
items to register a potentially dangerous dog:
(a) Secure Enclosure. A secure enclosure exists for the potentially
dangerous dog and there is a posting on the premises with a clearly
visible warning sign, including a warning symbol to inform children, that
there is a potentially dangerous dog on the property.
(b) Bond/Insurance. A surety bond issued by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in the State of Minnesota in a form
acceptable to the Animal Control Authority in the sum of at least
$300,000.00, payable to any person injured by the potentially dangerous
dog, or a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company
authorized to conduct business in the State of Minnesota in the amount of
at least $300,000.00, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted
by the potentially dangerous dog.
(c) Photograph. The owner of the potentially dangerous dog shall make
the dog available to be photographed for identification by the Animal
Control Authority at a time and place specified by the Animal Control
Authority.
7.6 Potentially Dangerous Dog Regulations.
7.6.1 Annual Fee. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall pay the
potentially dangerous dog fee set in 7.5.1(c) upon each annual renewal, in
addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of
registration for a potentially dangerous dog under this section.
7.6.2 Annual Renewal. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must
renew the registration of the dog annually until the dog is deceased. If the
dog is removed from the City of Gem Lake, it must be registered as a
potentially dangerous dog in its new jurisdiction.
7.6.3 Death/Transfer from City. The owner of any potentially dangerous dog
must notify the Animal Control Authority in writing of the death of the dog;
of its transfer to a residence outside of the City of Gem Lake or of its transfer
within the City of Gem Lake within thirty (30) days of the death or transfer.
The notice must also provide the new location where the dog will reside if
moved.
7.6.4 Notice to Landlord. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who
rents property from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the
property owner, prior to entering into the lease agreement and at the time of
any lease renewal, that the person owns a potentially dangerous dog that will
reside at the property.
7.6.5 Transfer of Ownership. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must
notify any new owner, whether by purchase, donation or other transfer, that
the City has identified the dog as a potentially dangerous dog. The
transferring or selling owner must also notify the Animal Control Authority in
writing of the sale and provide the Animal Control Authority with the new
owner’s name, address, and telephone number.
7.7 Designation Review. Beginning six months after a dog is declared a
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, an owner may request annually a
review of the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's
behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion
of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other
factors. The owner shall submit a request for reconsideration to the City
Administrator, who shall then assign a Hearing Officer to consider the request, in
Consultation with the Animal Control Authority. If the Hearing Officer finds
sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior has changed, the Officer may rescind
the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog designation.
7.8 Seizure of Dangerous Dog. The Animal Control Authority shall
immediately seize any dangerous dog if:
7.8.1 The owner has not registered the dog in compliance with the
provisions of Section 7.3 within fourteen (14) days after the service of the
Notice of Final Determination declaring a dog to be a dangerous dog.
7.8.2 The owner does not secure the proper liability insurance pursuant
to Section 7.3 within fourteen (14) days after the service of the Notice of Final
Determination declaring a dog to be a dangerous dog.
7.8.3 The dangerous dog is not maintained in a secure enclosure.
7.8.4 The dangerous dog is outside a secure enclosure and not under the
physical restraint of a responsible person.
7.8.5 The dangerous dog is not sterilized within thirty (30) days as
required by 7.4.6.
7.8.6 Seizure is ordered by the District Court upon conviction of the
owner for a crime related to the keeping of a dangerous dog.
7.9 Reclaiming a Dangerous Dog. Unless otherwise ordered by the District
Court, a dangerous dog may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment
of the impounding and boarding fees, and upon presentation of proof to the
Animal Control Authority that the requirements of Sections 7.3 and 7.4 have
been satisfied. A dangerous dog not reclaimed under this provision within seven
(7) days may be disposed of as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 35.71,
Subdivision 3, and the owner shall be liable to the Animal Control Authority for
costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dangerous dog. Any person
claiming an interest in a seized dog may prevent disposition of the dog by posting
security, by cash or letter of credit, in an amount sufficient to provide for the
dog’s actual cost of care and keeping. The security must be posted within seven
(7) days of the seizure inclusive of the date of seizure.
7.10 Review of Status for Persons Prohibited from Owning Dogs. A person
barred from owning a dog under Minnesota Statutes, § 347.542, subd. 1 may
request that the City Council review the prohibition. No request for review may
be made before three years have passed from the date of conviction which caused
the person to be barred from dog ownership. The Animal Control Authority shall
report to the City Council on matters relating to the review, including but not
limited to the seriousness of the violation or violations that led to the prohibition,
any criminal convictions of the person under review, and any other appropriate
factors. The Animal Control Authority may recommend continuing the
prohibition, rescinding the prohibition with limitations upon ownership, or
completely rescinding the prohibition. The City Council, in addition to acting on
the recommendation, may also establish conditions that the person must meet
before a prohibition is partially or completely rescinded, including, but not limited
to, successfully completing dog training or dog handling courses. A person under
prohibition may only make one (1) request for review in any twelve-month
period, regardless of outcome. If a person has a prohibition rescinded, in full or in
part, by the City Council, and subsequently fails to comply with any limitation
imposed by the Council or is again convicted of an animal violation involving
unprovoked bites or attacks, the City Council may permanently prohibit the
person from owning a dog in the State of Minnesota.
7.11 Confiscation of Dangerous Dog. If the owner of a dangerous dog has been
convicted of a misdemeanor violation of Minnesota Statutes §347.51, §347.515,
or §347.52, and the owner is charged with a subsequent violation of those statutes
with the same dog, the Animal Control Authority shall immediately seize the
dangerous dog and hold it until resolution of the new criminal charges. The
Animal Control Authority shall follow the directives of the District Court
regarding disposition of the dog. If the owner is not convicted of the charges, the
owner shall be notified of the right to reclaim the dog within seven (7) days
consistent with other reclamations.
7.12 Destruction of Dog Under Certain Circumstances. Upon a Final
Determination, following a hearing if one is requested, and not withstanding the
other provisions of this Ordinance, a dangerous dog that: (i) inflicted substantial
bodily harm or great bodily harm on a human being on public or private property
without provocation; (ii) inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation; (iii) bit multiple human victims on public or private
property in the same attack without provocation; or (iv) bit a human on public or
private property without provocation in an attack where more than one dog
participated in the attack may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner by the
Animal Control Authority.
SECTION 8 - ENFORCEMENT, RECORDS AND PENALTIES
Section 8.1 Enforcement. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by
the Animal Control Officer and other such persons or agencies as may, from time
to time, be appointed by the City Council.
Section 8.2 Records. The City shall maintain accurate records of all licenses,
impoundments, quarantines, disposition of animals taken into custody, reports of
all animal attacks or bites, and fees and fines related thereto and to make such
records available as public documents within reasonable times.
Section 8.3 Penalties. Any owner, harborer, or other person, or the parents of any
person under eighteen (18) years of age violating any provision of this Ordinance
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished to
the maximum extent allowed by law.
Section 8.4 Other Associated Costs. Any owner, harborer, or other person, or the
parents of any person under eighteen (18) years of age violating any provision of
this Ordinance shall be solely responsible for all costs associated with
enforcement of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, impound fees,
boarding, notification of owners, and disposal.
SECTION 9 - EXEMPTIONS TO THIS ORDINANCE
Section 9.1 Exemptions
9.1.1 Hospitals, clinics, and other premises operated by licensed
veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance except where such duties are expressly stated
and where such facility meets the applicable zoning code.
9.1.2 The licensing and vaccination requirements of this Ordinance shall
not apply to any animal belonging to a non-resident of the City of Gem
Lake and kept within the City of less than thirty (30) days, provided all
such animals area fully and at all times confined within a building
enclosure or vehicle or are deemed to be under complete restraint of the
owner.
9.1.3 Non-poisonous snakes or snakes not prohibited as wild and exotic by
definition, birds kept indoors, hamsters, mice, rabbits, gerbils, white rats,
guinea pigs, chinchillas, or lizards and similar small animals capable of
being kept in cages continuously are exempt and do not require a permit.
SECTION 10 - ANIMAL OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES
Section 10.1 Animal Owner Responsibilities and Liability. This Ordinance shall
not relieve or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning or
harboring any animal to persons or real property or any other injury occasioned
thereby.
Section 10.2 Abrogation and Greater Restriction. It is not intended by this
Ordinance to appeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any Sate or Federal
law, or local ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits issued pursuant to law.
However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall govern.
Section 10.3 Right of Entry. All law enforcement and animal control officers may
enter upon private property where it appears that there is reasonable cause to
believe that an animal is not being kept, confined, or restrained as herein required
or where it appears that a violation of this Ordinance may be present and when
accompanied by a warrant to enter property duly issued by a judge of the district
court.
Section 10.4 Interference. No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any
agent of the City while engaged in the performance of any duty related to this
Ordinance or release any animal in the custody of the agent.
SECTION 11 - ENACTMENT AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 11.1 Existing Uses. Existing uses that are not compliant with the
Ordinance shall have one-hundred twenty (120) days to become compliant unless
a Special or Interim Use Permit is issued by the City Council to specifically
exempt the existing activity from all or portions of the regulations described in the
Ordinance. A Special or Interim Use Permit application can be procured from the
City Clerk. Nothing in this paragraph vests any non-confirming use from being
controlled by these regulations.
Section 11.2 Enactment and Effective Date. This Ordinance No. 69 was adopted
by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 16th day of November in the
year 2005 and ordered to be placed in full force and effect upon publication in the
White Bear Press, the City’s official legal publication.
ATTEST: ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Enacted 16 November 2005 Enacted 16 November 2005
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 69 LEGEND
An Ordinance Regulating the Keeping of Dogs was originally adopted by the City
Council in Ordinance Number 12 on January 27, 1965. The Council has since repealed
Ordinance 12 and replaced it with Ordinance No. 69, the Animal Control Ordinance, on
November 16, 2005. Since that time, the City Council has made amendments to the
Ordinance in keeping with changes in State law and the wishes of the community. The
following table indicates the original ordinance and the said amendments.
ORDINANCE DESCRIPTION ENACTMENT
12 An Ordinance Regulating the Keeping of Dogs 01/27/1965
69 An Ordinance Regulating the Keeping of Dogs, Cats, Horses
and Other Animals Within the City of Gem Lake, repealing
Ordinance No. 12.
11/16/2005
106 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 69 to Provide for the
Regulation of Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs,
adding definitions, internal references, and a new Section 7,
renumbering thereafter.
02/10/2009
110 An Ordinance to Permit and Regulate the Keeping of Pigeons in
the City of Gem Lake, Amending Ordinance No. 69
10/19/2009
126 An Ordinance to Permit and Regulate the Keeping of Chickens
and Other Domestic Fowl in the City of Gem Lake, Amending
Ordinance No. 69
07/17/2012
9/16/2014
5.1.1 Personal Kennel Operation. Personal kennels that harbor no more than three (3) domestic
animals of various types and which animals are solely owned by the occupants of the
premise and which are over the age of six (6) months are allowed in the residential districts
of the City of Gem Lake. The operators of such kennels are responsible to operate these
kennels in compliance with all of the terms and regulations defined in this Ordinance.
A) The kennel structure shall be made of suitable fencing or other materials
suitable for containment of the animal based upon the size and weight of the
animal.
B) The kennel structure shall be placed so as to be located as far as possible from
neighboring residences and not less than fifty (50') feet from adjacent property
lines.
12/16/2014 Changes
Add the following definition to the text of Section 2.3:
Animal, Service: Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit
of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other
mental disability.
Section 2
Amend the text of Section 4 as shown (*NOTE* Amendments & addition language underlined):
Section 4.1 Dog Licensing and Identification Required.
4.1.1 Dog Licensing and Identification. No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over the age of six
(6) months within the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining a city issued license for each
animal as herein provided.
B) Dog licenses are issued by the City Clerk. Each dog license is valid for a period of one
two (2) years at a fee set by the City Council. The dog license issued will be in the form
of a “tag” that shall be attached to the dog to identify its owner or harborer. Applicant
shall give the following information on forms provided by the City:
1) Owner’s name and home address; and
2) Dog’s name, breed (if known), date of birth (if known), color and sex.
Proof that rabies and other vaccinations have been done must be supplied when the license is
applied for.
The provisions of this Section shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are visitors
temporarily in the City for sixty (60) days or less.
SECTION 4.4 Animal Licensing: Review, Revocation and Appeal
4.4.1 License Application Review. The City shall review the license application. The City may deny an
applicant’s license application for any reason reasonably related to the regulation of animals
within city limits, including but not limited to; protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. Convictions for violations of City Ordinance # 69 or any applicable state statutes within
the preceding three years shall be considered evidence of a threat to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.
4.4.2 The City may revoke licenses previously issued upon the same grounds. If a license is denied or
revoked, the City shall notify the applicant, in writing, and provide information regarding the
applicant’s right to appeal under paragraph 2 of this section.
4.4.3 Appeal. An applicant may appeal the City’s determination by filing written notice with the City
Administrator within ten (10) days of the applicant’s receipt of the City’s notice. Failure to file a
timely appeal results in a waiver of the appeal. If the applicant files a timely appeal, a hearing will
be held before an impartial hearing officer as soon as practicable after the City’s receipt of the
appeal. The rules of evidence do not apply at the hearing and any reports and records of the
Ramsey County Animal Control officer shall be considered without further foundation. The
hearing officer will make written findings of fact. The hearing officer’s decision will be personally
served upon the owner or a person of suitable age at the residence of such owner and is the final
decision of the City.
SECTION 4.5 Service Animal Registration Required.
4.5.1 Service Animal Registration. All service animals kept, harbored or maintained within the City shall
be registered. There shall be no fee for service animal registration. The applicant shall give the
following information on forms provided by the City:
3) verify that the animal is required because of a disability; and
4) identify what work or task the animal has been trained to perform.
If this information is not provided, the animal shall not be considered a service animal and is
subject to the license and registration requirements of §4.1.1(A). The registrant shall also give
the following information on forms provided by the City:
3) Owner’s name and home address; and
4) Dog’s name, breed (if known), color, and sex.
Proof that rabies and other vaccinations have been done must be supplied when the license is
applied for.
Service animals are not considered animals for the calculation under § 5.1.1.
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 70C
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 70B, RENAMING SAID ORDINANCE
AS ORDINANCE NO. 70C AND PROVIDING FOR COMPENSATION FOR THE
MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
The City Council of the City of Gem Lake does hereby ordain:
Section 1.
Section 1.1. Base Compensation. The base compensation of the Mayor and Council
Members shall be increased, effective 12:01 am on 01 January 2015, as follows:
Mayor $ 2,400 per year
Each Council Member $ 1,200 per year
Section 2.
Section 2.1. Additional Compensation. Additional compensation of $20.00 for each
meeting (other than a regular meeting of the City Council) which any of the foregoing
persons is directed by the City Council to attend.
NOW, THEREFORE, the motion for the adoption of the foregoing Ordaniance was made
by Councilmember Artig-Swomley and seconded by Councilmember Bosak with ___5____ votes
in favor and _0__votes in opposition.
Dated 10/21/ 2014 ____________________________________
William Short, City Clerk
Page 1 of 2
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 70B LEGEND
The Elected Official Compensation Ordinance of the C ity of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the City
Council as City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 50 on 01 October 1988. Since that time, the City Council has adopted
several changes in keeping with the changing times and needs and wishes of the community. The following table is added
to Ordinance No. 70B as an historic reference to those changes. All changes shown have been incorporated into
Ordinance No. 70B , the City Elected Official Compensation Ordinance.
ORDINANCE
NO. TITLE & DESCRIPTION ENACTED
# 50 An Ordinance Providing For Compensation For The Mayor, Council Members, Treasurer And
Clerk
10/17/88
# 62 An Ordinance Replacing Ordinance No. 50 And Providing For Compensation For The
Mayor, Council members, Treasurer And Clerk
08/17/92
#70 An Ordinance Repealing Ordinance No. 62 and Providing For Compensation For The Mayor
And Council Members.
01/01/99
#70B An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 70 and Providing For Compensation For The Mayor
And Council Members.
12/19/05
#70C An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 70B and Providing For Compensation For The Mayor
And Council Members.
10/21/2014
-1-
CITY OF GEM LAKE
Ordinance No. 77
An Ordinance repealing City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 44 and providing for: 1) adoption of the
“Minnesota Uniform Fire Code”; 2) establishing prohibited conditions to prevent fires; 3)
appointment of fire department, fire chief and fire marshal by the City Council; 4) adding
requirements for fire inspections and associated fees in the City’s commercial zones and uses; and
5) reestablishing requirements for issuance of burning permits.
SECTION 1. TITLE
1.1 This Ordinance No. 77 shall be known as “City of Gem Lake Fire Regulations”, except as sometimes referred to
herein as the “Code” or this “Ordinance”.
SECTION 2. INTENT AND PURPOSE
2.1 This Ordinance No. 77 is adopted for the purpose promulgating public safety through the adoption of fire codes
and providing for their application, administration, and enforcement.
SECTION 3. SEPARABILITY
3.1 It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that the several provisions of this
Ordinance are separable and that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any other provision of this
Ordinance not specifically included in said judgement.
SECTION 4. FIRE PREVENTION
4.1 MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. The “Minnesota Uniform Fire Code”
which is comprised of the “Uniform Fire Code and Standards, 1997 Edition” promulgated by the International
Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs Association, and amendments made thereto by the
Commissioner of Public Safety through the State Fire Marshal Division, such amendments having been filed
September 25, 1989, and set out in Minnesota Rules Chapters 7510.3100 - 7510.3280 and as amended from time
to time are hereby adopted as the Gem Lake Fire Code. The Minnesota Uniform Fire Code as amended from time
to time is hereby incorporated by this Ordinance as though printed in full herein.
4.2 FIRE DEPARTMENT AND OFFICIALS. The City Council shall annually appoint a properly accredited fire
department to act on a contractual basis as the City of Gem Lake fire department, using such criteria as the City
may, from time to time, develop.
4.2.1 The Fire Chief and the Fire Marshal of the contract provider shall, during the contractual period, be
acknowledged as holding similar positions within the City of Gem Lake.
SECTION 5. INSPECTIONS, RIGHT-OF-ENTRY AND FEES
5.1 For purposes of inspection to insure compliance with regulations adopted herein, the Fire Chief and the Fire
Marshal are hereby empowered as law enforcement officers for the strict application of this Ordinance.
5.2 The Fire Marshal shall make annual inspections of all property and buildings within the City’s commercial
districts and all buildings or residences used for purposes other than just residential (e.g. home occupations) and
locate and report to the Fire Chief and City Clerk such places where fire hazards exist, and abate any conditions
existing contrary to this code or the laws of the State of Minnesota.
5.3 The setting and collection of fees for inspections governed by this Ordinance shall be set by the City Council from
time to time by resolution and shall be administered by the City Clerk.
5.3.1 Failure to pay fees for inspections shall constitute a lien against the real property upon which the inspection
was performed and the City Clerk shall extend such sum due plus twenty-five (25.0%) percent thereof as
a special tax against the real property and certify same to the County Auditor of Ramsey County, M innesota
for collection in the same manner as taxes and special assessments are certified and collected.
-2-
SECTION 6. BURNING PERMITS REQUIRED
6.1 Open Burning Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle or maintain any bonfire nor shall any
person normally furnish any such material for any such fire nor shall any person authorize any such fire to be
kindled or maintained on or in any street, alley, road, land, public grounds or upon any private property without
first obtaining a written permit from the City Clerk which has been appropriately executed by the Fire Marshal.
6.1.1 Recreational or cooking fires supervised by an adult and which are fully contained within approved fire
rings, pits or appliances not greater than three (3'0") feet in diameter shall be exempt from the permit
requirement, providing no fire bans have been issued by the Fire Marshal or the Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources.
SECTION 7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
7.1 Any person(s) violating or otherwise refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than Seven Hundred
and No/100 ($700.00) Dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense. Each day that
a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 8. REPEALER
8.1 Ordinance No. 44 of the City of Gem Lake is hereby repealed in it’s entirety.
SECTION 9. ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
9.1 Adopted by a unanimous vote of the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 21st day of May, 2001.
9.2 This Ordinance No. 77 shall take effect and be in force after it’s adoption by the City Council and publication in
the City’s official Legal Publication.
FOR THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Dated: 21 May 2001 Dated: 21 May 2001
Published in the White Bear Press on the 13th day of June 2001.
e-files: Ordinances\Ord77\Ord77A.wpd
CERTIFIED COPY
CITY OF GEM LAKE
Ordinance No. 78B
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDINANCE NO. 78 AND
PROVIDING FOR: ADOPTION OF THE MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE;
THE APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE
MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE; THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND THE
SETTING AND COLLECTION OF FEES THEREFOR; PROVIDING PENALTIES
FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
The City Council of the City of Gem Lake does ordain as follows:
Section 1 – Building Code
1.1 Adoption of Minnesota State Building Code. The Minnesota State Building
Code, as adopted by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes §§16B.59 to 16B.75 including any optional chapter
hereinafter specifically adopted; and including all amendments, rules and
regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the
Minnesota Commissioner of Administrator through its Building Codes and
Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set
forth herein, and shall be known as the Gem Lake Building Code.
1.2 Building Code – Optional Provisions. The following optional provisions, as
identified in the most current addition of the Minnesota State Building Code, are
hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Gem Lake Building Code:
1.2.1 Chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems, electing Minn. R.
1306.0020 Subpart 2, applying the code to new and existing buildings;
1.2.2 Grading, appendix chapter K, 2001 Supplements to International
Building Code; and
1.2.3 Chapter 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to
1335.1200.
Section 2 – Application, Administration and Enforcement
2.1 The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in
accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statute, 16B.62,
subdivision 1, when so established by this ordinance.
2.2 The City shall appoint a Certified Building Official to administer the Gem
Lake Building Code.
2.3 The City shall appoint an Electrical Inspector pursuant to Minn. Stat. §
326.244, subd. 4, who shall inspect electrical installations within the City.
Section 3 – Permits and Fees
3.1 It shall be unlawful for any person to perform work subject to the Building
Code for which a permit is required without first obtaining a permit for that work
from the City. The City shall only issue permits to persons licensed by the State
of Minnesota to perform such work, or to a person applying to perform work
wholly within the residence owned and occupied by the person. The issuance of
permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statute §
16B.62, subdivision 1, and as per the Minnesota State Building Code, Minn. R.
1300.1060 regarding fees.
3.1.1 Permit fees. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this
Code in accordance with the fee schedule prescribed by separate ordinance
of the City Council, a copy of the most current version of which shall be
available at the office of the City Clerk.
3.1.2 Plan review. Plan review fees shall be as required by the State of
Minnesota, or when submittal documents are required under this
Ordinance or any other City Ordinance. The plan review fee shall be 65
percent of the building permit fee. Submitted documents approved as
similar plans under Minn. R. 1300.0160 Subp. 6 plan review fees shall not
exceed 25% of the building permit fee. Plan review fees are separate from
and in addition to the permit fees. In addition to information required by
the Building Code, permit applications shall include the following
information:
3.1.2.1 Construction Plans. All data required by section 18.2.1 of
the Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance.
3.1.2.2 Proof of Ownership. Applicants for building permits to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, demolish or move commercial and
industrial structures or residential structures containing more than
two dwelling units, shall supply proof of ownership of the property
for which the permit is requested consisting of an Abstract of Title,
certified currently, or a Registered Property Abstract, together with
any unrecorded documents whereby the applicant acquires a legal
or equitable ownership interest. Provided that proof of ownership
shall not be required for building permits to construct, alter, repair,
demolish, or move sheds, shelters, unattached garages, driveways,
sidewalks or fences.
3.1.3 State Surcharge Fees. All municipal permits issued for work under
the code are subject to the State surcharge fee imposed in Minn. Stat. §
16B.70, which shall be computed in accordance with that statute.
3.1.4 Valuation. The building official shall utilize the Chart of Estimated
Construction Cost as annually provided by the Minnesota Department of
Administration State Building Codes and Standards Division to compute
building valuations for the purposes of establishing the City of Gem Lake
permit fee schedules. Permit valuation shall include total value of all
construction work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is
being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and
permanent systems. Permit fees for manufactured (mobile) homes and
prefabricated structures shall be based on a valuation of on site work only.
3.1.5 Other Fees. The building official may charge separate and
additional fees, in accordance with the fee schedule prescribed by
ordinance of the City Council, for inspections conducted outside of normal
business hours, reinspection, and other inspections or work outside of
those normally required by the Building Code for which no other fee is
specified. If the City requires the use of outside consultants for
engineering, planning, legal, or similar services, the cost of such services
shall be charged to the applicant, including administrative and overhead
costs.
3.1.6 Investigation Fee. Whenever any work for which a permit is
required by the code has been commenced without first obtaining said
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be
issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected for the investigation equal to the amount of the permit
fee required by this code.
3.1.7 Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of any
fee paid herein which was erroneously paid or collected. The building
official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit
fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance
with this code. When plan review services have been provided, the plan
review fee portion of the permit fee shall not be refunded. The building
official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written
application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the
date of fee payment.
3.2 Permit or application expiration. Applications for which no permit is issued
within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and
plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the
applicant or destroyed by the building official. All work authorized by building
permit shall be initiated in accordance with City-approved construction plans
within one (1) year after the date the City issued the building permit. Once
initiated, work authorized by the building permit shall continue to completion
without any delay or cessation of 60 days or greater. In all cases, the compliance
deadlines shall be upheld unless a written extension is submitted and approved by
the Building Official. An extension may only be granted in the event that a natural
disaster or a calamitous event occurs which unavoidably delays the completion of
the building project. The decision of the Building Official may be appealed to the
Planning Commission, who acts as the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. In
order to renew action on an application or permit after its expiration, the applicant
shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.
Section 4 – Violations and Penalties
4.1 A violation of the Gem Lake Building Code is a misdemeanor. Each day in
which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 5 – Separability
5.1 Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provisions of this Ordinance,
or the Minnesota State Building Code, be held to be invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance
as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
Section 6 – Repealer
6.1 Ordinance No. 78 of the City of Gem Lake is hereby repealed in its entirety.
Section 7 – Licenses and Bonds
7-1. Before any person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of doing
or performing any of the various types of work listed in this section, they must
show proof of being licensed and bonded by the State of Minnesota. Such people
or entities who are performing work which is not required to be licensed by the
State of Minnesota, but listed in this section, must obtain a license from the City
of Gem Lake before engaging in their type of business. Contractors may be
required to obtain a surety bond for work in the City as a condition of obtaining a
City license. Any bond requirement, and the amount of said bond, shall be stated
in the City’s fee schedule, which shall be adopted by the City Council by
ordinance from time to time.
7-2. The requirements of this section apply to the following types of work:
1. Cement work, cement block work, cement block laying or brick
work;
2. General construction including erection, alteration or repair of
buildings;
3. The moving or wrecking of buildings;
4. Plastering, outside stucco work or lathing;
5. Electrical wiring;
6. Plumbing including installation of outside sewage disposal plants;
7. Heating;
8. Gas installation, including heating, appliance devices or machinery;
9. Well drilling;
10. Roofing;
11. Sign and billboard erecting;
12. Excavators (including for basements, foundations, grading of lots);
13. Driveway contractors; and
14. Outside sewer and water installers.
7-3. Licenses shall be obtained from the Clerk of the City. Applications for
licenses shall be filed with the Clerk on the forms furnished by the City. The fee
for each license shall be as established from time to time by City Council
Resolution.
7-4. All licenses shall expire on January 1st following the date of issuance unless
revoked or forfeited prior to this date. If a license granted hereunder is not
renewed previous to its expiration then all rights granted by such license shall
cease and any work performed after the expiration of the license shall be in
violation of this code.
7-5. Persons, firms, or corporations renewing their licenses after the expiration
date shall be charged the full annual license fee. No pro-rated license fee shall be
allowed of renewals.
7-6. A license granted to a contractor shall include the right to perform all of the
work for which he is licensed. Sub-contractors on any work shall be required to
comply with the sections of this code pertaining to license, bond, qualifications,
etc. for his particular type of work.
7-7. Each applicant for a license shall satisfy the governing body that he is
competent by reason of education, special training and experience. Applicants
shall also demonstrate that they are equipped to perform the work for which a
license is requested in accordance with all state laws, City Ordinances and this
Building Code. Each applicant for a heating license shall further satisfy the
governing body that he already had a valid license or competency card from
another municipality in the St. Paul-Minneapolis Metropolitan Area.
7-8. The governing body shall have the power to suspend or revoke the license of
any person, partnership, firm or corporation, licensed under the regulations of this
code. Adverse action shall be based upon findings that the licensee’s work was
improper, defective, or so unsafe as to jeopardize life or property. A licensee
must be given twenty (20) days notice and granted the opportunity to be heard
before such action is taken. If and when such notice is sent to the legal address of
the licensee and he fails or refuses to appear at the said hearing, his license will be
automatically suspended or revoked five (5) days after the date of the hearing.
7-9. When a license is suspended, the period of suspension shall be not less than
thirty (30) days nor more than one (1) year, such period being determined by the
governing body.
7-10. When any person, partnership, firm or corporation holding a license as
provided herein has been convicted for the second time by a court of competent
jurisdiction for violation of any of the provisions of this code, the governing body
shall revoke the license of the person, partnership, firm or corporation so
convicted. Such person, partnership, firm or corporation may not make
application for a new license for a period of one (1) year.
7-11. No license granted under the terms stated herein shall become effective until
the licensee shall have filed with and approved by the Clerk of the City a policy of
public liability insurance naming the City of Gem Lake as an additional insured
which shall remain and be in force and effect during the entire term of said license
and which shall contain a provision that it shall not be canceled without ten (10)
days written notice to the City Clerk. Public liability insurance shall not be less
than an amount established by City Council Resolution.
7-12. Each applicant for a permit to move a building or electrical transformer over
any street or public right-of-way must satisfy the Building Inspector that he is
provided with sufficient and adequate insurance to protect the municipality and
the public from any and all damages which may result, either directly or
indirectly, from the moving of said building or electrical transformer.
7-13. A certificate of competency must be submitted by gas installers to qualify
for gas line installation.
7-14. All licenses heretofore issued and now in force and effect shall continue for
one year from the date of issuance. These licenses, may, upon expiration, be
renewed in accordance with the provisions of 7-4 of this Ordinance.
7-15. Persons installing sewer and water services outside buildings on private
property do not have to be licensed plumbers. They shall be classified as pipe
layers and be licensed as outside sewer installers. A surety bond shall be
furnished, conditioned that the City and the person contracting to have the work
done by the license holder will be saved harmless from any loss or damage by
reason of inadequate or improper work performed by the holder of said license
under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 8 – Adoption & Enactment
8.1 Adopted by a unanimous vote of the City Council of Gem Lake on the 21st
day of December, 2006.
8.2 This Ordinance No. 78B shall take effect and be in force after its adoption by
the City Council and publication in the City’s official Legal Publication.
CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Dated: 21 December 2006 Dated: 21 December 2006
Published in the White Bear Press on the 24th day of January, 2007
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 78B LEGEND
The State Building Code was originally adopted by the City Council in Ordinance
Number 10 on March 17, 1964. The Council has since repealed Ordinance 10 and
replaced it with, most recently, Ordinance No. 78 Providing for Adoption of the
Minnesota State Building Code on May 21, 2001. Since that time, the City Council has
made amendments to the Ordinance in keeping with changes in State law and the wishes
of the community. The following table indicates the original ordinance and the said
amendments.
ORDINANCE DESCRIPTION ENACTMENT
10 An Ordinance Adopting the Building Code by Reference 03/17/1964
24 An Ordinance Adopting the Uniform Building Code, repealing
Ordinance No. 10
08/17/1971
78 An Ordinance Repealing Ordinance No. 24 and Providing For:
Adoption of the Minnesota State Building Code; the
Application, Administration and Enforcement of same; the
Issuance of Permits and the Setting and Collection of Fees
Therefor; and Providing Penalties for Violation Thereof.
05/21/2001
78B An Ordinance Repealing Ordinance No. 78 and Providing for
Adoption of the Minnesota State Building Code, the
Application, Administration and Enforcement of same; the
Issuance of Permits and the Setting and Collection of Fees
Therefor; and Providing Penalties for Violation Thereof.
12/21/2006
87 An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 78B to Require City
Licenses for Certain Home Construction Contractors,
incorporated as a new Section 7 in the Ordinance
10/21/2008
- 1 -
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 82
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 80 AND PROVIDING FOR THE LOCATION,
REGULATION, LICENSING, OPERATION AND INSPECTION OF ADULT USES AND SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESSES IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SAID
REGULATION.
SECTION 1. TITLE
1.1 This Ordinance shall be known as “City of Gem Lake Adult Use Ordinance”, except as sometimes referred to
herein as the “Code” or this “Ordinance”.
SECTION 2. INTENT AND PURPOSE
2.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to control, through licensing and zoning regulations, certain land
uses that have a direct and detrimental effect on the character of the City of Gem Lake’s residential and
commercial districts.
2.2 Findings. The City Council makes the following findings about the effect adult uses and sexually oriented
businesses have on the character of the City’s neighborhoods. In making the findings, the City Council accepts
the recommendations of the City’s Planning Commission, which has studied the experiences of other urban
areas about such businesses and has held a public hearing to solicit input on the contents of this Ordinance.
Furthermore, the City Council is aware of a study conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General which
examined the impact that sexually oriented Adult Establishments have in cities in Minnesota and throughout the
country. This study concluded that Adult Establishments have an adverse impact on surrounding
neighborhoods. Those impacts included increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency,
neighborhood blight and potential health risks. In addition, the City Council is also aware that the cities
surrounding Gem Lake have adopted ordinances regulating adult uses and sexually oriented businesses,
indicating that such ordinances were deemed important and necessary in the communities surrounding Gem
Lake. Based on the studies and findings, the City Council concludes:
a) Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in crime in the area where such
businesses are located. This can be a burden upon law enforcement services.
b) Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the deterioration of residential
neighborhoods and can increase neighborhood blight. These businesses can impair the character and
quality of the residential housing in the area where such businesses are located. This situation could lessen
the amount of desirable housing for residents.
c) Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary impacts of the types described in (a)
and (b) above.
d) It is necessary to provide for the special and express regulation o f businesses, establishments or commercial
enterprises that operate as adult body painting studios, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult car washes,
adult companionship establishments, adult hotels or motels, adult massage parlors or health clubs, adult
mini-motion-picture theaters, adult modeling studios, adult theaters, adult novelty businesses, adult saunas,
or that permit erotic adult dancing on their premises.
e) The commercial enterprises such as the types described in (d) above and all other similar establishments
whose services include sessions offered to adults conducted in private by members of the same or opposite
sex and employing personnel with no specialized training are susceptible to operations contravening,
subverting, or endangering the morals of the City by being the site of acts of prostitution, illicit sex, and
occasions of violent crimes and, thus, requiring close inspection, licensing and regulation.
f) Control and regulation of commercial establishments of these types, in view of the abuses often perpetrated,
require intensive efforts by law enforcement and other governmental functions of the city. Increased and
concentrated use of city services for such control and regulation detracts from and reduces the level of
services available to the rest of the City. Thus, these types of establishments can diminish the ability of the
City to protect and promote the general health, welfare, morals and safety of the City.
- 2 -
g) The City Council adopts the land-use and licensing regulations in this article, recognizing that it has an
interest in the present and future character of the City’s residential and commercial neighborhoods. These
regulations are to lessen the detrimental and adverse effects adult uses and sexually oriented businesses
have on adjacent land uses and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
City.
2.3 It is not the intent of the City Council to prohibit adult uses or sexually oriented businesses or establishments
from having an opportunity to locate in the City. It also is not the intent of the City Council to regulate these
businesses on the basis of content, but only on the basis of likely adverse secondary effects.
SECTION 3. INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY
3.1 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, its provisions shall be held to be minimum
requirements and shall be construed so as to fully effect its purpose and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other power established by law or ordinance except as specifically provided herein. In the event
that requirements imposed by this Ordinance conflict with requirements imposed by this Ordinance or by other
ordinances of the City of Gem Lake or any other county, state or federal law or regulation, then the more
restrictive provisions shall apply. The City Council shall rule on what is more restrictive and appeals from such
decisions.
3.2 Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the M ayor and City Council that the several provisions
of this Ordinance are separable and that if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any other provision of this
Ordinance not specifically included in said judgement.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
4.1 Construction. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; the singular includes the plural,
and the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive; the
masculine gender includes the feminine.
4.2 Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance only, the words and phrases below are defined as follows:
Adult Establishment. A business engaged in any of the following activities or which utilizes any of the
following business procedures or practices:
a) A business that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage, either by operation, law or by the owners of such
businesses, except any business licensed under Ordinance No. 9 of the Gem Lake City Code.
b) Any business that has a substantial or significant portio n of its floor space that is characterized by
an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatom ical areas.
c) An adult establishment includes, but is not limited to, any adult use defined in this ordinance.
Adult Use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business which provides the service of applying
paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when
such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore. A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items
consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, reco rds, audio tape, videotape or motion picture film if
such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more
classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of
such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live
entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such
dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
Adult Companionship Establishment. A companionship establishment which excludes minors by
reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion between an employee or independent contractor of the establishment and a customer, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
- 3 -
Adult Conversation Parlor. A conversation parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
Adult Health or Sports Club. A health or sports club which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
Adult Hotel or Motel. Adult hotel or motel means a hotel, motel or portions thereof from which
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Massage Parlor. A massage parlor which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides
the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than
fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Modeling Studio. An establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of
figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers.
Adult Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building used for presenting motion picture
or other similar moving motion image material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age or is such material is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Novelty Business. A business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which
stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
Adult Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or red ucing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat
bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason
of age or if the service provided by the bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Specified Anatomical Areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human penis in a
discernibly turgid or erect state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities. Specified sexual activities are any of the activities described below:
a) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation,
bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of
a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and
any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy,
coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism or
zooerasty.
b) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence.
c) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation.
d) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast.
e) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in
sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture,
fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such person(s).
f) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human
being.
g) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
- 4 -
Substantial or significant. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the use of the words “substantial or
significant” means that at least twenty (20%) percent of the portion of the floor area of the business (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basement or any portion of the business not open to the
public) is devoted to items, merchandise or other material that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
SECTION 5. LOCATIONS
5.1 Adult Establishments shall be located only in districts zoned GB or GB-II and shall be located at least threehundred
(300') radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the
building upon which the adult establishment is located, to the pro perty line of:
a) residentially zoned property (R1, R2, R3, R4);
b) any licensed day care center;
c) any public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, junior high or senior high school; or
d) any church or similar place of worship recognized by the city.
SECTION 6. LICENSE REQUIRED
6.1 License Required. No person, firm, corporation or other business entity shall own or operate an Adult
Establishment without having first secured a license as provided for in this Ordinance.
6.2 Applications. The application for an Adult Establishment license shall be submitted on a form provided by the
City and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a) The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the applicant, if an individual; and if a corporation or
other business entity, the names, residences, phone number and birth dates of all owners holding more than
a five (5%) percent ownership interest in such corporation o r business entity;
b) The name, address, phone number and birth date of a person or persons who shall be designated as the
operations manager(s) of the establishment, whether or not such person is an owner;
c) The address and legal description of the premises where the adult establishment is to be located;
d) A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony relating to a sex offense and/or the operation of
adult uses and related activities of which the applicant or any persons named in (a) or (b) above have been
convicted, and whether or not the applicant has ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of
business in other communities;
e) The activities and types of businesses to be conducted;
f) The proposed hours of operation;
g) Provisions made to ensure access to minors is restricted; and
h) A building plan of the premises with details about all internal operations and activities.
6.3 License fees.
a) License Fee. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the required fee for
the license. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the City Clerk shall authorize the City Treasurer
to refund the amount paid as License Fee.
b) Origination Fee. An applicant for a license under this ordinance shall deposit with the city at the time of
original application a non-refundable Origination Fee which is supplemental to the License Fee which shall
be used to cover costs associated with investigating matters contained in the original application.
c) Term. All licenses shall be issued for a period of one (1) calendar year and shall expire on the last day of
December in each year. Any application made or license issued for a portion of a calendar year shall be
subject to payment of the full amount required for the calendar year for which the license is issued.
d) Refunds. If any of the events identified herein occur within the first half of any license period/calendar year,
a refund equal to twenty-five (25%) percent of the total license fee paid shall be refunded, presuming a
written claim for said refund is received by the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the event. No refund
shall be provided for claims received for incidents which happen after the first half of any license
period/calendar year. Events for which refunds may be available include:
1) Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other catastrophe;
2) The licensee’s dissolution if a business entity, or death if an individual;
3) A change in law making the licensed activity unlawful to continue.
e) Fee Amounts. The amount of all fees related to this O rdinance shall be set annually by the City Council as
part of the Fee Schedule adopted in January and all fees shall be paid into the general fund o f the City.
- 5 -
6.4 Granting of license.
a) The City shall complete its investigation within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application,
including all license fees. Applications that are not complete will be returned without being reviewed; the
applicant will be notified of incomplete items and may resubmit a completed application anytime thereafter.
b) If the application is for license renewal, the applicant shall be allowed to continue business until the City
Council has determined to renew or refuse to renew a license.
c) If, after such investigation, it appears that the applicant and the place proposed for the business are eligible
for a license under the criteria set forth in this ordinance, then the license shall be approved by the City
Council within thirty (30) days after the investigation is completed. In all other cases the license shall be
denied.
d) Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another holder. Each
license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application. N o license may be transferred to
another premise or holder without approval of the City Council. If the licensee is a business entity other
than a sole proprietorship, a change in identity of the business entity, including the participation of new
principals with more than a five (5%) percent ownership interest in the entity, shall be deemed a transfer of
the license.
6.5 Persons ineligible for license. No license shall be granted to or held by any person who:
a) Is under 21 years of age;
b) Has been convicted of a felony or of violating any law of this state or local ordinance relating to sex
offenses and/or adult establishments; or
c) Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued.
6.6 Places Ineligible for license.
a) No license shall be granted for Adult Establishments on any premises where the owner or the applicant has
been convicted of a violation of this Ordinance, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause,
until one (1) year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
b) Except for uses lawfully existing at the time this Ordinance is adopted, no license shall be granted for any
Adult Establishment which is not in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
6.7 Conditions of License. Every license shall be granted subject to the following conditions and all other
provisions of this Ordinance, and of any applicable sections of other codes of the City, Ramsey County or State
of Minnesota.
a) All licensed prem ises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at all times.
b) No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
c) Any designated inspection officer of the City shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect and search
the premises of a licensee.
d) Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of their place of business and shall maintain conditions
of order.
SECTION 7. ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS
7.1 Additional Conditions for Adult Cabarets. In addition to all other conditions set forth in this Ordinance, the
following conditions apply to adult cabarets:
a) No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow any dancer or other live entertainer
to perform nude.
b) No dancer, live entertainer, patron or any other person shall be nud e in an adult cabaret.
c) The owner, operator or manage of an adult cabaret shall provide the following information to the city
concerning any persons who dance or perform live entertainment at the adult cabaret: the person’s name,
home address, home telephone number, date of birth and any aliases.
d) No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under eighteen (18) years old.
e) All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose and which is raised at
least 30 inches from the level of the floor.
f) No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live entertainment closer than eight (8) feet to any
patron.
g) No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or
performer.
h) No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
i) No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
- 6 -
SECTION 8. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
8.1 Administration. The City Clerk shall develop and maintain applications for such licenses and shall distribute
same to applicants upon request.
8.2 Right Of Entry And Enforcement. For purposes of inspection to insure compliance with regulations adopted
herein the Zoning Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer and all law enforcement officials with whom the
City has contracted to provide law enforcement are hereby empowered as law enforcement officers for the strict
application of this Ordinance and may enter upon the premises at any time to investigate compliance with the
various provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 9. PENALTIES
9.1 Penalties.
a) Any person violating any provision of this ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall
be punished by not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.
b) Any violation of this chapter shall be a basis for the suspension or revocation of any license granted
hereunder. In the event that the City Council proposes to revoke or suspend the license, the licensee shall
be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed revocation or suspension. The Council shall hold a
hearing for the purpose of determining whether to revoke or suspend the license, which hearing shall be
within 30 days of the notice.
c) The City Council shall determine whether to suspend or revoke a license within 30 days after the close of
the hearing or within 60 days for the date of the notice, whichever is sooner, and shall notify the licensee of
its decision within that period.
SECTION 10. ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
10.1 Repealer. When this O rdinance is adopted by the City Council and placed in full force and effect, Gem Lake
Ordinance No. 80 shall hereby be repealed.
10.2Adoption. Adopted by a unanimous vote of the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 19th day of April,
2004 and ordered for publication.
10.2 Effective. This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force following publication of a summary of the
ordinance in the City’s official Legal Publication.
FOR THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST
Paul R. Emeott Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Dated: 19 April 2004 Dated: 19 April 2004
Published in the White Bear Press on 12 May 2004.
e-files: Ordinances\Ord82\Ord82A.wpd
CERTIFIED COPY
7
CITY OF GEM LAKE
Office of the City Clerk
1369 County Road “E” East
Gem Lake, MN 55110-5231
Telephone: ( 651 ) 426 - 6443 Facsimile: ( 651 ) 426 – 6444
Mobile: ( 612 ) 812 – 6139 Email: GemLakeCity@aol.com
Paul Emeott, Mayor
Fritz Magnuson, City Clerk Sarah Cobian, Treasurer
PUBLIC NOTICE NO. 2004-14
DATE: 06 May 2004
FROM: Fritz Magnuson, City Clerk
TO: Press Publications, Legal Publications @ legals@sherbtel.net
RE: Legal Notice To Be Published
To W hom It May Concern,
The following Legal (Public) Notice is to be published in the Legal Notices Section of the 12 May 2004 edition
of the White Bear Press. Please confirm receipt and verify content is in acceptable form for use.
City of Gem Lake
Public Notice No. 2004-14
ORDINANCE N O. 82
On 19 April 2004, the Gem Lake City C ouncil enacted C ity of Gem
Lake Ordinance No. 82., AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCE
NO. 80 AND PROVIDING FOR THE LOCATION, REGULATION,
LICENSING, OPERATION AND INSPECTION OF ADULT USES AND
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE
AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SAID REGULATION. This
Ordinance will take full force and effect upon publication of this public notice
or 01 M ay 2004, w hich ever is later.
To be known as the “Gem Lake Adult Use Ord inance”, copies of the
entire ordinance may be obtained by sending a written request accompanied
by a $10.00 printing and handling fee plus $0.65 sales tax ($10.65 total) and a
self-addressed stamped ($0.60) envelope to the City Clerk at 1369 East
County Road E, Gem Lake, MN 55110-5231.
Ss//FredericC. M agnuson, C ity Clerk
Fritz Magnuson
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 83
AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE GEM LAKE CITY HOUSING CODE.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. TITLE AND PURPOSE. This Ordinance may be cited as the "GEM
LAKE HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE". The purpose of
this Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
people of the City. These general objectives include, among others, the following:
1-1. To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the City.
1-2. To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely
to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including the
physical, mental and social well-being of persons occupying dwellings within the
City of Gem Lake.
1-3. To provide minimum standards for the maintenance and conservation of
existing residential buildings, the rehabilitation of existing substandard residential
buildings, thus to prevent slums and blight.
1-4. To provide minimum standards for cooking, heating and sanitary equipment
necessary to the health and safety of occupants of buildings.
1-5. To provide minimum standards for light and ventilation, necessary to health
and safety.
1-6. To prevent overcrowding of dwellings by providing minimum space
standards per occupant for each dwelling unit.
1-7. To provide a diversity of housing choice and reasonable amount of low and
moderate income housing in the City.
1-8. With respect to rental disputes, and except as otherwise specifically
provided by the terms of this Ordinance, it is not the intention of the City Council
to intrude upon the fair and accepted contractual relationship between tenant and
landlord. The City Council does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either
party, nor to act as an arbiter, nor to be receptive to complaints from tenant or
landlord which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this
ordinance. In the absence of such relevance with regard to rental disputes, it is
intended that the contracting parties exercise such legal sanctions as are
available to them without the intervention of City government.
Neither in enacting this Ordinance is it the intention of the City Council to
interfere or permit interference with legal rights to personal privacy.
1-9. Any minimum standards shall not exceed the minimum standards provided
for new construction by the Minnesota Building Code, and in the event any
minimum standards herein do exceed said Building Code, the standards of the
Minnesota State Building Code shall govern.
SECTION 2. APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE. Every building and its premises
used in whole or in part as a home or residence, or as an accessory structure
thereof, for a single family or person, and every building used in whole or in part
as a home or residence of two or more persons or families living in separate units
shall conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, irrespective of when such
building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. This Ordinance
establishes minimum standards for erected dwelling units, accessory structures,
and related premises.
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply to the
interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance.
3-1. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE – a structure subordinate to the main or
principal dwelling or dwellings and which is not used nor authorized to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on or partially on
the premises.
3-2. BUILDING – any structure erected for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
3-3. COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL – the City Clerk and his designated agents
authorized to administer and enforce this Ordinance.
3-4. DWELLING – a building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly
for residential occupancy of a continued nature, including 1-family dwelling, 2-
family dwellings, and multiple family dwellings; but not including hotels and
motels.
3-5. DWELLING UNIT – a single residential accommodation which is arranged,
designed, used or, if vacant, intended for use exclusively as a domicile for one
family. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be considered as
part of the building in which the dwelling unit is located.
3-6. FAMILY – any of the following definitions shall apply:
3-6.1. A person or persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
together with his or their domestic servants or gratuitous guests, all
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit approved and
certified by the appropriate public agency.
3-6.2. Group or foster care of not more than six (6) wards of clients
by an authorized person or persons, related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, together with his or their domestic servants or gratuitous
guests, all maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit
approved and certified by the appropriate public agency.
3-6.3. A group of not more than five (5) persons not related by
blood, marriage or adoption maintaining a common household in a
dwelling unit.
3-7. FLUSH WATER CLOSET – a toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece,
which is connected to the City water system and sewer system or other approved
water supply and sewer system.
3-8. GARBAGE – putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
3-9. HABITABLE BUILDING – any building or part thereof that meets minimum
standards for use as a home or place of abode by one or more persons.
3-10. HABITABLE ROOM – a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, including bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements,
(those without required ventilation, required electric outlets and required exit
facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than 50 square feet of floor space, foyers,
communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops,
hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground level or in
attics.
3-11. HEATED WATER – water heated to a temperature of not less than 120o
Fahrenheit, or such lesser temperature required by government authority,
measured at faucet outlet.
3-12. KITCHEN – a space which contains a sink with counter working space,
adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and adequate
space for the storage of cooking utensils.
3-13. MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING – a dwelling or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units.
3-14. OCCUPANT – any person (including owner or operator) living, sleeping,
cooking and eating in a dwelling unit or living and sleeping in a rooming unit.
3-15. OPERATOR – the owner or agent who has charge, care, control, or
management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let.
3-16. OWNER – any person, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly, or severally
with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or control of,
any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit within the City as owner, employee or
agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title
holder. Any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this Ordinance to the same extent as the owner.
3-17. PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY – the maximum number of persons
permitted to reside in dwelling unit or rooming unit.
3-18. PERSON – an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or joint
venture or organization of any kind.
3-19. PLUMBING – all of the following supplied facilities and equipment in a
dwelling: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar fixtures and the installation thereof,
together with all connections to water, sewer and gas lines.
3-20. PREMISES – a plated lot or part thereof or unplatted parcel of land, either
occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure, including such
building, accessory structure or other structure thereon.
3-21. PUBLIC HALL – a hall, corridor or passageway for providing egress from a
dwelling unit to a public way and not within the exclusive control of one family.
3-22. REFUSE – all putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids including
garbage and rubbish.
3-23. RENTAL DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT – a dwelling or dwelling unit
let for rent or lease.
3-24. REPAIR – to restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation,
serviceability or appearance.
3-25. RODENT HARBORAGE – any place where rodents can live, nest, or seek
shelter.
3-26. ROOMING UNIT – any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and
eating purposes.
3-27. RUBBISH – nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and
shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
3-28. SAFETY – the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards
which may cause accidents or diseases.
3-29. SUBSTANDARD DWELLING – any dwelling which does not conform to
the minimum standards established by City Ordinance.
3-30. SUPPLIED – paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of the
owner, operator, or agent of a dwelling.
3-31. MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS – whenever the words "dwelling",
"dwelling unit", "premises", or "structure" are used in this Ordinance they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
SECTION 4. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS. No owner
or other person shall occupy or let to another person any dwelling, dwelling unit
or rooming unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human
occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the State of
Minnesota, and the City of Gem Lake, including the following requirements:
4-1. MAINTENANCE OF SHARED OR PUBLIC AREAS. Every owner of a
dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof.
4-2. MAINTENANCE OF OCCUPIED AREAS. Every occupant of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he
occupies and controls.
4-3. STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH. Every occupant of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall store and dispose of all his rubbish in a clean,
sanitary, and safe manner as prescribed by the City Ordinances.
4-4. STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE. Every occupant of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall store and dispose of all his garbage and any
other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a
clean, sanitary, and safe manner as prescribed by the City Ordinances.
4-5. RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND
RUBBISH. Every owner of a multiple family dwelling shall supply facilities for the
sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of
single or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to
furnish such facilities.
4-6. RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORM AND SCREEN DOORS AND WINDOWS.
The owner of a rental dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be
responsible for providing and hanging all screens and storm doors and storm
windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this Ordinance,
except where there is written agreement otherwise between the owner and
occupant.
4-7. RESPONSIBILITY FOR PEST EXTERMINATION. Every occupant of a
dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of vermin infestations and/or rodents on the premises. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit
shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only
one infested. Notwithstanding, however, whenever infestation is caused by the
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable rodent-proof or
reasonable vermin-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any
dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
4-8. RODENT HARBORAGES PROHIBITED IN OCCUPIED AREAS. No
occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate boxes, lumber, scrap
metal, or any other similar materials in such a manner that may provide a rodent
harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials shall be
stacked neatly in piles.
4-9. RODENT HARBORAGES PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC AREAS. No owner of
a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit the
accumulation of boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other similar materials in
such a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about shared or public
areas of a dwelling or its premises. Materials stored by the owner or permitted to
be stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly in piles.
4-10. PREVENTION OF FOOD FOR RODENTS. No owner or occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials
that may serve as food for rodents in a site accessible to rodents.
4-11. SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES AND FACILITIES. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
4-12. MINIMUM HEATING CAPABILITY AND MAINTENANCE. In every
dwelling unit or rooming unit when the control of the supplied heat is the
responsibility of a person other than the occupant, a temperature of at least 68o
Fahrenheit or such lesser temperature required by government authority shall be
maintained at a distance of three feet above the floor and three feet from exterior
walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments from
September through May.
4-13. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE. The owner of a multiple family dwelling or
dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible for the
removal of snow and ice from parking lots, driveways, steps and walkways on the
premises. Individual snowfalls of three inches or more, or successive snowfalls
accumulating to a depth of three inches, shall be removed from parking lots and
driveways within 24 hours after cessation of the snowfall. Individual snowfalls of
one inch or more, or successive snowfalls accumulating to a depth of one inch,
shall be removed from steps and walkways within eight hours after cessation of
the snowfall.
4-14. MINIMUM EXTERIOR LIGHTING. The owner of a multiple family dwelling
or dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible for
providing and maintaining effective illumination in all exterior parking lots and
walkways.
4-15. MAINTENANCE OF DRIVING AND PARKING AREAS. The owner of a
multiple family dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be
responsible for providing and maintaining in good condition paved and delineated
parking areas and driveways for tenants.
4-16. MAINTENANCE OF YARDS. The owner of a multiple family dwelling or
dwellings containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible for
providing and maintaining premises yards.
SECTION 5. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES. No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or let to another for
occupancy and dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping,
cooking and eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
5-1. KITCHEN FACILITIES. Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a
room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked and which shall have
adequate circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following:
5-1.1. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly
connected to an approved water supply system and which provides
at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running
water under pressure, and which is connected to an approved
sewer system.
5-1.2. Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking,
and cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not
require refrigeration for safekeeping, and a counter or table for food
preparation. Said cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall
be adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and
shall be of sound construction furnished with surfaces that are
easily cleanable and that will not impart any toxic or deleterious
effect to food.
5-1.3. A stove or similar device for cooking food, and a refrigerator
or similar device for the safe storage of food, which are properly
installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and
efficient operation. Provided that such stove, refrigerator, or similar
devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied
and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy,
in which case sufficient space and adequate connections for the
installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator or similar device
must be provided.
5-2. TOILET FACILITIES. Within every dwelling unit there shall be an
uninhabitable room which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working
condition. In a rental dwelling unit, such room shall have an entrance door which
affords privacy. Said flush water closet shall be equipped with easily cleanable
surfaces, shall be connected to an approved water system that at all times
provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause water
closet to be operated properly, and shall be connected to an approved sewer
system.
5-3. LAVATORY SINK. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink.
Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or if
located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to
the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The
lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and shall be properly connected
to an approved water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate
amount of heated and unheated water under pressure, and shall be connected to
an approved sewer system.
5-4. BATHTUB OR SHOWER. Within every dwelling unit there shall be an
uninhabitable room which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working
condition. In a rental dwelling unit, such room shall have an entrance door which
affords privacy. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the flush
water closet, or in another room, and shall be properly connected to an approved
water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of heated
and unheated water under pressure, and shall be connected to an approved
sewer system.
5-5. STAIRWAYS, PORCHES AND BALCONIES. Every stairway, inside or
outside of a dwelling, and every porch or balcony, shall be kept in safe condition
and sound repair. Every flight of stairs and every porch and balcony floor shall be
free of deterioration. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than
four risers high shall have handrails not less than 30 inches high nor more than
34 inches from the nose of the stair tred to the top of the handrail. Every porch
which is more than four risers high and every balcony shall have handrails 30
inches high and every balcony and landing shall have guardrails not less than 36
inches in height and intermediate rails each 9 inches. Every handrail and
balustrade shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. No flight of
stairs shall have settled out of its intended position or have pulled away from the
supporting or adjacent structures enough to cause a hazard. No flight of stairs
shall have rotting, loose, or deteriorating supports. Excepting spiral and winding
stairways, the treads and risers of every flight of stair shall be uniform in width
and height. Stairways shall be capable of supporting a live load of 100 pounds
per square foot of horizontal projection.
5-6. ACCESS TO DWELLING UNIT. Access to or egress from each dwelling unit
shall be provided without passing through any other dwelling unit.
5-7. DOOR LOCKS. No owner shall occupy nor let to another for occupancy and
dwelling or dwelling unit unless all exterior doors of the dwelling or dwelling unit
are equipped with safe, functioning locking devices. Multiple family dwellings
shall be furnished with door locks as follows:
5-7.1. For the purpose of providing a reasonable amount of safety
and general welfare for persons occupying multiple family dwellings
constructed after May 5, 1969, an approved security system shall
be maintained for each multiple family building to control access.
The security system shall consist of locked building entrance or
foyer doors and locked doors leading from hallways into individual
dwelling units. Dead-latch type door locks shall be provided with
lever knobs (or doorknobs) on the inside of building entrance doors
and with key cylinders on the outside of building entrance doors.
Building entrance door latches shall be of a type that are
permanently locked from the outside and permanently unlocked
from the inside.
5-7.2. Every door that is designed to provide ingress or egress for a
dwelling unit within a multiple family building shall be equipped with
an approved lock that has a deadlocking bolt that cannot be
retracted by end pressure, provided, however, that such door shall
be open able from the inside without the use of a key or special
knowledge or effort.
SECTION 6. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION. No
person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements:
6-1. HABITABLE ROOM VENTILATION. Except where there is supplied some
other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Compliance
Official, every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly
outdoors which can be opened easily with an area of not less than 10% of the
floor area with a minimum of 10 square feet.
6-2. NONHABITABLE ROOM VENTILATION. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment, and every laundry and utility room shall contain at least the
ventilation requirement for habitable rooms contained in Section 7-1, except that
no windows shall be required if such rooms are equipped with a ventilation
system capable of providing for five air changes per hour.
6-3. ELECTRIC SERVICE, OUTLETS AND FIXTURES. Every dwelling unit and
all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric service, functioning
over current protection devices, electric outlets, and electric fixtures which are
properly installed, which shall be maintained in good and safe working condition,
and shall be connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by
the Ordinance, rules and regulations of the City of Gem Lake and by the laws of
the State of Minnesota. The minimum electric outlets and fixtures shall be as
follows:
6-3.1. Dwelling containing one or two dwelling units shall have at
least the equivalent of 60-ampere, three-wire electric service per
dwelling unit as a condition of sale.
6-3.2. Dwelling units shall have at least one branch electric circuit
for each 600 square feet of dwelling unit floor space.
6-3.3. Every habitable room shall have at least one floor or walltype
electric convenience outlet for each 60 square feet or fraction
thereof of the total floor space, and in no case less than two such
electric outlets, provided, however, that one ceiling or wall-type light
fixture may be supplied in lieu of one required electric outlet.
6-3.4. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen, laundry
room, and furnace-room, shall contain at least one supplied ceiling
or wall-type electric light fixture and every bathroom, kitchen, and
laundry room shall contain at least one electric convenience outlet.
6-3.5. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple family
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all
times, so as to provide effective illumination in all parts thereof.
Every public hall and stairway in structures containing not more
than two dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located
light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be
turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
6-3.6. A convenient switch or equivalent device for turning on a light
in each dwelling unit shall be located near the point of entrance to
such unit.
SECTION 7. MINIMUM THERMAL STANDARDS. No person shall occupy as
owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of living therein, which does not have heating facilities which are
properly installed, and which are maintained in safe and good working condition,
and which are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein
to a temperature of at least 68o Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above floor
level and three feet from exterior walls at an outside temperature of -25o
Fahrenheit. Gas or electric appliances designed primarily for cooking or water
heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning
of this section. Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of liquid
fuel does not meet the requirements of this section and is prohibited. No owner
or occupant shall install, operate or use a space heater employing a flame that is
not vented outside the structure in an approved manner.
SECTION 8. GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall occupy as owner,
occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the
purposes of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
8-1. FOUNDATIONS, EXTERIOR WALLS AND ROOFS. The foundation,
exterior walls and exterior roof shall be substantially water tight and protected
against vermin and rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The
foundation element shall adequately support the building at all points. Every
exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting Councils
or timbers, and any other condition which might emit rain or dampness to the
interior portion of the walls or to the exterior spaces of the dwelling. The roof shall
be tight and have no defects which admit rain, and roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls. All exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment. If 25% or
more of the exterior surface of such wood surface is unpainted or determined by
the Compliance Official to be paint blistered, the surface shall be painted. If 25%
or more of the exterior surface of the pointing of any brick, block or tone wall is
loose or has fallen out, the surface shall be repaired.
8-2. WINDOWS, DOORS AND SCREENS. Every window, exterior door, and
hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and
repair. Every window, other than a fixed window or storm window, shall be
capable of being easily opened. Every window, door and frame shall be
constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction as
to completely exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building.
Every open able window or other device required by Section 7-1, shall be
supplied with 16-mesh screens during the insect season.
8-3. FLOORS, INTERIOR WALLS AND CEILINGS. Every floor, interior wall, and
ceiling shall be adequately protected against the passage and harborage of
vermin and rodents, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every
floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding or rotted flooring materials. Every
interior wall and ceiling shall be free of holes and large cracks and loose plaster
and shall be maintained in a tight weatherproof condition. Toxic paint and
materials with a lasting toxic effect shall not be used. Every toilet room and
bathroom floor surface shall be capable of being easily maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
8-4. RODENT PROOF. Every dwelling and accessory structure and the premises
upon which located shall be maintained in a rodent-free and rodent-proof
condition. All openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground or
first floors, and roofs which have a ½" diameter or larger opening shall be rodentproofed
in an approved manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars and other
areas in contact with the soil shall be paved with concrete or other rodent
impervious material.
8-5. FENCE MAINTENANCE. All fences supplied by the owner or agent on the
premises and all fences erected by an occupant on the premises shall consist of
metal, wood, masonry, or other decay resistant material. Fences shall be
maintained in good condition both in appearance and in structure. Wood
materials, other than decay resistant varieties, shall be protected against decay
by use of paint or other preservatives.
8-6. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE MAINTENANCE. Accessory structures
supplied by the owner, agent or tenant occupant on the premises of a dwelling
shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and appearance.
The exterior of such structures shall be made weather resistant through the use
of decay-resistant materials such as paint or other preservatives.
8-7. SAFE BUILDING ELEMENTS. Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and
interior wall, ceilings, inside and outside stair, every porch and balcony, and
every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting loads
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
8-8. FACILITIES TO FUNCTION. Every supplied facility piece of equipment of
utility required under City Ordinances and every chimney and flue shall be
installed and maintained and shall function effectively in a safe, sound and
working condition.
8-9. GRADING AND DRAINAGE. During the period May through October, every
yard, court, passageway, and other portions in the premises on which a dwelling
stands shall be graded and drained so as to be free of standing water that
constitutes a detriment to health and safety.
8-10. YARD COVER. Every yard of a premises on which a dwelling stands shall
be provided with lawn or combined ground cover of vegetation, garden, hedges,
shrubbery, and related decorative materials and such yard shall be maintained
consistent with prevailing community standards.
8-11. DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE OR FACILITIES. No owner, operator,
or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required
under this Ordinance, to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such
temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations
are in process, or during temporary emergencies.
SECTION 9. MAXIMUM DENSITY, MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION
REQUIREMENTS. No person shall occupy nor permit or let to be occupied any
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements:
9-1. PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY OF DWELLING UNIT. With the exception of
owners occupying a respective dwelling unit prior to June 1, 1975, the maximum
permissible occupancy of any dwelling unit shall be determined as follows:
9-1.1. For the first occupant, 150 square feet of habitable room floor
space and for every additional occupant thereof, at least 100
square feet of habitable room floor space.
9-1.2. In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed 2
times the number of habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling
unit.
9-2. ONE FAMILY PER DWELLING UNIT. Not more than one family, except for
temporary guests, shall occupy a dwelling unit.
9-3. MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHT. In order to qualify as habitable, rooms shall
have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet, 6 inches, except that in attics or
top-half-stores used for sleeping, study, or similar activities, the ceiling height
shall be not less than 7 feet, 6 inches over at least 40% of the floor area. In
calculating the floor area of such rooms in attics or top-half-stores, only those
portions of the floor area in the room having a clear ceiling height of 5 feet or
more may be included.
9-4. ACCESS THROUGH SLEEPING ROOMS AND BATHROOMS. No dwelling
unit built after 1940 and containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have a
room arrangement such that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment
intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be gained
only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall the room arrangement be
such that access to a sleeping room can be gained only by going through
another sleeping room. A bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be
used as the only passageway to any habitable room, hall, basement or cellar or
to the exterior of any dwelling unit.
SECTION 10. LICENSING OF RENTAL UNITS. From and after January 1, 2008,
no person shall operate a rental dwelling without first having obtained a license to
do so from the City of Gem Lake as hereinafter provided. All rental licenses shall
expire on December 31, 2010, thereafter every two years. Licenses which have
less than one year remaining on this term shall pay one-half of the license fee.
10-1. LICENSE FEES. Fees for rental unit licenses shall be as set forth by the
City Council in a fee schedule, which the Council shall pass by ordinance from
time to time. The fees shall be due 60 days prior to the license expiration date; in
the cases of new unlicensed dwellings, license fees shall be due upon issuance
of the certificate of occupancy; in the cases of licensing periods of less than two
years, license fees shall be prorated monthly:
A delinquency penalty of 5% of the license fee for each day of operation without
a valid license shall be charged operators of rental dwellings. Once issued, a
license is nontransferable and the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any
license fee upon revocation or suspension.
10-2. OWNER OR AGENT TO APPLY. License application or renewal shall be
made by the owner of rental units or his legally constituted agent. Application
forms may be acquired from and subsequently filed with the Compliance Official.
The applicant shall supply:
10-2.1. Name, address, and telephone number of dwelling owner,
owning partners if a partnership, corporate officers if a corporation.
10-2.2. Name, address, and telephone number of designated
resident agent, if any.
10-2.3. Name, address and telephone number of vendee, if the
dwelling is being sold through a contract for deed.
10-2.4. Legal address of the dwelling.
10-2.5. Number of dwelling units within the dwelling.
10-2.6. Description of procedure through which tenant inquiries and
complaints are to be processed.
10-3. RESIDENT AGENT REQUIRED. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed for a non-resident owner of rental dwelling units (one who does not
reside in any of the following Minnesota Counties: Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka,
Carver, Dakota, Scott, or Washington) unless such owner designates in writing to
the Compliance Official the name of his resident agent (one who does reside in
any of the following Minnesota Counties: Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver,
Dakota, Scott, or Washington) who is responsible for maintenance and upkeep
and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of
violation of the provisions of the City Ordinance, to receive orders and to institute
remedial action to effect such orders and to accept all service or process
pursuant to law. The Compliance Official shall be notified in writing of any change
of resident agent.
10-4. CONFORMANCE TO LAWS. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed unless the rental dwelling and its premises conform to the Ordinances
of the City of Gem Lake and the laws of the State of Minnesota.
10-5. INSPECTION CONDITION. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed unless the owner of rental units agrees in his application to permit
inspections pursuant to Section 10.
10-6. POSTING OF LICENSE. Every licensee of a multiple dwelling shall cause
to be conspicuously posted in the main entry way or other conspicuous location
therein the current license for the respective multiple dwelling.
10-7. LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. No operating license shall be
transferable to another person or to another rental dwelling. Every person holding
an operating license shall give notice in writing to the Compliance Official within
72 hours after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal
control of any licensed rental dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and
address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental
dwelling or dwellings.
10-8. OCCUPANCY REGISTER REQUIRED. Every owner of a licensed rental
dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
current register of occupancy for each dwelling unit which provides the following
information:
10-8.1. Dwelling unit address.
10-8.2. Number of bedrooms in dwelling unit.
10-8.3. Names of adult occupants and number of adults and
children (under 18 years of age) currently occupying the dwelling
units.
10-8.4. Dates renters occupied and vacated dwelling units.
10-8.5. A chronological list of complaints and request for repair by
dwelling unit occupants, which complaints and requests are related
to the provisions of this Ordinance, and
10-8.6. A similar chronological list of all corrections made in
response to such requests and complaints.
Such register shall be made available for viewing or copying by the
Compliance Official at all reasonable times.
10-9. LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. Every operating license
issued under the provisions of this Ordinance is subject to suspension or
revocation by the City Council should the licensed owner or his duly authorized
resident agent fail to operate or maintain licensed rental dwellings and units
therein consistent with the provisions of the Ordinances of the City of Gem Lake
and the laws of the State of Minnesota. In the event that an operating license is
suspended or revoked by the City Council for just cause, it shall be unlawful for
the owner of his duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any new occupancies
of vacant or thereafter vacated rental units until such time as valid operating
license may be restored by the City Council. Any person violating this provision
shall be guilty of a violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 11. ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION AUTHORITY. The City Clerk
and his designated agents shall be the Compliance Official who shall administer
and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and who are hereby authorized to
cause inspections on a scheduled basis for rental units, or otherwise when
reason exists to believe that a violation of this Ordinance has been or is being
committed. Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable daylight hours and
the Compliance Official shall present evidence of official capacity to the occupant
in charge of a respective dwelling unit.
11-1. INSPECTION ACCESS. Any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of
a dwelling or dwelling unit may refuse to permit free access and entry to the
structure or premise under his control for inspection pursuant to this Ordinance,
whereupon the Compliance Official may seek a court order or administrative
search warrant authorizing such inspection. Any costs incurred by the City in
obtaining said order or warrant shall be charged to the owner or occupant
refusing access.
SECTION 12. UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
(1). Any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which is damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or other which lacks
provision for basic illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities to the extent that
the defects create a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of
the public may be declared unfit for human habitation. Whenever any dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit has been declared unfit for human habitation, the
Compliance Official shall order same vacated within a reasonable time and shall
post a placard on same indicating that it is unfit for human habitation, and any
operating license previously issued for such dwelling shall be revoked.
(2). It shall be unlawful for such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit to be used
for human habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected and
written approval has been issued by the Compliance Official. It shall be unlawful
for any person to deface or remove the declaration placard from any such
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit.
12-1. SECURE UNFIT AND VACATED DWELLINGS. The owner of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which has been declared unfit for human
habitation, or which is otherwise vacant for a period of 60 days or more, shall
make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety and
welfare of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant
dwelling open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard
to the health, safety and welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the
meaning of this Ordinance.
12-2. HAZARDOUS BUILDING DECLARATION. In the event that a dwelling has
been declared unfit for human habitation and the owner has not remedied the
defects within a prescribed reasonable time, the dwelling may be declared a
hazardous building and treated constant with the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes.
SECTION 13. COMPLIANCE ORDER. Whenever the Compliance Official
determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the premises
surrounding any of these, fails to meet the provisions of this Ordinance, he may
issue a Compliance Order setting forth the violations of the Ordinance and
ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such violations. This
Compliance Order shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this Ordinance.
(3) Establish a reasonable time for the correction of such violation and notify of
appeal recourse.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may
require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or
agent, or upon any such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
(a) Served upon him personally, or
(b) Sent by registered mail to his last known address, or
(c) Upon failure to effect notice through (a) and (b) as set out in this
Section, posted at a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
which is affected by the notice.
13-1. RIGHT OF APPEAL. When it is alleged by any person to whom a
compliance order is directed that such compliance order is based upon
erroneous interpretation of this Ordinance, such person may appeal the
compliance order to the City Council sitting as a Board of Appeals and
Adjustments. Such appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the
appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the City Council in
cash or cashier’s check, and must be filed with the City Clerk within five (5)
business days after service of the compliance order. The filing of an appeal shall
stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless such a
stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
13-2. BOARD OF APPEALS DECISION. Upon at least five (5) business days
notice to the appellant of the time and place for hearing the appeal, and within
thirty (30) days after said appeal is filed, the Board of Appeals and Adjustments
shall hold a hearing thereon. The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may
reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in part, the compliance order and may
order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal is upheld.
13-3. RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. It shall be unlawful for
the owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit upon whom a pending
compliance order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose thereof to another person until the provision of the tag or compliance
order have been complied with unless such owner shall furnish to the grantee,
lessee, or mortgagee a true copy of any notice of violation or compliance order
and shall obtain and possess a receipt of acknowledgement. Anyone securing an
interest in the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit who has received notice of
the existence of a violation tag or compliance order shall be bound by same
without further service of notice upon him and shall be liable to all penalties and
procedures provided by this Ordinance.
13-4. PENALTIES. Any person who fails to comply with a compliance order after
right of appeal has expired, and any person who fails to comply with a modified
compliance order within the time set therein, upon conviction therefore shall be
punished as hereinafter provided for conviction of violation of this Ordinance.
13-5. EXECUTION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS BY PUBLIC AUTHORITY.
Upon failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set therein and no
appeal having been taken, or upon failure to comply with a modified compliance
order within the time set therein, the criminal penalty established hereunder
notwithstanding, the City Council may by resolution cause the cited deficiency to
be remedied as set forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall
be a lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a
special assessment in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429,
but the assessment shall be payable in a single installment.
SECTION 14. ALTERNATIVE SANCTIONS. Notwithstanding the availability of
the foregoing compliance procedures and the penalties, whenever the
Compliance Official determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
or the premises surrounding any of these fails to meet the requirements set forth
in this Ordinance, the Compliance Official may issue a violation tag summoning
the responsible person into court or request the issuance of a criminal complaint
and arrest warrant.
SECTION 15. PENALTIES. In addition to any fines, costs, or assessments
provided for by this Ordinance or other City Ordinances, the City may prosecute
a violation of any provision of this Ordinance as a misdemeanor, and a person, if
convicted, may be punished by the maximum fine and term of imprisonment
provided by Minnesota Statutes § 609.02, subd. 3, as that statute may be
amended from time to time.
SECTION 16. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 17. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Dated: _________________________
_______________________________ __________________________
Paul Emeott, Mayor Bill Short, City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 84
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A GENERAL PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
FOR THE LICENSING OF BUSINESSES WITHIN THE CITY.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. GENERAL LICENSING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
1.1 The City Clerk shall be responsible for processing and issuing city licenses.
1.2 Revocation and suspension of licenses.
1.2.1 The City Council shall have the power to suspend or revoke the
license of any person licensed by the City found to be in violation of the
terms of their license or other applicable laws, providing the person
holding such license is given 20 days’ notice and granted the opportunity
to be heard before such action is taken. If and when such notice is sent to
the legal address of the licensee and he fails or refuses to appear at the
hearing, his license will be automatically suspended or revoked five days
after the date of the hearing.
1.2.2 When a license is suspended under 1.2.1, the period of suspension
shall not be less than 30 days nor more than one year, such period being
determined by the city council.
1.2.3 When any person holding a license issued by the City has been
convicted for the second time by a court of competent jurisdiction for
violation of any of the sections of a City ordinance relating to the subject
matter of the license, the city council shall revoke the license of the person
so convicted. Such person may not make application for a new license for
a period of one year.
1.3 Enforcement and Penalties. In addition to any fines, costs, or assessments
provided for by City Ordinances, the City may prosecute a violation of any
provision of this chapter as a misdemeanor, and a person, if convicted, may be
punished by the maximum fine and term of imprisonment provided by Minnesota
Statutes § 609.02, subd. 3, as that statute may be amended from time to time.
SECTION 2. FEES. Unless otherwise specifically or expressly provided, the
amount of fees due the city for the licensed activities described in this chapter
shall be set from time to time by the City Council, and a schedule of such fees
shall be on file and available for inspection by the public.
SECTION 3. POSTING OF BUSINESS LICENSES. Business licenses, issued by
the City of Gem Lake, shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the licensed
business location, viewable to the public who visits this licensed business.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force
from and after its passage and publication.
Dated: _________________________
_______________________________ __________________________
Paul Emeott, Mayor Bill Short, City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 85
AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF REGULATING HOME
BUSINESSES, HOME MERCHADISE SALES AND OTHER HOME
OCCUPATIONS.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. LICENSE REQUIRED.
1.1. Home occupations shall require a Special Home Occupation license
if any of the following circumstances would occur more than 30 days each
year:
a) Employment of a non-resident in the home occupation.
b) Customers or customers’ vehicles on the premises.
c) Manufacture, assembly or processing of products or materials on
the premises.
d) More than one vehicle associated with the home occupation
which is classified as a light commercial vehicle.
e) A vehicle and/or trailer used in the home occupation, and parked
on the premises, which exceeds a one ton payload capacity.
f) If the home occupation produces any waste that should be
treated or regulated.
g) A vehicle used in a home occupation, and parked on the
premises, with greater than a one ton payload capacity is needed.
Parking of this vehicle shall only be allowed by the issuance of a
conditional-use parking permit issued by the City of Gem Lake.
1.2 Home occupations, requiring a license, shall be subject but not limited
to the following requirements:
a) No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood. The need for off-street parking shall not exceed
more than three off-street parking spaces for the home occupation
at any given time, in addition to the parking spaces required by the
residents.
b) No more than one non-resident employee shall be allowed to
work on the premises. Nonresident employees who work off the
premises may be allowed to visit the premises. If an on-site
employee is parking on site, off-site employees shall not leave their
vehicles on site. If there is no on-site employee vehicle parked on
site, one off-site employee vehicle may be parked on site.
c) No vehicle associated with the home occupation, including
customers or employees, shall be parked on the street or block
sidewalks or public easements. Private vehicles used by the
residents shall not be included in this subsection.
d) An area equivalent to no more than 20 percent of each level of
the house, including the basement and garage, shall be used in the
conduct of a home occupation.
e) There shall be no change visible off the premises in the outside
appearance of the building or premises that would indicate the
conduct of a home occupation, other than one nameplate sign as
permitted by Section 19.6.3 of the Gem Lake Zoning Code.
f) No more than 20 percent of business income shall come from
the sale of products produced off site unless approved by the City
Council.
g) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
which creates noise, vibration, light, glare, fumes, smoke, dust,
odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off
the premises. If electrical interference occurs, no equipment or
process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes
fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
h) There shall be no fire, safety or health hazards.
i) A home occupation shall not include the repair of internal
combustion engines, body repair shops, spray painting, machine
shops, welding, ammunition manufacturing or sales, the sale or
manufacture of firearms or knives or other objectionable uses as
determined by the city. Machine shops are defined as places
where raw metal is fabricated, using machines that operate on
more than 120 volts of current.
j) Any noncompliance with this subsection shall constitute grounds
for the denial or revocation of the home occupation license.
k) The City Council may waive any of these requirements if the
home occupation is located at least 350 feet from a residential lot
line.
l) The City Council may add any additional requirements that it
deems necessary to ensure that the operation of the home
occupation will be compatible with nearby land uses.
SECTION 2. APPLICATION PROCEDURE. An application for a licensed home
occupation shall be filed with the City Clerk. Upon submitting the application, the
applicant shall also pay the license fee, which shall be set by the City Council.
Other costs for mailings made to adjacent property owners and publication fees
shall also be charged. The Clerk shall forward the completed license application
to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the
hearing shall be mailed, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to the
owners of all properties located within 350 feet of any lot line of the property on
which the home occupation is proposed. The notice shall also be published in
the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of hearing.
SECTION 3. YEARLY LICENSE RENEWAL. Each person holding a license to
conduct a home occupation shall apply to the City Clerk each January for
renewal. Prior to issuance of a license renewal, the city shall determine that all
licensing conditions and city ordinances are being met.
SECTION 4. REVOCATION AND APPEAL PROCESS.
4.1 The City Clerk shall revoke a home occupation license where
compliance with the licensing conditions or city ordinances cannot be
obtained or where the home occupation has been discontinued.
Revocation may occur at any time that compliance with license conditions
or city ordinances cannot be obtained.
4.2 The holder of a home occupation license whose license has been
revoked by the city clerk may appeal the decision to the City Council. To
request an appeal, a written letter or request must be submitted to the City
Clerk within 30 days of the license revocation. The City Council shall hold
a public hearing on the appeal, using the notification procedures in section
2. After conducting the public hearing, the Council may revoke the
license, allow the license to continue, or allow continuation with additional
conditions upon the license. When applying additional conditions, the
Council may direct that it receive a follow-up report at a time prior to the
annual license renewal.
SECTION 5. TRANSFER PROHIBITED. No license granted for a home
occupation shall be transferable from person to person or place to place.
SECTION 6. TRANSITION. All persons currently conducting a home occupation
shall have six (6) months from the effective date of this Ordinance to apply for a
license or otherwise become compliant with the terms of this Ordinance.
SECTION 7. OCCASIONAL SALES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
A) Personal vehicles, trailers, recreational equipment and similar items
may be sold in the residential areas of the City of Gem Lake if;
1) The merchandise sold is the personal property of the occupant
or property owner.
2) Sales of such personal merchandise shall be limited to no more
than two (2) merchandise items per calendar year, unless
approved by the City Council.
3) Merchandise items for sale shall not be placed in any portion of
the public right-of-way, public boulevard or required front yard
except in a designated improved driveway.
4) For Sale signs on or in the merchandise shall be limited to two
(2) square feet in size.
B) Estate, garage or rummage sales may be held in residential areas of
the City of Gem Lake if:
1) Merchandise offered for sale is the personal property of
occupant or property owner.
2) Sales shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) consecutive
days and occurring no more that two (2) times within one
calendar year per property, unless approved by the City
Council.
3) Merchandise items for sale shall not be placed in any portion of
the public right-of-way, public boulevard, or required front yard
except in the designated improved driveway to the site where
the sale is taking place.
4) Signs for such events shall be governed by Section 19 of the
Gem Lake Zoning Code.
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force
from and after its passage and publication.
Dated: _________________________
_______________________________ __________________________
Paul Emeott, Mayor Bill Short, City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 86
AN ORDINANCE DEFINING NUISANCES, PROHIBITING THEIR CREATION
OR MAINTENANCE AND PROVIDING FOR ABATEMENT AND PENALTIES
FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
Section 1. Public Nuisance Defined. A public nuisance is a thing, act, or use of
property which shall:
1.1 Annoy, injure, or endanger the health, safety, comfort, or repose of the public;
1.2 Offend public decency;
1.3 Unlawfully interfere with the use of or obstruct, or tend to obstruct or render
dangerous for passage, a public water, park, square, street, alley, or highway;
1.4 Depreciate the value of the property of the inhabitants of the City of Gem
Lake or of a considerable number thereof; or
1.5 In any way render the inhabitants of the City of Gem Lake, or a considerable
number thereof, insecure in life or in use of property.
Section 2. Definitions.
2.1. The term "City" as used herein means the City of Gem Lake.
2.2. The term "person" as used herein includes any person, firm, or corporation,
and the singular shall include the plural.
2.3. Where references are made herein to particular officers, councils, boards, or
agencies, such officers, councils, boards, or agencies are those of the City of Gem
Lake.
2.4. The term "Council" as used herein means the City Council of the City of
Gem Lake.
Section 3. Public Nuisances Affecting Health, Safety, Comfort, or Repose. The
following are hereby declared to be public nuisances, affecting health, safety, comfort, or
repose:
3.1 All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;
3.2 All diseased animals running at large;
3.3 Milk which is produced by cows which have not been tested and found free of
tuberculosis within the year previous to the offering of such milk for sale to the
public;
3.4 Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
3.5 Accumulations of manure or rubbish;
3.6 Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
3.7 Dumping the contents of any cesspool, privy vault, or garbage can except at
places authorized by law;
3.8 All noxious weeds and other rank growth;
3.9 An accumulation of tin cans, bottles, or trash or debris of any nature or
description; and the throwing, dumping, or depositing of any dead animals,
manure, garbage, waste, decaying matter, ground, sand, stones, ashes, rubbish, tin
cans, or other materials of any kind on private property;
3.10 Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, and soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities;
3.11 Offensive trades and businesses as defined by statute or ordinance not
licensed as provided by law;
3.12 All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease;
3.13 The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are
placed in the hands of an adult person by someone properly licensed; and
3.14 All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations, and uses of property which are
deemed by the board of health to be a menace to the health of the inhabitants of
the City or a considerable number thereof.
Section 4. Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency. The following are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
4.1 All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards;
4.2 Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatuses used in such occupations;
4.3 All houses kept for the purposes of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses.
4.4 All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered, or
given away in violation of law, or where persons are permitted to resort for the
purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors as a beverage contrary to law, or where
intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter, or distribution in violation of law,
and all liquor bottles, kegs, pumps, bars, and other property kept at and used for
maintaining such a place;
4.5 Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor or any
immoral purpose;
4.6 All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, newspapers,
and billboards;
4.7 The public use of profane or obscene language;
4.8 The looking into or peeping through doors, windows, or openings of private
homes by methods of stealth and without proper authority and by surreptitious
methods, or what is commonly known as "window peeping"; and
4.9 All other things, acts, omissions, or occupations that may be considered
detrimental to the moral well being of the inhabitants of the City or a considerable
number thereof.
Section 5. Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following are declared to
be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
5.1 All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twelve (12) hours after
the snow and ice has ceased to be deposited thereon;
5.2 All wires which are strung less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of any
public street or alley;
5.3 All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by fire,
decay, or otherwise to an extent exceeding one half their original value or which
are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public;
5.4 All explosives, inflammable liquids, and other dangerous substances of
materials stored or accumulated in any manner or in any amount other than that
provided by law or ordinance;
5.5 All use of display of fireworks except as provided by law or ordinance;
5.6 All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
5.7 All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected in violation of
fire ordinances concerning manner and materials and construction;
5.8 Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use of the public of
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds, except under such conditions as are
provided by ordinance, and any other excavation left unprotected or uncovered
indefinitely or allowed to exist in such manner as to attract minor children;
5.9 Radio aerials strung or erected in any manner except that provided by law or
ordinance;
5.10 The piling, storing, or keeping of old machinery, wrecked or junked vehicles,
and other junk or debris;
5.11 The use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk, or any use of a
public street or sidewalk, which cause large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of public streets or sidewalks;
5.12 All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over public streets or
sidewalks, or so situated as to endanger public safety, not constructed and
maintained as provided by law or ordinance or without proper permit;
5.13 The allowing of rain, water, ice, or snow to fall from any building on any
public street or sidewalk or to flow across any public sidewalk;
5.14 All dangerous, unguarded machinery, equipment, or other property in any
public place, or so situated or operated on private property as to attract minor
children;
5.15 The distributing of handbills except as provided by law or ordinance;
5.16 Throwing, dropping, or releasing printed matter, paper, or any other material
or objects over and upon the City from an airplane, balloon, or other aircraft, or in
such a manner as to cause such materials to fall on land in the City;
5.17 Placing entrance culverts, or doing any act which may alter or affect the
drainage of public streets or alleys or the surface of grade of public streets, alleys,
or sidewalks without proper permit;
5.18 Making repairs to motor vehicles or tires in public streets or alleys, excepting
only emergency repairs when it will not unduly impede or interfere with traffic;
5.19 Throwing, placing, depositing, or burning leaves, trash, lawn clippings,
weeds, grass, or other material in the streets, alleys, or gutters;
5.20 Erecting, painting, or placing of unauthorized traffic signs or advertising
signs in streets or alleys or on sidewalks;
5.21 All unnecessary interference and disturbance of radios or TV sets caused by
defective electrical appliances and equipment or improper operation thereof; and
5.22 All other conditions, acts, or things which are liable to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone.
Section 6. Traffic and Vehicles.
6.1 Snowmobiles
6.1.1. Incorporation by Reference. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes,
Sections 84.81 through 84.90, and the provisions of the Regulations of the
Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources contained in Sections 7460.5100
and 7460.5200 of Minnesota Rules 1989, and any amendments to those statutes or
regulations or substitutes for those statutes or regulations that may from time to
time become effective, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
6.1.2. Limitation of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile in the
City of Gem Lake except on public trails, waterways, and highways specifically
designated for such use, or on private property where lawful permission has been
obtained from the property owner, occupant, or lessee. No snowmobile shall be
operated within any public right-of-way or on a public sidewalk or trail provided
or used for pedestrian or bicycle travel.
6.1.3. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile in the City of
Gem Lake between the hours of eleven (11) o'clock p.m. and seven (7) o'clock
a.m. prevailing time in Ramsey County, Sunday through Thursday, and from one
o'clock a.m. to seven o'clock a.m. on other days, including the day preceding a
national holiday.
6.1.4. Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile in the City of Gem Lake at a
speed in excess of limits specifically posted for such use or at a speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour within one hundred fifty (150) feet or any fisherman,
fish house, pedestrian, skier, skater, skating rink, sliding area, ski tow area, or
other areas where such operation would conflict with or endanger other persons or
property.
6.1.5. Tow Bars. No person shall operate a snowmobile so as to tow any person,
sled, or other conveyance except by the use of a rigid low bar attached to the rear
of such snowmobile. Persons towing disabled snowmobiles shall be exempt.
6.1.6. Mandatory Lights. No person shall operate a snowmobile unless such
vehicle is equipped with a head light and tail light that are illuminated at all times
during such operation. Snowmobiles equipped with an engine of five (5)
horsepower or less shall be exempt.
6.1.7. Mandatory Pennant. No person shall operate a snowmobile unless such
vehicle is equipped with a red or orange blaze pennant flag of at least forty (40)
square inches in area and displayed at a height of not less than five (5) feet above
the roadway.
6.1.8 Authorized snowmobiles. Authorized snowmobiles may be used on any
public property within the City for rescue, emergency or law enforcement
purposes.
6.2 All Terrain Vehicles – (ATVs)
6.2.1. Limitation of Operation. No person shall operate an all terrain vehicle in
the City of Gem Lake except on public trails, waterways, and highways
specifically designated for such use, or on private property where lawful
permission has been obtained from the property owner, occupant, or lessee. No all
terrain vehicle shall be operated within any public right-of-way or on a public
sidewalk or trail provided or used for pedestrian or bicycle travel.
6.2.2. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate an all terrain vehicle in the
City of Gem Lake between the hours of eleven (11) o'clock p.m. and seven (7)
o'clock a.m. prevailing time in Ramsey County, Sunday through Thursday, and
from one o'clock a.m. to seven o'clock a.m. on other days, including the day
preceding a national holiday.
6.2.3. Speed. No person shall operate an all terrain vehicle in the City of Gem
Lake at a speed in excess of limits specifically posted for such use or at a speed in
excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour within one hundred fifty (150) feet or any
fisherman, fish house, pedestrian, skier, skater, skating rink, sliding area, ski tow
area, or other areas where such operation would conflict with or endanger other
persons or property.
6.2.4 Authorized snowmobiles. Authorized all terrain vehicles may be used on
any public property within the City for rescue, emergency or law enforcement
purposes.
6.3 Use of Streets and Highways; Incorporating State Traffic Laws
6.3.1. Highway Traffic Regulation Act Incorporated by Reference. The
regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169, and any amendments
thereto or substitutes therefor that may from time to time become effective, are
hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways, streets, and
alleys within the City of Gem Lake and are hereby incorporated in and made a
part of this Code as completely as if set out here in full.
6.3.2. Penalty. Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in 6.2.1 is a
violation of this Code when it occurs within the City of Gem Lake.
6.4 Parking Regulations
6.4.1 In General. It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
(7) In a sign-posted fire lane;
(8) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(9) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(10) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(11) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
(12) On any bridge or elevated structure of a street;
(13) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(14) In front of a mailbox during the hours of 9:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Monday through Saturday. Postal carriers must be able to drive into and
out of the delivery area without backing up.
6.4.2 Winter Parking Regulations. In the event of snow accumulation of two
(2) inches or greater, no owner or operator of any vehicle shall park or allow any
vehicle to stand on any street until snow has been removed from the street. Any
vehicle found standing on the street in violation of this paragraph may be
summarily removed by the city and stored in a safe storage facility. The owner or
operator shall be responsible for the towing and storage costs incurred in
removing the vehicle.
6.4.3 Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of 6.3.1 shall be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor.
Section 7. Weapons
7.1. No person in the City of Gem Lake shall have in his possession, except
within his own domicile, or carry, use, or discharge any air gun, "BB" gun, gasoperated
or spring gun, or any other similar type instrument for the purpose of
throwing or projecting missiles of any kind whatsoever, whether such instrument
is called by any name set forth or any other name.
7.2. The prohibition of 7.1 above shall apply in private grounds or premises under
circumstances when such instrument can be and is fired, discharged, or operated
in such a manner as to endanger persons, property or wild animals or birds; and
further provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
carrying of any type gun whatsoever when unloaded and properly cased.
7.3. Any person wishing to discharge any instrument referred to in 7.1 for some
special reason or purpose must secure a written permit from the City Council.
Section 8. Curfew for Minors
8.1. Restrictions on Minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of
sixteen (16) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public places and public
buildings, places of entertainment and amusement, vacant lots, and other
unsupervised places in the City of Gem Lake between the hours of ten o'clock
p.m. and five o'clock a.m. the following day. It shall be unlawful for any minor
who is sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or
play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds,
public places, and public buildings, places of entertainment and amusement,
vacant lots, and other supervised places in the City of Gem Lake between the
hours of twelve o'clock midnight and five o'clock the following morning.
Provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her guardian, or other adult person having the care and
custody of the minor, to a minor who is upon an emergency errand or other
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor, or where the presence of said minor in
said place or places is connected with and required by some legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and
custody of the minor, or where the presence of said minor in said place or places
is connected with and required by some legitimate business, trade, profession, or
occupation in which said minor is permitted by law to be engaged.
8.2. Duties of Parents or Guardians. It shall be unlawful for the parent,
guardian, or other adult person having charge of a minor under the age of eighteen
(18) years to permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon
the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public
grounds, places, and public buildings, places of entertainment and amusement,
vacant lots and other unsupervised places in the City of Gem Lake during the
hours prohibited by this ordinance; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, where
the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or
her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor, or where the presence of said minor in said place is connected with and
required by some legitimate business, trade, profession, or occupation in which
said minor is permitted by law to be engaged.
8.3. Minors in Amusement Places. No person, operating or in charge of any
place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years to remain in such place during the hours prohibited
by this ordinance; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply when such minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
Section 9. Duty of owners and occupants; removal of nuisances by City
9.1 Ice, snow, and rubbish from sidewalks. The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep such walk safe
for pedestrians. No such owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt, leaves, or
rubbish to remain on the sidewalk longer than 24 hours after its deposit.
9.2 Weeds. Any weeds, whether noxious as defined by law or not, growing upon
any lot or parcel of land outside the traveled portion of any public street or alley
in the City to a height of six (6) inches or greater or which have gone or are about
to go to seed are hereby declared a nuisance. The owner and the occupant shall
abate or prevent the nuisance on the property and on land outside the traveled
portion of the public street or alley abutting on public property. The City shall
give the owner and occupant written notice directing the abatement of such
weeds, and stating that if not destroyed within ten (10) days of the notice, the
weeds shall be destroyed by the City at the expense of the owner, and that, if not
paid, the charge for such work shall be made a special assessment against the
property concerned.
9.3 Removal by City. The City Public Works Supervisor may cause removal of
the nuisances specified in 9.1 and 9.2 upon expiration of the period of time given
the owner and occupant in those sections to remove the nuisance. The City Public
Works Supervisor shall keep a record showing the cost of the removal adjacent to
each separate lot and parcel.
Section 10. Methamphetamine Labs.
10.1 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare and
to reduce public exposure to health risks where law enforcement officers have
determined that hazardous chemicals from a suspected clandestine drug lab or
chemical dump site may exist. These conditions present health and safety risks to
occupants and visitors of such structures and land through fire, explosion and skin
and respiratory exposure to chemicals. The City Council finds that such sites may
contain hazardous chemicals, substances, or residues that place people,
particularly children or adults of child-bearing age, at risk of exposure through
inhabiting the property, visiting the property or using or being exposed to
contaminated personal property.
10.2 Definitions.
10.2.1 “Child” means any person less than 18 years of age.
10.2.2 “Chemical dump site” means any place or area where chemicals
or other waste materials have been located.
10.2.3 “Clandestine drug lab” means the unlawful manufacture or
attempt to manufacture controlled substances.
10.2.4 “Clandestine drug lab site” means any place or area where law
enforcement has determined that conditions associated with the operation
of an unlawful clandestine drug lab exist. A clandestine drug lab site
includes any dwellings, accessory structures, buildings, a chemical dump
site, a vehicle, boat, trailer or other similar appliance or any other area,
land or location.
10.2.5 “Cleanup” means proper removal and/or containment of
substances hazardous to humans and/or the environment at a clandestine
drug lab site or chemical dump site.
10.2.6 “Controlled substance” means any drug, substance or immediate
precursor in Schedules I through V of Minnesota Statutes Section 152.02.
The term does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages,
intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
10.2.7 “Owner” means any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who
owns, in whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle, boat,
trailer or other location associated with a clandestine drug lab site or
chemical dump site.
10.2.8 “Public Health Nuisance” means a nuisance as defined above or
under Minnesota Statute Section 145A.02, subdivision 17.
10.2.9 “Remediation” means methods such as assessment, evaluation,
testing, venting, detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition,
and/or removal of contaminated materials from a clandestine drug lab site
or chemical dump site.
10.3. Declaration of Property As a Public Health Nuisance.
10.3.1. Any property containing a clandestine drug lab or chemical dump
site will be declared a public health nuisance.
10.3.2. No person may occupy, enter or allow occupancy or entrance to
property declared a public health nuisance under this Section until such
declaration is vacated or modified to allow occupancy.
10.4. Law Enforcement Notice to Other Authorities.
Upon identification of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site
deemed to place neighbors, visiting public, or present and future occupants of the
affected property at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants and other
associated conditions, law enforcement officials shall notify the City
Environmental Health Official and other appropriate municipal, child protection,
and public health authorities of the property location, the property owner if
known, and conditions found.
10.5. Seizure of Property.
10.5.1. If a clandestine drug lab or chemical dump site is located inside a
vehicle, boat, trailer, or other form of moveable personal property, law
enforcement authorities may immediately seize such property and
transport it to a more secure location.
10.5.2. Personal property may not be removed from a clandestine drug lab
site or a chemical dump site without the prior consent from the City
Environmental Health Official.
10.6. Action by City Environmental Health Official.
10.6.1. Upon notification by law enforcement authorities, the City
Environmental Health Official or other appropriate municipal or public
health authority will issue a Declaration of Public Health Nuisance for the
affected property and post a copy of the Declaration at all probable
entrances to the dwelling or property.
10.6.2. Removal of the posted Declaration of Public Health Nuisance by
anyone other than the Environmental Health Official, law enforcement
authorities, or their designees, is prohibited.
10.6.3. The City Environmental Health Official shall also attempt to notify
the following parties of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance:
1. Owner of the property;
2. Occupants of the property;
3. Neighbors within close proximity that can be reasonably
affected by the conditions found;
4. The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department; and
5. Other state and local authorities, such as the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Department
of Public Health, which are known to have public and
environmental protection responsibilities applicable to the
situation.
10.6.4. Any rental license issued by the City for the property is
immediately suspended upon issuance of the Declaration of Public Health
Nuisance. Such license will be reinstated only after full compliance with
an abatement order.
10.6.5. After issuance of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance, the
City Environmental Health Official will issue an order to the property
owner to abate the public health nuisance. The abatement order will
include the following:
1. A copy of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance;
2. An order to immediately vacate those portions of the
property, including building or structure interiors, which
may place the occupants or visitors at risk;
3. Notification of suspension of the rental license, if
applicable;
4. A summary of the owner’s and occupant’s responsibilities;
5. Information on locating professional services necessary to
remove and abate the public health nuisance status as
provided in this Ordinance and Minnesota Statute Section
145A.04; and
6. Information about the potentially hazardous condition of
the clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site.
10.7. Responsibilities of Owner.
10.7.1. Upon receipt of an abatement order by the City’s Environmental
Health Official, the property owner must, at the owner’s expense:
1. Immediately vacate those portions of the property, including
building or structure interiors, that may place the occupants or
visitors at risk. This includes dwellings, buildings, motor
vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances or any other affected area or
location. No person shall occupy, enter or allow occupancy or
entrance to a building or structure declared a Public Health
Nuisance until such declaration is vacated or modified to allow
occupancy;
2. Properly secure and post warning signs on the perimeter of any
contaminated areas on the property in an effort to avoid
exposure to unsuspecting parties;
3. Promptly contract with one or more acceptable environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firms (acceptable firms are those
that have provided assurance of appropriate equipment,
procedures, and personnel, as determined by the Minnesota
Department of Health) to accomplish the following:
A. A detailed on-site assessment of the extent of
contamination at the site and the contamination of the
personal property therein;
B. Soil testing of the site and testing of all property and
soil in proximity to the site that the environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firm determines may have
been affected by the conditions found at the site;
C. A complete cleanup of all property and soil at the site
and in proximity to the site that is found to be affected
by conditions found at the site (including but not
limited to, the cleanup or removal of contaminated
plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures and
contaminated soil) or a demolition of the site and a
complete cleanup of the demolished site;
D. Remediation testing and follow-up testing to determine
all health risks are sufficiently reduced, according to the
Minnesota Department of Health guidelines, to allow
safe human occupancy and use of the site and use of the
personal property therein.
4. Regularly notify the City of actions taken and reach agreement
with the City on the cleanup schedule. The City shall consider
practical limitations and the availability of contractors in
approving the schedule for cleanup; and
5. Provide written documentation to the City of the cleanup
process, including a signed, written statement that the property
is safe for human occupancy and that the cleanup was
conducted in accordance with Minnesota Department of Health
guidelines.
10.7.2. The property may not be re-occupied or used in any manner until
the City has obtained the written statement in paragraph (1)(E) and has
confirmed that the property has been cleaned in accordance with the
guidelines established by the Minnesota Department of Health.
10.8. Owner’s Responsibility for Costs.
The owner is responsible for all costs associated with nuisance abatement
and cleanup of the clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, including, but
not limited to, costs for:
1. Emergency Response;
2. Posting and physical security of the site;
3. Notification of affected parties;
4. Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
5. Laboratory Fees;
6. Cleanup services;
7. Administrative fees; and
8. Other associated costs
10.9. City Authority to Initiate Cleanup and Recovery of Costs.
10.9.1. If, within ten (10) days after service of notice of the Declaration of
Public Health Nuisance, the City is unable to locate the property owner or if
the City Environmental Health Official determines that the owner refuses to,
or cannot pay the costs, or arrange timely assessment and cleanup that is
acceptable to the City, the City Environmental Health Official is authorized to
proceed in a prompt manner to initiate the on-site assessment and cleanup.
10.9.2. The City may abate the nuisance by removing any hazardous
structure, building, or otherwise, in accordance with Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 463, Section 13 of this Ordinance or by any other means provided
under law.
10.9.3. If the City abates the public health nuisance, in addition to any
legal remedy, it is entitled to recover all costs associated with such abatement
plus an additional 25% of the City’s costs for administration. In addition to
any other legal remedy, the City may recover costs by civil action against the
person or persons who own the property or by assessing such costs as a
special tax against the property in the manner that taxes and special
assessments are certified and collected pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section
429.101.
10.10. Authority to Modify or Remove Declaration of Public Health
Nuisance.
10.10.1. The Environmental Health Official is authorized to modify the
Declaration conditions or remove the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance.
10.10.2. Such modifications or removal of the Declaration shall only occur
after documentation from a qualified environmental or cleaning firm stating
that the health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential
dwelling occupants, are sufficiently abated or corrected to allow safe
occupancy of the dwelling.
Section 11. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Council to enforce the provisions of
this ordinance, and the Council may, by resolution, delegate to other officers or agencies
power to enforce particular provisions of this ordinance, including the power to inspect
private premises, and the officers charged with enforcement of this ordinance shall take
all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public
nuisances.
Section 12. Powers of Officers. Whenever, in the judgment of the officer charged with
enforcement, it is determined upon investigation that a public nuisance is being
maintained or exists within the City, such officer shall notify in writing the person
committing or maintaining such public nuisance and require him to terminate and abate
said nuisance and to remove such conditions or remedy such defects. Said written notice
shall be served on the person committing or maintaining said nuisance, in person or by
registered mail. If the premises are not occupied and the address of the owner is
unknown, service on the owner may be had by posting a copy of the notice on the
premises. Said notice shall require the owner or occupant of such premises, or both, to
take reasonable steps within a reasonable time to abate and remove said nuisance, said
steps and time to be designated in said notice, but the maximum time for the removal of
said nuisance after service of said notice shall not in any event exceed thirty (30) days.
Service of notice may be proved by filing an affidavit of service in the office of the City
Clerk setting forth the manner and time thereof.
When an order so given is not complied with, such noncompliance shall be reported
forthwith to the Council for such action as may be necessary and deemed advisable in the
name of the City to abate and enjoin the further continuation of said nuisance.
Section 13. Abatement of Nuisance by Council.
13.1 Normal procedure. If, after such service of notice, the person served fails
to abate the nuisance or make the necessary repairs, alterations, or changes in
accordance with the direction of the Council, the Council may cause such
nuisance to be abated at the expense of the Council and recover such expenditure,
plus an additional twenty-five percent (25%) of such expenditures, by civil action
against the person or persons served; or if service has been had upon the owner or
occupant by ordering the Clerk to extend such sum, plus twenty-five percent
(25%) thereof, as a special tax against the property upon which the nuisance
existed and to certify the same to the county auditor of Ramsey County,
Minnesota, for collection in the same manner as taxes and special assessments are
certified and collected.
13.2 Summary enforcement. In cases where the delay in abatement required to
complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in sections 12 and 13.1
will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health, safety
or welfare, the Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
The officer charged with enforcement shall determine that a public nuisance
exists or is being maintained on premises in the City and that delay in abatement
of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The
enforcement officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises
of the nature of the nuisance and of the City’s decision to seek summary
enforcement and the time and place of the council meeting to consider the
question of summary enforcement. The council shall determine whether or not
the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay
in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth above, and may order
that such nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not
immediately terminated or abated, the Council may order summary enforcement
and abate the nuisance.
13.3 Emergencies. The city may, without notice or other process, immediately
abate any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or
safety.
13.4 Responsibility for cost. In cases of summary or emergency enforcement,
the owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall be
personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative
costs. The clerk shall prepare a bill once costs have been determined and present
it to the owner, due and payable immediately.
Section 14. Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk shall list all
the total unpaid charges for nuisances’ abatement and for each type of current service and
charge described hereunder against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this Ordinance. The Council may then levy the charges against the
property benefited as a special assessment under Minn. Stat. § 429.101 and other
pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection along with current
taxes the following year in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may
determine in each case. Assessments may be levied for charges, including, but not
limited to:
A. Abatement of public nuisances affecting health, morals and decency, peace
and safety, and public property as described above.
B. Removal or treatment of snow, ice, dirt, rubbish, weeds, diseased trees or
public heath and safety as described above.
C. Installation or repair of water service lines, street sprinkling, street flushing,
light street oiling or other dust treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys;
and the operation of a street lighting system.
The City Council of Gem Lake authorizes the Ramsey County Auditor and the Ramsey
County Treasurer to act as agents for the City of Gem Lake in Ramsey County to collect
remaining balances of assessments for improvements in cooperation with the City Clerk
and City Treasurer.
Section 15. Penalties. In addition to any fines, costs, or assessments provided for by this
Ordinance or other City Ordinances, the City may prosecute a violation of any provision
of this Ordinance as a misdemeanor, and a person, if convicted, may be punished by the
maximum fine and term of imprisonment provided by Minnesota Statutes § 609.02, subd.
3, as that statute may be amended from time to time.
Section 16. Repealer. This Ordinance supersedes, replaces and repeals all prior
Ordinances relating to the same subjects contained within this Ordinance. Any portion of
such prior ordinances not incorporated within this Ordinance is expressly repealed.
Section 17. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of
this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than
the part held to be invalid.
Section 18. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its passage and publication.
Dated: February 19, 2008
_______________________________ __________________________
Paul Emeott, Mayor Bill Short, City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 91
AN ORDINANCE DEFINING THE OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
PROCEDURES TO BE USED IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
Section 1. In General
1.1 The City of Gem Lake is a statutory city and a municipal corporation organized and
created under the laws of the State of Minnesota. Gem Lake is organized as an Optional
Plan A city as allowed by Minnesota Statutes, § 412.572 to § 412.591. The City shall
have the powers and rights and be subject to the duties of municipal corporations at
common law. The City shall also exercise the powers granted it by Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 412 and other legislative enactments granting powers to cities.
Section 2. City Council and Mayor
2.1 The City of Gem Lake shall operate through its City Council, whose voting
membership is composed of the Mayor and four elected members, which shall exercise
all legislative and administrative powers of the city.
2.2 The term of office for the Mayor shall be four years.
2.3 Ordinances, Notices and other acts of the council required to be posted for public
viewing shall be posted in a public place to be designated by the City Council each year.
Adopted ordinances and other public notices shall also be published in the official
newspaper, to be selected by the council in January of each year.
Section 3. Boards, Commissions and Committees
3.1 The Council may create such departments and advisory boards and appoint such
officers, employees and agents for the city as may be deemed necessary for the proper
management and operation of municipal affairs.
3.2 All actions of the advisory boards, commissions and committees shall be in the
nature of recommendations to the city council, and the commission shall have no final
authority about any matters, except as the council may lawfully delegate to it.
3.3 Each appointed body shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson in January of
each year. The commission may elect other officers, establish meeting times, and adopt
its own rules of procedure to be reviewed and approved by the city council.
3.4 All meetings of the city’s boards, commissions and committees shall be open to the
public.
3.5 All members of commissions, boards, and committees shall serve without
compensation. However, approved expenses of these bodies shall be paid from available
city funds.
Section 4. Planning Commission.
4.1 The City Council establishes for the city a Planning Commission as an advisory
board to the city council, as provided in Minnesota Statute § 462.354.
4.2 The planning commission shall have at least 3 members appointed by the city
council. Alternate members may also be appointed who will take the place of regular
members who cannot make a specified meeting. The members shall be residents of the
city and may not hold an elected city public office. When possible, the council shall
select commission members to represent various areas of the city and to help meet the
needs of residents.
4.3 The appointments of members to the planning commission shall be for three-year
terms. Upon initial appointment, the council shall appoint one member to a one-year
term, two members to a two-year term, and two members to a three-year term. Later
appointments to fill vacancies shall be to finish the unexpired part of the vacated term.
All terms shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the appointment ends.
4.4 The planning commission shall have the duty to:
(1) Prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan of development for the city.
(2) Conduct hearings and make recommendations to the city council about the
adoption of the city comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto.
(3) Study and make recommendations to the city council about implementing the
comprehensive plan and any land use regulations.
(4) Study and make recommendations to the city council about zoning code
amendments.
(5) Review and make recommendations to the city council on development
applications, such as re-zonings, conditional use permits, variances, vacations,
preliminary plats and home occupation licenses.
(6) Accept such other and further duties as may, from time to time, be directed by
the city council, including conducting hearings.
4.5 The City Council hereby adopts and ratifies all previous actions of the citizen
committees who have served as the City’s planning commissions prior to the adoption of
this Ordinance.
Section 5. Parks and Recreation Commission
5.1 The city council establishes for the city a parks and recreation commission as an
advisory board to the city council.
5.2 The park and recreation commission shall have at least three members appointed by
the city council. The members shall be residents of the city and may not hold an elected
city public office. When possible, the council shall select commission members to
represent various areas of the city and to help meet the needs of residents.
5.3 The appointments of members to the park and recreation commission shall be for
three-year terms. Upon initial appointment, the council shall appoint one member to a
one-year term, two members to a two-year term, and two members to a three-year term.
Later appointments to fill vacancies shall be to finish the unexpired part of the vacated
term. All terms shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the appointment ends.
5.4 The park and recreation commission shall have the duty to:
(1) Study and make recommendations to the city council on the collection,
maintenance and expenditure of funds in the city’s park and recreation fund.
(2) Study and make recommendations to the city council on any necessary
changes to the park dedication ordinance or other city ordinances.
(3) Review and make recommendations to the city council on proposed purchases
of land for parks, trails or other recreational facilities by the city.
(4) Accept such other and further duties as may, from time to time, be directed by
the city council, including conducting hearings.
5.5 The parks and recreation commission created herein is not a park board as defined by
Minnesota Statutes § 412.511 to § 412.531, and shall not exercise the powers granted by
that statute, which are hereby reserved to the city council.
6. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provisions of this
Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than
the part held to be invalid.
7. Effective date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication.
Dated: February 19, 2008
__________________________ ______________________
Paul Emeott – Mayor Bill Short – City Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 92
AN ORDINANCE DESCRIBING THE ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW PROCESS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. State law adopted. The City of Gem Lake hereby adopts the provisions
of Minnesota Statutes, § 116D.04 and 116D.045, and Minnesota Rules Chapter 4410, as
those laws and rules may be amended or altered from time to time, and makes those
provisions a part of this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
SECTION 2. Application. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all land use
applications submitted to the City, including but not limited to zoning amendments,
planned unit development applications, subdivision applications, shoreland and wetland
permits, variances, conditional use permits, and nonconforming use permits. The intent
of this ordinance is to standardize the City’s process for determining when to require
review by Environmental Assessment Worksheet (“EAW”) or Environmental Impact
Statement (“EIS”).
SECTION 3. Determination of Need for Environmental Review.
3.1 The City Planner shall be the person responsible for the administration of this
ordinance, and the rules adopted by reference by this ordinance.
3.2 The City Planner shall be responsible for determining whether an action for
which a permit is required is an action for which an EAW is mandatory under
Minn. R. 4410.4300 and/or an EIS is mandatory under Minn. R. 4410.4400. The
planner shall also determine those proposed actions for which a discretionary
EAW may be required under Minn. R. 4410.1000, subp. 3, and shall notify the
Planning Commission and the City Council of these proposed actions.
3.3 If the City Planner identifies a proposal as potentially requiring a
discretionary EAW, or if the City receives a petition for EAW determination from
the Environmental Quality Board, the decision to require an EAW must be made
by the city council. The planner’s notice or EQB petition shall be referred to the
Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
The city council’s decision on whether or not to require an EAW shall take place
no later than 30 days from receipt of the planner’s notice or petition from the
EQB. Notice of the council’s decision shall be sent to the proposer within five (5)
days of the decision. Copies of this notice shall also be sent to the EQB and
petitioners’ representative if the determination was triggered by a citizen petition.
3.4 If the City Planner identifies a proposal as requiring mandatory
environmental review, the planner may require that review process to begin
immediately.
SECTION 4. Procedures on Determination that EAW is Required.
4.1 If an EAW is required, the proposer of the project shall submit an
“Application for Environmental Review” along with the completed data portions
of the EAW. The applicant shall agree in writing, as a part of the application, to
reimburse the City prior to the issuance of any permits for all reasonable costs,
including legal and consultants’ fees, incurred in preparation and review of the
EAW. The proposer shall make a deposit of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
with the City Treasurer to be held in escrow for the payment of these costs. Any
unexpended funds remaining after final consideration of the EAW by the city
council shall be returned to the proposer within thirty (30) days of the council’s
decision.
4.2 The City Planner shall promptly review the application for completeness and
accuracy. If the city planner determines that the submittal is incomplete, the
submittal shall be returned to the proposer for completion of the missing data. If
the city planner determines that the submittal is complete, the proposer shall be
notified of the acceptance of the submittal within five days. The City shall have
30 days from notification to add supplementary material to the EAW, if
necessary, and to approve the EAW for distribution.
4.3 Upon completion of the EAW for distribution by the city planner, the City
Clerk shall provide mailed notice of the availability of the EAW and date of the
meeting at which the Planning Commission will consider the matter to all
property owners within at least seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of the
boundaries of the property which is the subject of the EAW. Said notice shall be
mailed at minimum ten (10) days before the date of the Planning Commission
meeting during which the EAW will be considered. Failure of a property owner
to receive notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings on the EAW or the
underlying land use proposal.
4.4 The City Clerk shall also send the notices, copies and other material required
by Minn. R. 4410.1500 within five (5) days of the planner’s approval of the
EAW.
4.5 The City Clerk shall receive and collect all written comments on an EAW
submitted during the 30-day EAW review and comment period. The planning
commission and city council may take public comment on the EAW during the
30-day period, provided that notice of the comment time is published and mailed
to the proposer at least ten (10) days prior to the date the commission or council
plans to take public comment.
4.6 When reviewing an EAW or EIS, city staff and the Planning Commission may
suggest design alterations which would lessen the environmental impact of the
action. The City Council may require these design alterations to be made as a
condition for approving the land use proposal when it finds that the design
alterations are necessary to lessen the environmental impact of the action.
4.7 The Planning Commission shall review the EAW and all public commentary
after the close of the comment period, and make a recommendation to the City
Council regarding the need for an EIS. The City Council shall meet no less than 3
days and no more than 30 days after the close of the comment period to decide
whether an EIS is needed for the land use proposal. Both the Planning
Commission and the City Council shall use the standards and procedures set forth
in Minn. R. 4410.1700 to guide their recommendations and decisions.
SECTION 5. Procedure when an EIS is required. The City shall apply and follow the
guidance of Minn. Stat. § 116D.045 and Minn. R. 4410.2000 – 4410.3000 in the
preparation and review of a required EIS.
SECTION 6. Prohibition on Approvals During Environmental Review. No permit
for an action for which an EAW or an EIS is required shall be issued until all costs of
preparation and review which are to be paid by the applicant are paid, and all information
required is supplied in adequate detail and until the environmental review process has
been completed as provided in this article, and pursuant to any written agreements
entered into by the applicant for the permit or permits and the City Council.
SECTION 7. Severability. It is the intention of the City Council that the several
provisions of this Ordinance are separate and that it any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such
judgment shall not effect other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in
such judgment.
SECTION 8. Effective date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its
passage and publication.
Dated October 21, 2008
_________________________________ ___________________________
Paul Emeott – Mayor William Short - Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 95
AN ORDINANCE DESCRIBING REGULATIONS FOR THE LICENSING OF A
PAWNBROKER BUSINESS AND FOR A PAWNBROKER
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. State law adopted. Except as further specified by this Ordinance, the
City of Gem Lake hereby adopts the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 325J,
with reference to definitions, eligibility, business operations, records, charges, and
locations, as those provisions may be amended from time to time, and intends to make
those provisions a part of this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
SECTION 2. License required.
2.1 A person may not engage in business as a pawnbroker or otherwise portray
the person as a pawnbroker unless the person has a valid license authorizing
engagement in the business. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a
license is void.
2.2 A separate license is required for each place of business. A person may obtain
more than one license if the person complies with this chapter for each license.
Licenses are issued for the premises described in the application and shall not be
transferable to a different location. A failure to comply at any one location may
be grounds for revocation of all licenses held by the person.
SECTION 3. Application Procedures.
3.1 An application for a pawnbroker license shall be filed with the City Clerk,
along with the license fee, which shall be set by the City Council from time to
time and published with other city fees and charges.
3.2 The City shall request a background investigation of the applicant, and report
the results of said investigation with the forwarded application. The applicant
shall pay an investigation fee of no more than $500, set by the City Council from
time to time, for investigation within the State of Minnesota. Should the City or
the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension determine that investigation outside the
State of Minnesota is necessary, the applicant shall pay for the cost of the
investigation, up to $10,000.00, through the city.
3.3 The Clerk shall forward the completed application to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall
be mailed, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, to the owners of all
properties located within 350 feet of any lot line of the property on which the
pawnbroker operation is proposed. The notice shall also be published in the
official newspaper at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. After conducting
the hearing, the City Council may grant or refuse the application in its discretion.
3.4 All licenses shall expire on the last day of December of each year. Each
license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if a portion of the
license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be issued for
the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired
fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
3.5 Each person holding a pawnbroker license shall apply to the City Clerk each
January for renewal. Prior to issuance of a license renewal, the City Clerk shall
determine that all licensing conditions and city ordinances are being met.
SECTION 4. Conditions Upon Licenses.
4.1 Before any person shall be licensed as a pawnbroker under this ordinance,
such applicant shall file with the City Clerk a bond in the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) with a duly licensed surety company as surety thereon, with
such surety bond to be approved by the City Clerk and such bond to be approved
as to form and execution by the City Attorney. Conditions of such bond shall be
that the licensee shall observe the sections of this Ordinance or other city
ordinances in relation to the business of the pawnbroker and that such licensee
will conduct such business in conformity therewith and will account for and
deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any goods, wares or merchandise,
article or thing which may have come into the possession of such licensee as
pawnbroker or, in lieu thereof, such licensee shall pay in money to such person
the reasonable value thereof.
4.2 The pawnbroker’s premises must be in compliance with all applicable zoning,
building and fire codes.
4.3 If a pawnbroker shall receive notice through publications, advertisements, or
any other means that any goods, articles or things in the licensee’s possession are
lost or stolen, the licensee or an agent thereof shall immediately give information
to either the City Clerk or the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department that the items
are in the licensee’s possession. The licensee shall not thereafter dispose of the
goods, articles or things except upon written authority from the City Clerk or
Ramsey County Sheriff.
4.4 Any licensee shall immediately report to the Ramsey County Sheriff’s
Department any attempt to sell, trade or barter any merchandise with a serial
number that has been removed, altered, obliterated or otherwise defaced in
violation of state law.
4.5 No licensed premises shall open for business before 8:00 a.m. or remain open
after 9:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
SECTION 5. Revocation, Appeal. A license may be suspended or revoked for failure
to comply with this Ordinance or the provisions of Minnesota Statutes incorporated
herein.
5.1 No expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any license shall impair
or affect the obligation of any preexisting lawful contract between the licensee
and any pledgor.
5.2 The City Clerk shall suspend a pawnbroker license where compliance with
the licensing conditions or city ordinances cannot be obtained. The suspension
shall extend for three months or until the license holder demonstrates compliance
with this ordinance and other applicable law to the city. The City Clerk shall
revoke the license of a pawnbroker in the event of confirmed noncompliance with
this ordinance or other applicable law, conviction of the license holder or an
employee of the licensed operation of a crime which would make the person
ineligible to maintain a pawnbroker license under Minn. Stat. § 325J.03, or where
the licensed operation has been discontinued.
5.3 The holder of a license whose license has been suspended or revoked by the
City Clerk may appeal the decision to the City Council. To request an appeal, a
written letter or request must be submitted to the City Clerk within 30 days of the
adverse license action. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the
appeal, using the notification procedures in section 3.2. After conducting the
public hearing, the Council may uphold the adverse action taken by the Clerk,
overturn the findings of the Clerk allow the license to continue, reduce a
revocation to a suspension for a term set by the council, or allow continuation
with additional conditions imposed upon the license.
5.4 When applying additional conditions or ordering a suspension, the Council
may direct that it receive a follow-up report at a time prior to the annual license
renewal.
5.5 The City Clerk shall notify the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department of any
licensee whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked as
provided by this chapter.
SECTION 6. Severability. It is the intention of the City Council that the several
provisions of this Ordinance are separate and that it any Court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge any provisions of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such
judgment shall not effect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included
in such judgment.
SECTION 7. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its passage and publication.
Dated: October 21, 2008
__________________________________ __________________________
Paul Emeott – Mayor William Short – Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 98
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL
IMPROVEMENTS IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY,
MINNESOTA
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. ASSESSMENT PARTIAL PREPAYMENT PRIVILEGE. One partial
prepayment in the amount of at least One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) may be
paid to the City Clerk for any assessment for local improvements no less than
five days prior to the date the Resolution Adopting and Confirming the
Assessment for the Local Improvement directs the Clerk to transmit a certified
copy of the Assessment Roll to the County Auditor.
SECTION 2. DEFERRED PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS. Pursuant to the
authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 435.193, the City Council may
defer the payment of any special assessment on homestead property owned by
a person who is:
a) 65 years of age or older;
b) retired by virtue of a permanent and total disability; or
c) a member of the Minnesota National Guard or other military reserves
who is ordered into active military service, as defined in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 190.05, as stated in the person’s military orders,
which property is subject to the levying of a special assessment, for whom it
would be a hardship to make payments, as of the date the assessment is
adopted.
SECTION 3. STANDARD OF DISABILITY. To be eligible for deferred payment
of assessments by reason of disability, the applicant must be retired by virtue of
a permanent and total disability and be receiving Social Security payments by
reason of such retirement by virtue of a permanent and total disability, or eligible
to receive such payments as shown by a report from the Department of Health
and Human Services.
SECTION 4. STANDARDS OF HARDSHIP.
4-1. A hardship shall be deemed to exist when:
4-1.1. The adjusted gross household income reported on the applicant’s
most recent Federal Income Tax Return or the total household income of
the applicant as evidenced by the applicant’s most recent Minnesota
Property Tax Refund Return (as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
290A), whichever amount be greater, is less than 150% of the Federal
poverty level for that household, using the guidelines published annually
by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and
4-1.2. The first year’s installment of the proposed special assessment will
increase the aggregate total of the installments of special assessments
against the property for which deferment is requested and payable in the
year of such first installment to a sum equal to more than two percent of
said income, and
4-1.3. The special assessment for which deferment is applied for exceeds
$500.00, and
4-1.4. The applicant’s (and spouse’s) total assets exclusive of that part of
the homestead valuation as determined by the Ramsey County Assessor
to be eligible for homestead classification do not exceed $50,000.00.
4-2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, the City Council
may consider exceptional and unusual circumstances not covered by the
standards and guidelines and grant a deferral as requested: but any
determination shall be made in a non-discriminatory manner which does not give
the applicant an unreasonable preference or advantage over other applicants.
SECTION 5. APPLICATION FOR DEFERRAL. An applicant may apply for
deferred payment of special assessments made after October 15, 2003 for local
improvements by making application therefore to the Department of Property
Taxation, Ramsey County, Minnesota, in accordance with Minnesota Statutes,
Section 435.194. A copy of said application shall be filed with the City Clerk
together with a certification form furnished by the City Clerk to establish the
qualifications of the owner for such deferral. Application for deferral shall be
made within 30 days after the adoption of the assessment roll by the City Council
for those assessment rolls adopted after the effective date of this Ordinance, and
shall be renewed each following year upon the filing of a similar application not
later than October 15. The City Council shall either grant the deferral by majority
vote or deny the deferral. Any assessment, the payment of which is deferred
pursuant hereto by the City Council, may bear interest at the rate of one percent
(1%) in excess of the rate of interest that would have been charged on the
assessment had the assessment payments not been deferred, but not, however,
in excess of the maximum interest rate allowed by law. When the deferred
assessment is granted, the City Clerk shall advise the Ramsey County
Department of Property Taxation, who shall, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 435.194, record a Notice of the deferral with the County Recorder of
Ramsey County which shall set forth the amount of the assessment and the rate
of interest on the deferred assessment payments.
SECTION 6. TERMINATION OF RIGHT TO DEFERRED PAYMENT. The option
to defer payment of special assessments shall terminate and all amounts
accumulated, including accrued interest, shall become due upon the occurrence
of any of the following events:
6-1. The death of the owner, provided that the spouse is otherwise not eligible for
the benefits hereunder;
6-2. The sale, transfer or subdivision of the property or any part thereof;
6-3. If the property should for any reason lose its homestead status;
6-4. If for any reason the City Council shall determine that there would be no
hardship to require immediate or partial payment; or
6-5. Failure to file a renewal application within the time hereinbefore prescribed.
SECTION 7. COLLECTION OF DEFERRED PAYMENT. Upon the occurrence of
one of the events specified in Section 6, the Council shall terminate the deferral.
Thereupon, the City Clerk shall notify the Ramsey County Assessor and the
Ramsey County Department of Property Taxation of the termination, including
the amounts accumulated on unpaid installments plus applicable interest which
shall become immediately due and payable as a result of the termination, and if
not paid prior to November 30th of the year the deferral is terminated, shall be
certified for collection together with the real estate taxes payable in the following
year, and shall be collected by the Ramsey County Treasurer as are other
special assessments.
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or any part thereof, other than the part held to be invalid
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force
after its passage and publication.
Passed by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Minnesota,
this 10th day of February, 2009.
APPROVED: ATTEST:
___________________________ _______________________________
Robert Uzpen, Mayor William Short, City Clerk
Published in the White Bear Press on ________________, 2009.
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 100
AN ORDINANCE DEFINING LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR LOTS AND
PARCELS IN BOTH RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS AND
REQUIRING THE CONTINUED MAINTENACE OF ALL ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPED
AREAS
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Landscaping Ordinance” except as
referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this Ordinance.”
SECTION 2 INTENT OF COUNCIL
2.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to clearly express the City of Gem Lake’s intent
for all properties in the City to be landscaped and to have the landscaping maintained with care.
Properties shall be landscaped to improve the environmental performance of all properties in the
City as well as to meet the aesthetic needs of the general public.
2.2 Landscaping Goals. All landscaping must be designed to protect, preserve, and promote the
aesthetic appeal and overall value of the property. The quantity and quality of the landscape
design should be compatible with the described use for each parcel in a zoning area and the
intended use of the property. The preservation of desirable vegetation is a goal which should be
addressed prior to any new construction, land filling, land changes or expansion of existing use
areas.
2.3 Landscape standards. The landscape standards set forth in the Ordinance will promote
harmonious development in the City, increase the desirability of residences, encourage
investment or occupation in the City, optimize use and value of land and improvements, increase
the stability and value of property, and add to the conditions affecting the peace, health and
welfare of the City.
Landscaping standards are essential to ensure compatible relationships between land uses within
a community. All uses allowed as either permitted or conditional uses within the City’s various
zoning areas shall conform to the following general provisions and performance standards.
2.4 Landscaping Maintenance. It is also important that all landscaped areas shall be properly
maintained. Minimum maintenance standards for all landscaped areas are described in Section
18 of this Ordinance.
2
SECTION 3 DEFINITIONS
Annual. A plant, usually a flowering species, which lives for only one (1) growing
season.
Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views or
decrease noise.
Coniferous/Evergreen Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least thirty (30) feet
in height, with a single trunk, fully branched to the ground, having foliage on the
outermost portion of the branches year round. This plant also retains its green color year
round and does not drop its fronds or needles in the winter.
Deciduous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twenty (20) feet in height,
with a single trunk, un-branched for several feet above the ground, having a defined
crown which loses leaves annually. This plant loses its foliage and becomes dormant
during winter months.
Fire Break. An area thirty (30) feet from the edge of any primary structure in which all
brush is cleared and any grasses are maintained at a height of 4 inches or lower. Single
specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery, or similar plants which are used as ground
cover may be maintained within a fire break area if they do not form a means of rapidly
transmitting fire from the native growth to any building or structure.
Ground Cover. Plants which are used for accents and/or soil stabilization and are
typically thirty-four (34) inches or less in height.
Growing Season. The growing season shall run from May 1 through October 31.
Landscaping. The operation of designing and installing a integrated system of turf,
plants, shrubs and trees into a planned design to give a sense of continuity between
structures and land.
Large Evergreen Tree. Large evergreen which reaches a mature height of fifty (50) feet
or greater.
Mulch. A protective covering of materials placed around plants to control weeds and
moderate evaporation of moisture or freezing. Examples of mulch include organic mulch
such as wood chips, shredded hardwood, or cocoa beans and inorganic mulch such as
stones or rocks. Materials which create an impermeable cover shall not be considered
mulch.
3
Native Grasses and Forbs. These are grasses and flowering board-leaf plants which are
indigenous to the State of Minnesota. Native grasses include Bluestem, Indiangrass and
Prairie Cordgrass.
Native Plants. These are plants which were present in Minnesota before European
settlers arrived, circa 1800.
Natural Area. Any wetland and flood plain designated on the official zoning map of the
City and any area of mature woodland, prairie and meadow vegetation native to
Minnesota.
Natural Barrier. A tree, shrubbery or earth barrier that acts as a visual or noise barrier
from roads, railroads and differing land uses.
Non-native or Exotic Plants. Plants which have been introduced into Minnesota from
Eurasia, or by accident since the 1800s.
Noxious Weed. Any plant which is identified by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the
State of Minnesota as a noxious weed pursuant to Minnesota Status Section 18.171,
Subd.5. Noxious weeds include poison ivy, hemp and bull thistle.
Ornamental Grasses or Ground Covers. Non-native grasses and ground covers used as
part of a planned landscaped area. Ornamental grasses do not include turf grasses.
Ornamental Tree. A deciduous tree with a mature height of less than thirty (30) feet.
Overstory Tree. Large deciduous shade producing trees with a mature height of over
thirty (30) feet.
Perennial. A plant, usually a flowering species, having a life span of more than two (2)
years. It also appears and blooms every year.
Performance Bond. A bond with good and sufficient sureties, approved by the City
Council, which is conditioned upon satisfactory implementation of an approved plan and
which names the City as oblige.
Planned Landscaped Area. An area where flowers, vegetables, ground covers, trees,
shrubs, ornamental vegetation and native vegetation are planted as part of a design.
Planting Schedule. A listing of all plants to be installed which identifies their common
name, botanical name, plant size, root type and quantity to be installed.
Restoration Area. An area in which native grasses and forbs are being or have been
intentionally re-established by human means.
4
Screening. A natural or man-made barrier to exclude noise, light or other items from
bordering areas.
Secondary Noxious Weed. Any plant which is identified by the Commissioner of
Agriculture of the State of Minnesota as a secondary noxious weed pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes Section 18.171, Subd. 5. Secondary noxious weeds include foxtail, ragweed and
milkweed.
Shrub (Large). Deciduous shrubs with a mature natural growth of over six (6) feet in
height.
Shrub (Medium). Deciduous shrubs with a mature natural growth of between four (4) to
six (6) feet in height.
Shrub (Small). Deciduous shrubs with a mature natural growth of less than four (4) feet
in height.
Spreading and Globe Evergreen. An evergreen which maintains a natural global or
spreading shape.
Steep Slopes. A slope with greater than a 3:1 change in elevation.
Turf Grasses. Grasses commonly used in law areas, including any blue grass, fescue or
rye grass blends or any other similar ground covers.
Upright Evergreen. An evergreen shrub which maintains a natural columnar or upright
shape.
Weed. Any noxious weed and secondary noxious weed and any vegetation, excluding
trees, not planted intentionally.
SECTION 4 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4.1 Where to install landscaping. All front yards, boulevards and side yards of a residential
structure in any zoning area in the City shall have sod or landscaping with mulch cover properly
installed. This installation shall occur within sixty (60) days after the home is constructed upon
the lot, but no later than two hundred forty (240) days after first grading, excavating, or otherwise
disturbing the land in furtherance of construction. If home construction is completed after the
end of growing season, such landscaping shall be installed within sixty (60) days of the start of
the next growing season. In rear yards, grass or mulch cover is still required, but the requirement
may be met by seeding or other measures reasonably expected to provide a grassy area in lieu of
installing sod. Silt fences and other methods to prevent soil erosion, as described in the Zoning
5
Ordinance, shall be installed and maintained on any remaining portions of the lot that are not
sodded or properly landscaped until a stable ground cover is established.
All areas disturbed by grading which surround the principal building and accessory buildings
which are not driveways, sidewalks or patios shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees or
other ornamental landscape materials.
4.2 Trees to be planted. Three (3) new trees per acre shall be installed concurrently with
sodding and seeding of the required yards. At least one (1) overstory tree and either one (1)
ornamental tree or coniferous/evergreen tree is required for each lot. Each acre may have two (2)
overstory trees as long as they are not of identical species. Existing significant trees that are
retained on each lot may be used as a credit in lieu of planting new trees, but each acre must have
at least two (2) trees.
4.3 Landscaping required after land filling or reclamation. If land filling or land reclamation
is done in a residential area, the requirements of 4.1 for landscaping following construction shall
be followed, using the date of permit expiration in place of the date of construction completion.
SECTION 5 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION IN NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
5.1 Where landscaping is necessary. For all non-residential districts, at least twenty five
percent (25%) of the land area shall be landscaped with grass, approved ground cover, shrubbery
and trees. All front yards, boulevards and side yards around a structure in all non-residential
districts in the City shall have sod or landscaping with mulch cover properly installed. This
installation shall occur within sixty (60) days after the structure is constructed upon the lot, but
no later than two hundred forty (240) days after first grading, excavating, or otherwise disturbing
the land in furtherance of construction. If construction is completed after the end of growing
season, such landscaping shall be installed within sixty (60) days of the start of the next growing
season. All areas around the structure must be finished, but seeding of large areas around the
structures is allowed in lieu of sod placement. Silt fences and other methods to prevent soil
erosion shall be installed and maintained on the remaining portions of the lot that are not sodded
or properly landscaped until a stable ground cover is established.
5.2 Parking Area Landscaping. Any parking areas in a non-residential zone that contain one
hundred (100) parking stalls or less shall include at least one unpaved landscaped island along
the driving aisles that serve as primary circulation to the site. In addition, at least one landscaped
island shall be provided for every two hundred and twenty five (225) feet of contiguous parking
stalls.
All parking areas containing over one hundred (100) parking stalls shall include unpaved
landscaped islands for every two hundred and twenty-five (225) feet of contiguous parking stalls.
The islands shall be distributed evenly throughout the planned parking area space and be
positioned in a way to promote effective traffic flow through the parking area.
6
All landscaped islands in parking areas shall contain a minimum of one hundred and eighty (180)
square feet of area and shall be provided with deciduous shade trees, ornamental or evergreen
trees, plus ground cover, mulch and/or shrubbery in addition to then minimum landscape
requirements of this Ordinance. Interior parking landscape area trees shall be provided at the rate
of one (1) tree for each fifteen (15) surface parking spaces provided or a fraction thereof.
Parking area landscaping shall be contained in planting beds bordered by a raised concrete curb
or equivalent approved by the Planning Commission.
5.3 Landscaping required in land filling or reclamation. If land filling or land reclamation is
done in a non-residential area, the requirements of 5.1 for landscaping following construction
shall be followed, using the date of permit expiration in place of the date of construction
completion.
5.4. Minimum Standards in non-residential districts. In order to achieve landscaping which is
appropriate in scale with the size of the building and site, these minimum standards shall apply to
all non-residential districts:
A. One (1) tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of total building floor area, or
one (1) tree for every fifty (50) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater. A
minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the trees required shall be coniferous.
B. One (1) ornamental tree may be substituted for every 0.6 overstory deciduous shade
tree. In no case shall ornamental trees exceed fifty percent (50%) of the required
number of trees.
C. One (1) large shrub for every three hundred (300) square feet of building or for every
thirty (30) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
5.5 Credit for Existing Trees. The total number of new overstory trees required on a property
may be reduced by the retention of existing overstory trees, provided that the following
conditions are satisfied:
A. The trees fulfill the minimum requirements of section 8 of this Ordinance as to size
and species. The City Forester shall recommend to the Planning Commission the
amount of credit for such existing trees based upon their location and distribution in
the lot.
B. Proper precautions to protect trees during building development shall be indicated on
site grading plans submitted for plan review. The landscape performance security
shall include provisions to ensure that these precautions are followed.
5.6 Irrigation System Required. As a non-residential area is developed, an underground
irrigation system shall be required in all landscaped areas.
7
SECTION 6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DISTRICTS
6.1 Trees and Shrubs. The following nursery stock sizes shall be required at the time of
planting. All measurements shall conform to the standards set forth in the current edition of the
USA Standards for Nursery Stock. Larger plants may be used or specified at any time.
Overstory Trees 2-1/2 inches in diameter
Ornamental Trees 1-1/2 inch in diameter
Evergreen Trees 6 feet tall
Large Shrubs 36 inches tall
Medium Shrubs 24 inches tall
Small Shrubs 12 inches tall
Evergreen Shrubs 24 inches in diameter
Upright Evergreen Shrubs 36 inches tall
Trunk diameter shall be measured six (6) inches above the ground level for four (4) inch or less
caliper trees and measured twelve (12) inches above the ground for four (4) inch caliper or larger
trees.
6.2 Topsoil and Planting Soil. When topsoil or planting soil is required for landscaping, the
soil shall have a pH range of 5.00 to 8.00, unless otherwise specified. All soil shall be free of
sticks, stones and other debris.
6.3 Planting Schedule. All landscaping plans shall contain a planting schedule which identified
all plants proposed to be installed, along with existing plants. Plants shall be identified by a
planting schedule which includes:
A. Quantity to be installed
B. Common name
C. Botanical name
D. Plant size
E. Root type (B & B, container, bare root)
6.4 Location of Plants. No plants, except flowers, ground cover or vines, shall be placed within
two (2) feet of any building, driveway or parking area unless specifically noted and approved on
the landscape plan.
6.5 Installation of Trees. The property owner shall be responsible for keeping new trees in a
plumb position. When staking or guying is required, it shall occur so as not to create any hazards
or unsightly obstacles. All wires shall be encased in hose to prevent tree damage.
8
SECTION 7 NATIVE LANDSCAPES
7.1 Native Landscape Alternative. A native landscape alternative to the requirements of this
Ordinance is allowed in all zoning districts. Landscape plans, or portions thereof, approved as
“native” are exempt from the other requirements of this Ordinance. An applicant proposing a
“native landscape” shall submit a landscape plan depicting the current state of the natural area, its
location on the property, and where any restoration of native area will be done. The plan must
describe all features which make the planned restoration or retention of the area “native” as
opposed to simply undisturbed. The plan shall also show fire breaks between the planting area
and any structure.
7.2 Approval. A “native landscape” plan for restoration shall be approved if the proposed
“native” area is composed of at least 80% native grasses and forbs, native plants, or a
combination thereof. A plan proposing to preserve or leave undisturbed an area of the property
may be approved as “native” landscaping if the specified area is composed of at least 50% native
grasses and forbs, native plants, or a combination thereof.
7.3 Maintenance of Native Landscaping. Once approved, native grass areas shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner without any noxious weeds, and mowed at least once
per year.
SECTION 8 LANDSCAPING OF EXISITING USES
Existing uses shall comply with the landscaping requirements listed in Sections 4 through 6 of
this Ordinance at the time any alterations are made on the buildings and premises.
SECTION 9 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
9.1 Parking Area Screening. Any off street parking area containing more than six (6) parking
spaces, any part of which is within thirty (30) feet of an adjoining residence or residential area or
across the street from any residence or residential area, and any driveway to a parking area
containing at least six (6) spaces within fifteen (15) feet of an adjoining residential zone shall be
completely screened to a height of at least three and one-half (3-1/2) feet above the parking
grade. Such screening shall be accomplished through the use of earth berming, plant materials,
or a combination of both, but not walls or fencing.
9.2 Trash areas and Accessory Structures. In all non-residential districts, all trash and trash
handling equipment shall be stored within the principal structure, within an attached structure
accessible from within the principal structure, or totally screened from eye level view from public
streets and adjacent residential or non-residential zoned properties. If accessory structures are
proposed, they shall be constructed of the same building materials as the principal structure and
be readily served through swinging doors. Design shall be approved by the Fire Department.
9
9.3 Mechanical utilities screening. The ground level view of all mechanical utilities including
roof top equipment shall be completely screened from contiguous properties and adjacent street,
or designed to be compatible with the architectural treatment of the principal structure.
9.4 Loading and service area screening. The external loading and service areas accessory to
buildings shall be completely screened from the ground level view from contiguous residential or
non-residential properties and adjacent streets, except at access points.
SECTION 10 ADDITIONAL SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
10.1 Residential districts. In all residential districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, garbage,
fuel or materials not currently in use for construction shall be stored indoors or totally screened
from the eye level view from public streets and adjacent properties.
10.2 All zoning districts. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment, utility meters, storage,
service area and similar features shall be completely screened from the eye level view from
adjacent properties and public streets, or designed to be compatible with the architectural
treatment of the principal structure.
SECTION 11 SCREENING METHODS
11.1 Screening Wall or Fence. A fence or wall may be used for screening when plant materials
are provided along the outside of the fence or wall.
11.2 Earth Berms. An earth berm shall be allowed for screening, when used in combination
with plant material. A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the required screening must be
provided by the plant material.
Final slopes on berms steeper than 3:1 will not be permitted without special approval or
treatment such as terracing or retaining walls.
Earth berms used to screen parking lots and other open areas shall be of sufficient height to
achieve screening but not to have slopes exceeding 3:1. A minimum of a two (2) foot berm is
required.
11.3 Planting Screens. All required screening or buffering shall be located on the lot occupied
by the use, building, facility or structures to be screened. No screening or buffering shall be
located on any public right-of-way or within eight (8) feet of the traveled portion of any street or
highway.
A planting screen shall consist of healthy, fully hardy plant materials and shall be designed to
provide a minimum year round opaqueness of eight percent (80%) at the time of maturity. The
plant material shall be of sufficient height to achieve the required screening.
10
Composition of plant material for screening shall be composed of these minimum standards:
A. Not less than thirty-three percent (33%) coniferous
B. Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) deciduous
C. Not more than thirty-five percent (35%) shrubs
D. Not more than forty-five percent (45%) of one species
Planting screens shall be maintained in a neat and healthy condition. Plants which have died
shall be promptly replaced.
SECTION 12 LANDSCAPING PLANS
12.1 Content of Plans. A landscaping plan for any construction or land disturbance site shall be
indicated either on the site plan and building plan, or on a separate to-scale plan drawing. The
landscape plan shall address the matters raised by Sections 4 through 6, as well as visually
depicting conformance with the performance standards of this Ordinance. Where streetscape
plans or other landscape guidance from the Zoning Ordinance are applicable to the proposal, the
landscape plan shall incorporate and visually depict compliance with those standards. When a
landscaping plan is required by this Ordinance, the applicant shall submit a number of copies
equal to the number of copies of site plans required for the permit or authorization (e.g. CUP,
building permit) sought.
12.2 Submission - residential districts. If the construction is proposed as part of a subdivision,
planned unit development, or other application requiring Planning Commission review, the
landscape plan shall be submitted with the applicant’s other materials for the permit or other
entitlement. In other cases, the City’s building official shall ensure that such a plan exists before
issuing a building permit.
12.3 Submission - non-residential districts. In non-residential districts, a detailed landscaping
site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission by the subdivider, developer, builder or
property owner as part of the application for zoning entitlement or other permit. This plan must
be approved at the same time as the site plan and building plan and the landscaping plan must be
approved before any building, demolition, grading or filling permit is issued and construction is
started. In cases where Planning Commission review is not required to issue a building permit,
such as additions to or remodeling of existing structures, the City’s building official shall ensure
that such a plan exists before issuing a building permit.
12.4 Land filling or reclamation. Each request for a land filling or land reclamation permit in
all zoning districts shall also include a landscaping plan. This plan shall be approved by the
Planning Commission before a filling permit is issued and filling is started.
11
SECTION 13 PERFORMANCE SURETY FOR LANDSCAPING IN NON-RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
13.1 Requirements. All landscape plans for construction in a non-residential district shall be
accompanied by an owner supplied performance security which shall provide the City with cash,
corporate surety bond, approved letter of credit or other surety satisfactory to the City to
guarantee the proper installation and vigorous growth of all landscape elements and screening
required.
13.2 Time period surety to remain in effect. Said surety shall remain in effect for two (2) full
growing seasons. The first year the amount of the surety shall be equal to one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated costs of plant material, installation and tree preservation. The
second year the surety shall be reduced to equal twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated costs
of plant material, installation and tree preservation.
13.3 Requirements for lots with irrigation systems. Lots or sites provided with an irrigation
system covering one hundred percent (100%) of the area improved with landscaping need only
provide surety for one (1) full growing season.
SECTION 14 MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING IN ALL DISTRICTS
14.1 Responsibility for replacing dead materials. The property owner shall be responsible for
replacement of any dead trees, shrubs, ground covers and sodding shown on a landscaping plan.
If any of these plant materials are not maintained or replaced, said plant materials will be
replaced by the City and the cost thereof will be taken from any posted surety or, if a surety does
not cover all costs, assessed to the property. In residential districts the City’s replacement costs
will be assessed to the property.
14.2 Responsibility for maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining
the landscaping on every lot and parcel in the City in good condition. Every occupied and
unoccupied lot and parcel shall be maintained to limit the growth of weeds or poisonous or
harmful vegetation. Weeds shall include all weeds, grass, brush, wildings, second growth, rank
vegetation or other vegetation that is not growing in its proper place, having a greater height of
ten (10) inches or spread more than ten (10) inches. . Grass must be mowed and shall not be
allowed to grow more than ten (10) inches. Moving shall occur only between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 8:30 p.m. Every property owner shall keep all yard spaces around a residence or nonresidential
in a manner such that the appearance will not detract from the neighborhood
Vegetation blocking visibility on corners or along the edge of roads or street and unreasonably
impeding the view of motor vehicles traveling along public roadways is expressly forbidden and
vegetation that grows to cause this problem must be trimmed or removed.
12
SECTION 15 PENALTY
Any person violating or refusing to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, may be punished in accordance with the statutory
penalties assigned to misdemeanor offenses, as those may be changed from time to time. The
costs of prosecution may also be added.
SECTION 16 ORDINANCE READ IN CONCERT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance is written to complement the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance, the City of
Gem Lake Tree Preservation Ordinance, and the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance. In
the event of conflicting requirements imposed by this Ordinance or by other Ordinances of the
City of Gem Lake, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
SECTION 17 SEPARABILITY
It is the intention of the City Council that several provisions of this Ordinance are separable. If
any Court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this Ordinance or application
thereof to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not
specifically included in such judgment.
SECTION 18. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force upon its passage and publication.
Dated: October 21, 2008
________________________________ __________________________________
Paul Emeott – Mayor William Short - Clerk
CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 105
ORDINANCE RELATING TO CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND FOR
APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT AND CITY LICENSES
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS – APPLICANTS FOR
TOWNSHIP EMPLOYMENT.
1-1. PURPOSE. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in Section 1-2.
1-2. CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS. The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the City of Gem Lake, to do a criminal
history background investigation on the applicants for the following positions
within the City of Gem Lake, unless the City Council concludes that a
background investigation is not needed: Employment positions: all regular parttime
or full-time employees of the City of Gem Lake.
1-2.1. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen employment applicants, the Ramsey County Sheriff’s
Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History
information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is
accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Ramsey County
Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the Sheriff or his or
her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department
to the City Council, City Clerk or other City staff involved in the hiring
process.
1-2.2. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake
the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions
of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes,
Section, 364.09, the City will not reject an applicant for employment on the
basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related
to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City
2
rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
1-2.2(a). The grounds and reasons for the denial.
1-2.2(b). The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.06.
1-2.2(c). The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment.
1-2.2(d). That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.
SECTION 2. LICENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS – APPLICANTS FOR CITY
LICENSES.
2-1. PURPOSE. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized
Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing
background checks.
2-2. CRIMINAL HISTORY LICENSE BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS. The Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the City of Gem Lake, to do a criminal
history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses in
the City: employees/owners of liquor establishments; peddler/solicitor/transient
merchant licenses; tobacco licenses.
2-2.1. In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen license applicants, the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any
data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Ramsey
Sheriff’s Department under the care and custody of the Sheriff or his or
her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal
History data may be released by the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department
to the licensing authority, including the City Council, City Clerk or other
City staff involved in the license approval process.
2-2.2. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Ramsey County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake
the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions
of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes,
Section 364.09, the City will not reject an applicant for a license on the
basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related
to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
3
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the
applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
2-2.2(a). The grounds and reasons for the denial.
2-2.2(b). The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.06.
2-2.2(c). The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the
license.
2-2.2(d). That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other
provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in
force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey
County, Minnesota, this 20th day of January, 2009.
_____________________________ ______________________________
Bob Uzpen, Mayor Bill Short, City Clerk
Gem Lake Gateway District Development Code
October 21, 2014
Ordinance 107B
SECTION 9 – GEM LAKE GATEWAY DISTRICT
9.1. The intent of the Gem Lake Gateway District (“Gateway” or “G”) is intended to allow for development
and redevelopment of the real property associated with Hoffman Corner and points westward along Ramsey
County Road E extending northward to the border with the zoning districts identified in Sections 5 and 6 of
this Ordinance. This area has been the subject of a visioning study and includes both commercial and
residential opportunities as described in the City of Gem Lake Comprehensive Plan and other city documents.
As introduced by the visioning plan and envisioned by the Comprehensive Plan, the Gateway will emphasize
commercial development and/or redevelopment in the Hoffman Corner intersection which traditionally has
been the location of the Gem Lake commercial district. As one moves westward along County Road E the
intent of the Gateway is to transition into more residential type neighborhoods becoming less dense until it
transitions to either the Estate Residential district or the Executive Residential district.
9.1.1 Purposes. Specifically, the Gateway zoning district will attempt to:
A) Promote development and redevelopment consistent with the visioning plan for the Gateway
area by encouraging residential uses in conjunction with commercial and expanded recreational
activities which in turn will create an active street life, while enhancing the vitality of businesses and
reducing vehicular traffic.
B) Provide for mixed-use development(s) that are carefully planned to promote efficient use of
land, parking and roadway systems.
C) Provide enhanced oversight through conditional use permit provisions, to ensure compatibility
of mixed uses and consistency with the approved master plan for the site.
D) Ensure compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.
E) Provide significant incentives to promote mixed-use redevelopment projects.
F) Encourage sustainable architectural, engineering and landscape design that is implemented by
responsive green construction practices.
G) Preserve natural resources, minimize the carbon footprint of the City, and establish a key zone
within Gem Lake that is respectful of neighboring areas and is instructive for future generations.
H) Encourage pedestrian and bicycle use.
I) Ensure that commercial and residential uses in a development are designed to be compatible
with each other.
J) Ensure high standards of site design, spatial relationships, architectural design, building
materials and landscape design.
K) Seek to put in place those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan (as supported by the
master plan) that includes four “sub-zones”:
1. Neighborhood Edge: Intended for lower density single-family residential housing
development to act as a transition between new mixed-use construction and existing singlefamily
detached structures on adjacent lands. This subzone in its basic form will accommodate
single-family dwellings on larger lots, or with application of incentives, more compact homes
on common larger lots or on compact lots with enhanced buffers (used in clustering), shared
with accessory buildings and generally served from a front or side driveway.
2. Neighborhood General: Intended to begin the transition from purely residential use at low
densities to more intensive mixed-use development at the district’s center. This subzone will
accommodate a variety of residential structures at varying densities, and also begin to integrate
lower-impact office or retail activities which complement the residential setting.
3. Neighborhood Mixed Use: Intended to establish a neighborhood focus that is distinguished
by mixed use buildings, together with denser residential options and smaller-scale commercial
and office buildings without residential components. This subzone will accommodate a variety
of activities and services within easy walking distance from homes throughout the District,
supporting daily convenience shopping and personal service needs, and also providing
opportunities for public gathering and social contact.
4. Neighborhood Center: Intended for the most urban conditions within all of the shown
mixed use areas. The mixture of land uses emphasizes ground-floor retail with offices and
residential/rental above (as market acceptance matures) and structures providing commercial
space for medium and large–sized retailers. Street frontages throughout this subzone should
be pedestrian-oriented, and the public space should be defined by placing building facades at
the edge of the sidewalk. Neighborhood Center land that abuts other subzones on the north
and west sides will be carefully planned to ensure lower-density buildings.
9.1.2 Definitions specific to this Section. The terms listed below have the meaning given to them
here for purposes of this Section. An effort has been made to define other key terms as they appear
within the applicable parts of this Section, and should be given the explicit or contextual meaning given
to them within the remainder of this Section. If a term is not defined in the Section, terms used herein
have the meaning given to them in the Definitions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance, or its
common-usage meaning if not defined within the Ordinance.
Applicant. The owner of land, or the owner of a leasehold interest therein, or the owner’s
authorized representative, or a governmental entity proposing an action or development
requiring City development review and approval or the issuance of a permit for the
development of land.
Application. Any application for a development permit or development approval pursuant to
this Ordinance and which application was not complete and filed on or before the date of
adoption of this Ordinance.
Encroachment. A porch, deck, balcony, patio or similar unenclosed space, or an awning, that
extends into space that is otherwise reserved for setbacks or public right-of-way. Permitted
encroachments are indicated on the Building Type Templates.
Garage. A structure intended for the parking and storage of passenger cars and light-duty
trucks. A garage may be attached to a building or a separate structure, where allowed by
Building Type Template.
Open Hours (also “Operation”). The time within the day in which a business invites
customers, clients or the general public to the property or business location in order to
conduct the purpose of the business. These hours will not begin earlier than 7 A.M., and will
not extend beyond 8 P.M. unless approved by conditional use permit (see Figure 17).
Shed. A structure on a property that is not a primary building nor a structure intended to
house parked cars or trucks. Generally a smaller building intended for the storage of home
maintenance equipment and other personal belongings. When allowed, a shed with a footprint
of 200 square feet or less may be built and maintained without a permit from the City.
9.2 Generally Applicable Regulations
9.2.1 Relationship to other portions of this Ordinance and other City Ordinances. The
requirements of this Section may conflict with or duplicate some portions of the Zoning Ordinance
and Subdivision Ordinance of Gem Lake. Any such conflict, when it relates to the use of land in the
Gateway District, shall be resolved in favor of the language in this Section. All other provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance apply within the Gateway District, including provisions
for Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Institutional Overlay. PUD or institutional overlay
proposals may be used in combination with or in place of the regulations and procedures set forth in
this Section. All other Gem Lake ordinances which relate to the construction of buildings and use of
land (including but not limited to the Landscaping Ordinance, Adult Use Ordinance, Tree Preservation
Ordinance, Building Code Adoption, and Pawnbroker Ordinance) apply within the Gateway District.
9.2.2 Administration, Conditional Uses, Variance, and Appeal.
A) The Building Type standards are intended to be employed and used to entitle the
construction of a building upon land in the same manner that listing a use as “permitted”
entitled land in other Zones defined by this Ordinance. The processing of conditional use
permits, variances, amendments, platted subdivisions and other land use applications which
may necessarily accompany an application for building approval in the Gateway District shall
be processed simultaneously with the review of the Gateway District proposal, whenever
possible.
B) All new construction, remodeling or expansion (except for the remodeling or
expansion of single-family detached dwellings) within the Gateway District requires a Zoning
Compliance Permit. The Zoning Compliance Permit is indefinite in duration and the
entitlements stated on the permit shall run with the land. A Zoning Compliance Permit is
granted after determination that the proposal complies with all applicable standards set forth
within this Section (Thoroughfare Standards, Civic Space Standards, Building Type Standards,
Parking, and Design Standards). As set forth below, the final approval for the Zoning
Compliance Permit will come from the City Council for proposals which require Council
approval in some form (such as a platted subdivision or conditional use permit), and the
Zoning Administrator for proposals which do not otherwise require Council review (such as
single buildings or minor subdivisions without variances).
C) For the purpose of providing administrative review and processing of development
proposals within the Gateway District, the City Council hereby appoints the Zoning
Administrator to serve as the primary point of contact between the City and applicants for
zoning approval. Upon receipt of an application for land use in the Gateway District, the
Zoning Administrator shall ensure that the application is complete within five (5) business days
of receipt. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall return all
materials with an explanation of what is required to make the application complete. When the
application is determined to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of
all submitted documents to the City’s appointed consultants in architecture, engineering and
planning. The Zoning Administrator shall obtain written comment on the application from
each consultant before the scheduled Planning Commission review of the application, or
before making an administrative approval where authorized.
D) If a City consultant identifies a failure to meet the standards of this Section, the
Zoning Administrator may not administratively approve a permit for the proposal. The
Zoning Administrator shall meet with the applicant to attempt to resolve the deficiency, and
re-submit any revised or clarified proposal to the consulting professional who identified the
problem for review. If the consultant agrees that the deficiency is corrected, the Administrator
may issue the permit.
E) For applications on a City Council approval track, the Zoning Administrator shall also
attempt to resolve any deficiencies noted in consultant review with the applicant prior to the
final Council action on the proposal. The Planning Commission and City Council may choose
to act on the proposal within their reasonably used discretion, even if the matter is not
resolved prior to final action.
F) All applicants seeking a Zoning Compliance Permit must submit a development plan with
their application.
G) Conditional Uses. All elements of a development plan which require conditional use
permit approval may be combined into a single conditional use permit application for the
proposal, with a single applicable CUP fee for review and processing in addition to other
required application fees. Portions of proposed buildings which may be used for permitted or
conditional uses need not apply for conditional use approval as part of the development
application, unless the tenant, occupant or owner of the space is known at the time of
application and will need a conditional use permit. All applications for conditional use permit
approval shall otherwise be processed in the same manner as other applications for conditional
use permit approval, using the procedures and criteria stated in Section 17.5 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
H) Any variances requested in connection with a Gateway District development proposal shall
be processed in the same manner as variances from other Sections of the Zoning Ordinance,
using the procedures and criteria stated in Section 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance
I) Any applicant aggrieved by a decision, mandate or other action of the Zoning
Administrator may appeal the matter in the manner provided by Section 17.7 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
9.2.3 Existing Uses and Structures at Adoption of Chapter. The standards generally applicable under
Section 16.3 of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to existing structures and uses located within the
Gateway District upon the adoption of this Section, or existing on land later added to the Gateway
District by re-mapping on the date a new zoning map becomes effective. An applicant seeking a
building permit to materially alter or expand a legally nonconforming structure within the Gateway
District shall submit a partial development plan, containing information as requested by the Zoning
Administrator to allow review of the alteration or expansion’s compliance with Design Review
requirements set forth at 9.10 and the Connectivity Requirements set forth at 9.7.3(C).
9.2.4 Incentives. The City Council may establish incentives which apply to encourage certain types of
land use or preservation activity within the Gateway District. The Council may set the incentives by
adopting a separate ordinance which identifies clearly the item or items the Council seeks to encourage,
the allowance or allowances which the Council is willing to offer applicants, and sufficient criteria to
allow the Zoning Administrator and City consultants to evaluate and score applications seeking to
apply the incentives and allowances. The following text is an example only:
The City of Gem Lake seeks to improve transit options within the City. Proposals which
incorporating public transit options into an overall development plan will receive enhanced civic space
credit for the space dedicated to the public transit option. Space bonuses will apply as follows:
Bus waiting area, uncovered: 2% bonus
Bus waiting area, covered: 4%
Bus waiting area, integrated w/ building: 8%
Bus Rapid Transit access: 10%
Rail access or access to station: 10%
Rail transit station: 30%
Intermodal transit center: 50%
Proposed spaces must meet the criteria for public transit facilities established by the Metropolitan
Council in order to qualify for space bonuses. The City Council shall approve all requests for transit
incentive bonuses. The Zoning Administrator shall consult with the City Engineer to review and
make recommendations on the request for incentive treatment within an application.
The ability to alter or change incentives may not be used to allow a variance from the standards of this
Section or the Zoning Ordinance overall. An ordinance establishing or modifying available incentives
shall not take effect until 45 days after adoption and publication, and shall not apply to any applications
filed with the City prior to the effective date. The ordinance creating incentives may, at the City
Council’s discretion, provide a method for an applicant to propose an incentive as part of a
development application in lieu of only seeking a modification of dimension or placement standards
through amendment or variance.
9.3 Placement of Subzones and Integration with Neighboring Zones
9.3.1 The Gateway district is composed of four sub-zones:
A) Neighborhood Edge
B) Neighborhood General
C) Neighborhood Mixed-Use
D) Neighborhood Center
9.3.2 Mapping requirements. The City Council shall assign the sub-zones to land included within the
Gateway District. The Council shall assign land to each sub-zone without reference to existing lot lines
or tax parcels contained within the Gateway District. In assigning land to sub-zones, the Council shall
a minimum:
A) assign all land lying within 200 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or
Executive Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Edge; and
B) not assign any land lying within 450 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE)
or Executive Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Center.
The District Sub-Zone Map will be included with reproductions of this Code as Figure 1.
Figure 1: Gateway District Sub-Zone Map
9.4 Thoroughfare standards. Streets, sidewalks and other pedestrian or bicycle ways within dedicated rights-ofway
shall be considered and designed together as “thoroughfares.” The street and pedestrian circulation system
in any development plan shall be used to organize and define the community, acting as functional and visual
links between neighborhoods, the neighborhood center, civic and commercial areas and open space. The
circulation system shall be based on a defined, interconnected network to provide adequate traffic capacity,
provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes, control through traffic, limit lot access to streets of lower
traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the community.
9.4.1 General street design principles. The following principles should be followed in street layout and
design:
A) Local street lengths should be short.
B) Streets should be designed with gentle curves and changes in grade to break the sight line of
the road into smaller visual elements and cause drivers to slow down.
C) Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians should be used to
encourage slow traffic speeds.
9.4.2 Thoroughfare Types Permitted by Subzone. The thoroughfare design in a given area of the
Gateway District is determined in part by the subzone to which the land is assigned. Right-of-way
dedication and the use of the right-of-way is set forth in the Thoroughfare Type diagrams at Figures 2
and 3. The presence of trees within a diagram indicates a requirement to plant “street trees” within the
indicated area. A development plan’s thoroughfares shall comply with the dimensional and layout
standards applicable to each thoroughfare type. The following Thoroughfare Types are allowed in each
sub-zone:
i) Neighborhood Edge: A, B, Alley;
ii) Neighborhood General: A, B, C*, Alley, Boulevard
(Type C only allowed within 250’ of Mixed-Use sub-zone boundary);
iii) Neighborhood Mixed-Use: C, D, Alley, Boulevard;
iv) Neighborhood Center: D, Alley, Boulevard; Scheuneman Road and Hoffman Road should be
treated as Type D thoroughfares in plans.
(May also propose a Plaza with a thoroughfare as regulated by Figure 5).
NOTE: County Road E and Highway 61 are not included within these Thoroughfare Types
and should not be used or depicted as “frontage” for any Building Type when using this Code.


9.5 Civic space standards. The City of Gem Lake’s visioning plan requires well-planned and functional open
spaces, preservation areas, parks and gathering places, which are generally referred to in this Section as “civic
space.” An application’s development plan shall dedicate or otherwise set aside sufficient land for public civic
space. At a minimum, 10% of the total acreage in development shall be identified on the plans as Civic Space.
The acreage of wetlands protected by state statute and any wetland buffer required by a governing watershed
district shall be excluded from calculations of “total acreage in development” and from the calculation of the
10% dedication to civic space. A Civic Space shall conform to one or more of the Civic Space Templates at
Figures 4 and 5. The Civic Space Type used to design a given Civic Space shall be indicated on any plan or
diagram intended to show compliance with this section.
9.5.1 No cash payment in lieu of civic space may be approved for applications within the Gateway
District.
9.5.2 The minimum width required for any Building Type under Figures 6 through 15 may be
reduced by up to 30% if the area which would have been contained within that building lot before the
reduction is transferred to a Civic Space located within 1/4 mile of the lot.
9.5.3 For Civic Spaces which include at least one automotive traffic lane or access, the area of the
traffic lane or access is not applied toward the 10% minimum requirement. Areas within the Civic
Space, areas within a thoroughfare adjacent to the Civic Space, or approved areas in lots adjacent to the
Civic Space, which are dedicated for public or shared parking can apply toward the requirement if
designed in conformity with applicable Thoroughfare or Building Type templates and the Parking
regulations in Section 9.9.


9.6 Building Type Standards.
9.6.1 New construction in the Gateway District shall conform to one of the following Building
Types:
A) Single Family Detached House (Figure 6)
B) Single-Family Attached Housing
1. Twin Home (Figure 7)
2. Townhouse/Rowhouse (Figure 8)
C) Apartment/Condominium (Figure 9)
D) Bungalow Court (Figure 10)
E) Live/Work Unit (Figure 11)
E) Mixed Use Building (Figure 12)
F) Commercial
1. Retail/Office Building (Figure 13)
2. Single Use Building (Figure 14)
a. With Liner Building (Figure 14a)
b. With Collar Uses (Figure 14b)
3. Auto-Oriented Layout (Figure 15)
9.6.2 Use of Building Type Templates. Figures 6 through 15 contain all regulatory information
governing the dimensions of lots and the dimensions, setbacks, height, mass, placement and use of
buildings in the District. The City’s review of a development application shall primarily apply the
information contained in the applicable Building Type Templates. Terms and concepts used within the
Building Type Templates are further defined as follows:
A) Frontage Street. The Thoroughfare Type on which the Building Type may be placed.
The building must be oriented toward the frontage street and have its primary entrance on the
permitted frontage street, unless an alternative is allowed by the terms of the Building Type
chosen. “Width” is measured along frontage street; “depth” measured perpendicular to the
frontage street. For purposes of placing buildings, Highway 61 and County Road E are not
frontage streets, and the property boundary with those roads’ rights-of-way should be aligned
as the rear lot line to the greatest extent possible. Parking lots may abut the Highway 61 or
County Road E rights-of-way, subject to the landscaping requirements of the Gem Lake
Landscaping Ordinance.
B) Height by Story. The permitted height of any building is determined by the number
of stories allowed and built. The height of each story is determined by the space between the
upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or the ceiling (peaked
roof) or roof (flat roof) above for top stories. A story must have a minimum height of 12 feet
and a maximum height of 15 feet; buildings with assigned ground-floor retail and commercial
shall have a ground-floor height of at least 15 feet and no more than 20 feet. The top of a
peaked roof is limited to the average story height of the building, measured from the ceiling of
the topmost floor to the highest gable of the roof. Half-stories (finishing the space, if any,
between the roof and the topmost full-story ceiling) are permitted for all building types in all
subzones.
C) Building types with specified height limits shall be measured from the average
elevation of the sidewalk on which the building’s primary entrance is located and the coping of
a flat roof or the deck line of a mansard roof.
D) Basements. All building types are permitted to have basements if it is technically
feasible to build basements on the chosen building site. A walk-out basement is considered a
“story” for height regulation, but other kinds of basements are not counted against the height
of the building.
E) Footprint. The building footprint is the area occupied by the horizontal projection of
the building’s first floor, excluding the floor area of attached garages and porches or decks
built as allowed encroachments into setbacks. Within the building envelope defined in the
Building Type Template, the horizontal projection of upper floors may not extend more than
ten feet in any direction over the footprint, except for portions of the upper floor built directly
over an attached garage.
F) Mass, Ratio. When used on a Building Type Template, the percentages listed in the
Mass table define the maximum area allowed the horizontal projection of one floor in relation
to the area of the horizontal projection of the building footprint and attached garage, if any.
G) Building Placement Diagram. The diagram on each Building Type Template provides
regulatory information on the setbacks, build-to lines (lines on which some or all of the
building façade must be placed), the “building envelope” in which the footprint may be placed,
frontage types, permitted encroachments of porches, decks and balconies, placement of
accessory structures, and other items which regulate the built environment on a given lot.
9.6.3 Combination of Building Types on Single Lot. The Building Type templates regulate lot size,
but it is not required that each building be on a separately conveyed lot. If multiple building types are
proposed, the dimensional standards should be applied as though the lot were being divided. Any total
surface coverage or building footprint standards may be combined among all of the buildings included
on a particular lot.
9.6.4 New Building Types. New building types may be proposed in the manner of other
amendments to the Zoning Code using the procedure in Section 17.6 of the Zoning Ordinance. A
proposal must contain all information included in existing analogous Building Types, including but not
limited to the dimensional standards, use designations, and frontage requirements.
9.6.5 Use of Regulations in the Gateway District. The Gateway District’s regulatory focus is first
upon the form of each building and its relation to the surrounding environment. This section regulates
the use of space within the building, except to the extent that any structure or land use existed as legally
non-conforming use prior to the adoption of this Section, as a matter secondary to the built form. The
use of land in the District is regulated by the Building Type Templates, the uses set forth in this Section 9.6.5 and
Figures 16 and 17 which are part of this Ordinance and is related to the building form. To the extent uses set forth in
the Templates and Figures 16 and 17 conflict with the uses set forth in this Section 9.6.5A, the uses set forth in this
Section 9.6.5A shall control and supersede the uses set forth in the Templates and Figures 16 and 17.
A) General Terms and Permitted Uses. The Building Type Templates assign categories
of uses to certain floors of a building. When multiple use categories are listed and separated by
a slash (such as “office/retail”), the uses may be combined on the floor at the discretion of the
owner or occupant of the building. When multiple use categories are stated as alternatives
(such as “office or residential”) the floor may only be assigned one category of use, at the
discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. Building Type Templates may also
contain specific exclusions or limitations which modify the application of a use category to the
particular building. The categorical terms are defined as follows:
Residential. Premises for long-term human dwelling.
Office. Non-residential premises used for administrative, clerical, professional or
similar activities. Office as used in this section includes medical and dental offices used by
five (5) or fewer medical principals (doctor, dentist, chiropractor or similar professional).
Retail. Premises for the sale of merchandise and food service. For purposes of this
Section, banks with teller service are considered “retail” instead of “office.” Athletic clubs
and fitness centers that are not the primary use of the building space are considered a
“retail” use. Certain personal service businesses are considered “retail” if not the primary
use of a building: barbershop/beauty salon; clothing rental and dry cleaning pickup (but
not on-site processing); and tailor shops.
Commercial. Premises for the conduct of the following activities which are not
included within the meaning of “office” or “retail” for purposes of this Section: athletic
club/fitness center (primary or only use of building space); business school or trade
school, veterinary clinic, funeral home, hotel, recreation primary use (such as a bowling
alley); cabinet and carpentry shop, heating, plumbing or electrical sales and service;
printing shop, upholstery shop, warehousing, conditional use of space assigned as
commercial are, light industrial uses which manufacture, process, store and distribute
foods and materials not likely to create offensive noise, odors, vibrations, dust, smoke,
heat, glare or other objectionable influences and are in general dependent upon raw
materials refined elsewhere.
(B) Accessory Alternative Uses. The Figures 16 and 17 provide charts stating the
compatibility of listed accessory uses and variations on categorical primary uses (such as
restricting residential uses to Senior Housing) with each building type. The items listed in
Figures 16 and 17 further refine the general definitions stated above, and any perceived
conflict should be resolved in favor of the general definitions stated above. Placement of
accessory buildings is generally noted on the Building-Type Template and is also governed
by the Design Standards.
C) Uses designated as “conditional” or “CUP” within this Section, on a Building Type
Template or within Figures 16 and 17 shall require a Conditional Use Permit, following the
existing procedures in Section 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance. Uses designated as “nonconforming”
see Appendix “A”.
D) Certain uses of land which are not necessarily related to a building are generally
permitted within the Gateway District by conditional use permit:
Essential Service Structures
Planned Unit Development
Institutional Overlay
E) Nothing in this Section or its attachments shall be construed to prevent the
application of other Gem Lake ordinances pertaining to types of uses (including, but not
limited to, the Adult Use Ordinance and the Pawnbroker Ordinance) or to city licensing of
businesses and activities in general.
F) If a use or structure is not listed or included among the definitions herein, the Building
Type Templates, or Figures 16 and 17, then it is prohibited within the Gateway District.















9.7 Proposals for Undeveloped Land or for Large Redevelopment. An applicant shall follow the following
procedure when seeking approval for construction upon land undeveloped at the time this Section was adopted,
or upon any plan requiring the platted subdivision of land or the construction of new streets. Proposals which
include a major subdivision of land shall proceed through the platting procedure mandated by the Gem Lake
Subdivision Ordinance, and shall submit the materials requested herein in addition to the materials required to
support the application for subdivision.
9.7.1 Pre-application Meeting. Before making a formal application for a land use plan which will
involve the creation of new streets or platted subdivision of land, the potential applicant shall prepare
sketch plans and preliminary descriptions which reflect the six items addressed below and any
additional items required by Section 12.1 of the Subdivision Ordinance. The applicant shall schedule
and attend the pre-application meeting described in Section 11.1 of the Subdivision Ordinance, in
which the participants shall address all of the following areas:
- Subdivision plat and related infrastructure;
- Thoroughfare network and civic space;
- Building Type placement and disposition;
- Proposed Design of completed buildings;
- Potential incentives, if any, which may apply to the proposal; and
- Likelihood that environmental review under Ordinance 92 is necessary.
9.7.2 Submission of Development Plan. An applicant shall submit an application for a Zoning
Compliance Permit and supporting documentation to the City which addresses all components of the
proposed development. The applicant shall submit twelve (12) sets of all applications and required
supporting materials in forms acceptable to the Zoning Administrator, including:
A) Development Plan. All attachments to development plans shall be drawn to scale and
provide the following information, unless otherwise specifically waived by the Zoning
Administrator:
1. A vicinity map, to include locations of any public streets, railroads, major streams or
rivers and other major features within 500 feet of the site.
2. Boundaries and dimensions shown graphically, along with a written legal description
of the property.
3. Present and proposed topography of the site and adjacent areas within 50 feet by
contour lines at intervals of no more than five feet, and directional arrows showing
proposed flow of stormwater runoff from the site.
4. The location of existing and proposed structures, with height and gross floor area
noted.
5. Elevation views of all proposed buildings and structures, with building materials and
proposed colors noted.
6. Phasing plans, where applicable.
7. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed curb cuts, aisles, offstreet parking
and loading spaces, and walkways.
8. Location, height and material for screening walls and fences, and other screening
devices.
9. Location of all existing and proposed water and sewer facilities and storm drainage
systems.
10. Existing and proposed public streets or rights-of-way, easements, or other reservations
of land on the site.
11. Location and method of screening of outdoor trash storage areas.
12. Location and size of all proposed signage.
13. Location and height of proposed lighting facilities.
B) Subdivision Plat supporting data as required by Section 12 of the Subdivision Ordinance
(if subdivision is proposed);
C) Grading and Filling Plan;
D) Tree Preservation Plan;
E) Sediment and Erosion Control Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, as
applicable; and
F) Landscaping Plan.
9.7.3 Thoroughfare Network.
A) Orientation of Thoroughfares. The orientation of streets and pedestrian access should
enhance open spaces and prominent buildings and provide for the maximum number of lots
with southern exposure. All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, except as
specified below:
i) Type A thoroughfares that terminate in cul-de-sacs may be permitted only when
topography prevents the use of loop streets.
ii) Any thoroughfare may terminate in a stub street when the stubs act as connections to
future phases of the development or adjacent undeveloped areas. A stub requires a
dedication of public right-of-way or similar title restriction encumbering the area on the
property from the closest intersection to the phase line or property boundary over which
the thoroughfare would run if built out.
B) Street Layout.
i) No lot shall be more than 550 feet from a street intersection. A future intersection
proposed as part of a later phase of the same development may be used to meet this
requirement. Local streets shall be designed to limit and slow through traffic by narrower
roadways, short lengths and other geometric configurations.
ii) Low volume streets (Types A and B) should be aligned to form three-way
intersections when possible. Three-way intersections create an inherent right-of-way
assignment (the through street receives precedence), which significantly reduces accidents
without the use of traffic controls.
iii) A low volume street that intersects a higher-order street (Types C, D and Boulevard),
should be aligned with another street to form a four-way intersection, which can easily be
regulated by a stop sign or other traffic control device.
iv) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. No street shall intersect
another at an angle of less than 75 degrees.
v) The roadway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of 20 feet for low-volume streets and 30 feet for intersections involving
higher-order streets.
a. Where the intersection of low-volume streets will be controlled by the placement of
stop signs, the radius may be reduced to 15 feet.
b. The intersection of a low-volume street and an alley shall be rounded by a tangential
arc with a minimum radius of 10 feet.
vi) Pedestrian crossing distances at intersections shall be shortened to the greatest extent
possible, using curb bump-outs to cover space assigned to parking in other parts of the
thoroughfare (see Figure 5, Boulevard, for example), or similar methods to reduce the
average time required for a pedestrian to cross the travel lanes of a thoroughfare.
vii) Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at intersections, unless controlled by traffic
signal devices.
a. For Type C and D streets intersecting low-volume streets the minimum
required clear sight distance shall be 120 feet.
b. For a Type C or D street intersecting another Type C or D street the
minimum required clear sight distance shall be 130 feet.
c. For any street intersecting either County Road E or U.S. Highway 61, the
minimum required clear sight distance is subject to the standards of Ramsey County
or the Minnesota Department of Transportation..
d. For Type A and B streets intersecting any other streets the minimum required
clear sight distance shall be 15 feet.
C) Pedestrian Network. Pedestrian sidewalks, paths and walkways shall be provided
within the community and shall constitute an integral element of the overall site design. They
shall provide safe, convenient and attractive connections to, from and among community focal
points, including residential neighborhoods, town and neighborhood centers, transit stops,
schools, parks and recreation areas, municipal buildings, and other public facilities.
i) Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets, except for residential access
lanes (Type A streets), which may have sidewalks on one side.
ii) Pedestrian paths shall be landscaped to provide scale, enclosure and shade.
iii) Intersections of pedestrian paths with streets shall be designed with clearly defined
edges. Crosswalks shall be well-lit and defined with contrasting paving materials or
striping.
iv) Sidewalks and paths shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width in residential areas, and 10
feet within commercial and civic areas, where practicable. Where space for the minimum
width is not available, the maximum practicable width shall be used.
v) Within lots, walkways shall provide pedestrian access through parking areas or open
space to building entries. Such walkways shall be located and aligned to directly and
continuously connect areas and points of pedestrian origin and destination. Such
walkways shall be at least 5 feet in width and be delineated by grade separation, planters, or
alternate paving material.
vi) Where the primary pedestrian access to a building or site crosses an internal traffic
lane or other automotive access, the pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place priority
on pedestrian access and safety. The material and layout shall be continuous as the
pedestrian access crosses, with a break in continuity of the automotive paving and not in
the pedestrian access way.
vii) All sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be handicapped accessible. Curb cuts and ramps shall be
located at convenient, safe locations for the physically disabled, bicyclists, and people pushing strollers or carts.
The location and design of curb cuts a
ramps shall meet the requirements of County and State Americans with Disabilities Act
ramp standards, and shall avoid crossing or directing pedestrian and bicycle traffic through
loading areas, drive-in lanes, and solid waste storage and collection areas.
viii) Where transit service is available or planned, site plans shall provide pleasant and
convenient access to transit stops. Where transit shelters are provided, they shall be placed
in locations that promote security through natural surveillance and visibility, and shall be
well-lighted and weather-protected.
9.7.4 Civic Space Placement. The plans should identify the 10% or more of the total acreage in
development which will be developed as Civic Space. Layout and relation to surrounding
thoroughfares should be clearly depicted on the plans. If a development is proposed in phases, the
10% Civic Space requirement shall be calculated for the development as a whole, instead of for each
phase. The apportionment of Civic Space dedication may be unbalanced among the proposed phases,
though any initial phase of a development must include at least one Civic Space in proportion to the
size of the phase. Phased development plans which propose to meet over half of the Civic Space
requirement in a second or later phase must include a timetable which shows the development
dedicating or building at least half of the required Civic Space within 3 years of initial development
approval.
9.7.5 Building Placement Standards. The types of buildings proposed in the plan and their
placement within the property is governed by the Building Type Standards set forth at Section 9.6 and
depicted in Figures 6 through 15. The plan must depict the types of buildings intended for
construction, their proposed disposition, any incentives sought by virtue of the intended design of any
buildings or arrangement of building types, and any special requirements or requests for variance
required to implement the building placement plan.
9.7.6 Design Review. The Zoning Administrator shall refer all applications requiring evaluation of
the Design Standards in 9.10 to the City Architect. The Architect shall review the development plan
and supporting documents for conformance with the Design Review guidelines at Section 9.10 and
provide written comment to the Zoning Administrator. If any deficiencies are noted by the City
Architect in the design when the applying the Design Standards, the Architect shall describe the
deficiency and suggest at least one complying alternative.
9.7.7 Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time
of development application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and
their effect on the overall Development Plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically
delegated within the ordinance creating the applicable incentive. The Zoning Administrator shall
confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by ordinance or at the Administrator’s best
discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make recommendations to the approving
authority. If incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall reach agreement
on the application of incentives prior to submitting the application to the Planning Commission. If any
applied-for incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of
the plans to incorporate the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant
electing to re-submit plans shall submit a written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable
timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358, and other applicable laws and ordinances.
The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the re-submitted materials within the
timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any applicable time
period.
9.8 Plans for Re-development of Single Lots or Small Subdivisions. An applicant shall follow the following
procedure when seeking approval for new building construction (not an addition or expansion to an existing
building) upon land which was developed at the time of the application, either requires no subdivision or is
eligible for minor subdivision approval, and for which no new streets are required. Such applications should be
processed for a Zoning Compliance Permit administratively by the Zoning Administrator unless the proposal
requires conditional use permit or variance approval.
9.8.1 Suggested Presentation. The plans for this type of development shall use the Building Type
templates at Figures 6 through 15, as allowed by the sub-zone in which the property lies. Plans should
introduce new lot lines, if any, and then depict the placement and disposition of the proposed building
type for each lot.
9.8.2 Required Submissions. The applicant shall submit four (4) sets of the application materials
listed in 9.7.2. The Zoning Administrator may allow the applicant to omit certain items if it is clear that
they are not applicable to the overall proposal. In all circumstances, the proposal shall include the
elements required for review under Sections 9.7.5 (Building Type) and 9.7.6 (Design).
9.8.3 Connectivity requirements. While improvements to an existing roadway are not required,
plans under this subsection must indicate how the proposed construction would relate to the roadway
if it were reconstructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.7.3. Proposals under this
Section 9.8 involving more than one lot shall comply with Section 9.7.3(C). Single-lot proposals must
indicate design incorporating the requirements of 9.7.3(C), but only must build the improvements
when the adjacent lots on the same side of the right-of-way also have built such improvements or have
been approved for construction under this Section.
9.8.4 Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time
of development application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and
their effect on the overall development plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically
delegated within the ordinance creating the applicable incentive. The request for incentive approval
does not require City Council approval of the entire plan. The Zoning Administrator shall confer with
at least one City consultant, as directed by ordinance or at the Administrator’s best discretion, in order
to evaluate the proposed incentives and make recommendations to the approving authority. If
incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall reach agreement on the
application of incentives prior to submitting the application to the Planning Commission. If any
applied-for incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of
the plans to incorporate the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant
electing to re-submit plans shall submit a written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable
timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358, and other applicable laws and ordinances.
The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the re-submitted materials within the
timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any applicable time
period.
9.8.5 Administrative Approval. If the application satisfies all applicable criteria, the Zoning
Administrator shall approve the Zoning Compliance Permit. The applicant shall execute a
Development Agreement with the City prior to the receipt of any building permit under the plan.
9.9 Parking Regulations.
9.9.1 On-street parking, either diagonal (angled) or parallel, shall be provided along all streets other
than Alleys. Parking is indicated on the Thoroughfare standards at Figures 2 and 3. Where angle
parking is permitted or required, the parking may be forward or reverse angle. Parking spaces (other
than handicapped spaces) on thoroughfares and on-grade parking lots shall be no wider than 9 feet.
Plans for new development and other major subdivisions are encouraged to plan thoroughfares and
civic spaces to provide a significant portion of the parking required for planned buildings. On-street
parking within 1/8 of a mile of a building entrance may be applied toward that building’s applicable
parking requirement.
9.9.2 A parking plan shall be included for all buildings, indicating how the parking requirement for each
proposed building is met through on-street parking, shared off-street parking or dedicated off-street
parking. Reductions in the number of spaces required by the Building Type regulations may be
approved if the proposal is supported by a parking study specific to the proposed building(s) and likely
tenants. Shared parking proposals are encouraged and should reference the Urban Land Institute’s
Shared Parking Guidelines or similar guidance. Plans including off-street parking and loading facilities
within the Gateway District shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner. If, upon review,
either consultant determines that an alternative to the proposed parking plan is desirable, it will
recommend an alternate parking plan to the Planning Commission, which shall make a
recommendation to the City Council for final review and approval.
9.9.3 The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require a contribution of
land or money toward community parking facilities in lieu of providing off-street parking facilities on
the property to be developed.
9.9.4 On-grade parking areas within lots are prohibited within any front yard setback or in front of the
principal building. On-grade parking areas shall be located at the side or the rear of buildings in midblock
areas, and may not be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any public streets (excluding
Alleys). Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance.
9.9.5 Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of interlocking pavers or similar materials is
strongly encouraged for areas that serve low-impact parking needs, such as remote parking lots, parking
areas for periodic uses and parking in natural amenity areas.
9.9.6 Bicycle Parking. Parking plans shall include designed space and facilities for bicycle parking, at a
ratio of 1 bicycle parking space for each 4 residential units or 20 required automobile spaces. Bicycle
parking facilities shall be located within fifty (50) feet of building entrances and shall be visible from the
uses they serve. They shall not be located so as to impede pedestrian or automobile traffic flow or to
cause damage to plants and trees from bicycle traffic. The facilities shall be of permanent construction,
attached to the ground, and designed to allow the bicycle frame and both wheels to be securely locked
to the parking structure. Facilities shall be at least two feet in width and six feet in length, and be
placed to allow a minimum of five feet of back-out or maneuver space.
9.10 Design Review Standards. The guidelines established in this section are for the purpose of promoting
quality development that is attractive, convenient and compatible with surrounding uses. These guidelines are
intended to be general in nature and not to restrict creativity, variety or innovation. However, unless site
characteristics or conditions dictate otherwise, Gem Lake’s expectation is that these guidelines be adhered to. In
cases where building and site design standards are specific to Building Types, those standards are noted within
the Building Type Template.
9.10.1 Site layout guidelines.
A. Site design shall incorporate existing topography and natural features, such as hillsides,
wooded areas and greenways. Important vistas and viewpoints, both from the site and into the
site, should be protected and enhanced.
B. Building arrangement. When multiple buildings are proposed for a site, care should be taken
to provide maximum street exposure for all buildings.
C. Service and docking facilities. Loading, delivery and service bays should be oriented away
from existing residences and public streets. When this is impractical, service and docking areas
shall be screened from view through the provision of walls, fencing or landscaping.
D. Drive-through facilities, where permitted, shall be designed with safe and easily understood
traffic patterns and shall provide sufficient stacking space, based on requirements of Section 9.9.
Drive-through windows should not face public streets; and loudspeakers should not create
nuisances for adjacent properties.
E. Shadowing. Where possible, buildings shall be located so that they minimize shadowing on
adjacent properties. A sun and shadow study may be required for any building that is more than
2 ½ stories or 35 feet in height.
9.10.2. Building placement – Nonresidential and Mixed uses. At least 70 percent of the front facade of
any building shall be located on the front build-to line as indicated by the Building Type Template
(with the exception of a “dooryard” layout as indicated on the template’s layout diagram). The
placement of buildings shall reinforce the street wall, maximize natural surveillance and visibility,
enhance the character of the surrounding area and facilitate pedestrian access and circulation. Parking
areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building or use served. The City Council, with
the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement, provided that any
adverse effects shall be mitigated by a masonry wall, decorative fence or planted materials, between 38
and 46 inches in height, which reinforces the street wall.
9.10.3. Building placement – Residential-only uses. Buildings shall be located so that the front doors of
the building or individual units face the public street rather than the interior of the site, unless a
courtyard layout is authorized on the Template for the particular building. Parking areas and garages
larger than 3 cars shall be located to the rear or interior of the site, or underground. The City Council,
with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement when one or
more of the following occurs:
A) The proposed building has primary or corner frontage on a Type C or Type D street.
B) Commercial buildings are located across the street from the proposed building.
C) Unusual or unique site conditions make the requirement impractical.
9.10.4. Building height and scale. In addition to the height and mass instructions contained within the
Building Type Templates, the height and scale of new buildings shall be related to the prevailing scale
of surrounding development and shall be compatible with surrounding buildings in roof form and
pitch. Larger buildings, where permitted, shall be designed to reflect the same architectural massing
and style as other buildings built or proposed within a two-block area. If no other single, large
buildings are present or proposed in the area, then the facade of the new building shall be designed to
reflect the form, mass and shape of several contiguous smaller buildings within the two block area.
The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this
requirement if a larger building is proposed, to reduce its apparent size by dividing the building mass
into smaller sections, including:
A) Stepping back or extending a portion of the building façade;
B) Emphasizing architectural elements, including windows and entries; and
C) Emphasizing architectural elements of the roof, including dormers, chimneys and gables.
9.10.5. Building facades. Building facades shall provide architectural detail and shall contain windows at
the ground level in order to create visual interest and maximize outdoor surveillance and visibility.
Exterior materials and appearance shall be compatible with surrounding buildings.
A) Front Facades and Entries.
1. Primary entries to residential buildings shall be emphasized through the use of
architectural features such as porches and roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details
that express the importance of the entrance. At least 20 percent of the first floor facade
that faces a public street or sidewalk shall consist of windows and doors. Windows shall be
distributed in a more or less even manner. Plans should avoid placing garage doors and
openings on the front façade of a building. If the garage door or opening is placed on the
front façade, it shall not be located on the building’s leading edge facing the street, but
shall be set back at least six feet from the front line of the building or an approved front
yard encroachment (such as a porch, or a deck over a tuck-under garage).
2. Primary entries to nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be emphasized through
the use of architectural features such as roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details
that express the importance of the entrance. At least 60 percent of the first floor facade
that faces a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly-tinted
glass that allow views into and out of the building. The windows shall be distributed in a
more or less even manner. The use of traditional window dimensions and a one-over-one
or two-over-one sash arrangement is strongly preferred. Buildings shall have entrances to
a street or public open space placed no more than sixty (60) feet apart. Buildings are
strongly encouraged to use awnings on the front façade, particularly over the main entry.
The awning should be compatible in style, material and color to the rest of the building,
and the width of the awning should fit the geometry of the building façade. There may be
signage on the end panel or front valance of an awning, proportional to the space
available. The installation of the awning should not hide any architectural detail or
character features of the building.
B) Side and Rear Facades. The exterior materials and appearance of the rear and side walls of
any building shall be similar to and compatible with the front of the building. Where the
façade is visible from a public street or right-of-way or any residential district and concreteblock
construction is used, the façade shall use integrally colored block or textured block. Any
exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public street, public open space, or abutting
property may not exceed sixty feet (60’) in length without significant visual relief consisting of
one or more of the following:
1. The façade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different materials
or textures;
2. Horizontal offsets of at least four feet (4’) in depth;
3. Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet (4’); or
4. Fenestration at the first-floor level which is recessed horizontally at least one foot (1’)
into the façade.
9.10.6. Architectural variety. The use of a variety of architectural features and building materials is
encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character. When accent colors are
proposed, the number of colors should be limited to prevent a gaudy appearance.
9.10.7. Materials. All buildings shall be constructed with materials that are attractive in appearance,
durable with a permanent finish, and of high quality. New mixed-use or commercial buildings erected
within the Gateway District shall be of masonry construction, an equivalent, or better. Exterior
building materials shall be classified as either primary, secondary, or accent materials. Primary materials
shall cover at least sixty percent (60%) of the façade of a building. Secondary materials may cover no
more than thirty percent (30%) of the façade. Accent materials may include door and window frames,
lintels, cornices and other minor elements, and may cover no more than ten percent (10%) of the
façade.
A) Primary materials may be face brick, stone, glass, architectural concrete or precast concrete
units (integrally colored block or textured block), provided that surfaces are molded, serrated
examples or treated with a textured material in order to give the wall surface a threedimensional
character.
B) Secondary materials may be decorative block or integrally colored stucco, fiber cement
siding (integrally colored or painted) with hidden seams. Synthetic stucco may be used as a
secondary material on upper floors only.
C) Accent materials may be wood, metal or fiber cement when used in trim, fascia or soffit if
appropriately integrated into the overall building design and not situated in areas which will be
subject to physical or environmental damage.
D) Prohibited Materials. No buildings shall be constructed of sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron,
steel, corrugated metal, plastic or fiberglass siding. Face materials which rapidly deteriorate or
become unsightly such as galvanized metal or unfinished structural clay tile are not permitted.
9.10.8 Colors. Colors used for exterior surfaces shall be harmonious with surrounding development
and shall visually reflect the traditional concept of the town center. Contrasting colors should be used
to emphasize architectural detail. Where a development plan proposes multiple buildings, the plan
shall carry over colors and materials across adjacent buildings.
9.10.9 Roofs. The predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood Center subzone is flat with
articulated parapets; the predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood General subzone is peaked.
Roof shapes in the Neighborhood Mixed-Use subzone should achieve a gradual transition between the
two roof types.
9.10.10 Outdoor Storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either materials or products except
through the issuance of a conditional use permit.
9.10.11 Screening. Property boundaries abutting property that is not included within the Gateway
District shall have significant dense vegetative screening.
9.10.12 Signage. Signage should be integrated as an architectural element, with attention given to the
color, scale and orientation of all proposed signs in relation to the overall design of the building. Signs
shall conform to the regulations in Section 19 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Appendix A
Gateway Ordinance 107B
Effective 10/21/2014
Non-conforming Use
1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to accomplish the following:
a) recognize the existence of uses which were lawful when established but which
no longer meet all ordinance requirements;
b) discourage the enlargement, expansion, intensification or extension of any
non- conforming use or any increase in the impact of a non-conforming use on
adjacent properties;
c) regulate the repair, replacement, restoration, and improvement of non-conforming
uses to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, safety, or
welfare; and
d) encourage the elimination of non-conforming uses or reduce their impact on
adjacent properties.
2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases have the meanings
given to them.
a) "Non-conformity" or "non-conforming use" means any land use, structure, physical
form of land development, lot of record or sign that is not in full compliance with the
regulations of this ordinance and either (1) was legally established before the effective
date of the ordinance provision with which it does not comply, or (2) became nonconforming
because of other governmental action, such as a court order or a taking by a
governmental body under eminent domain or negotiated sale. A non-conformity or nonconforming
use does not include a land use, structure, physical form of land
development, lot of record, or sign that was allowed to deviate from this ordinance by
an approved variance. A non-conformity or non-conforming use is one of two types of
physical land development: a non-conforming land use or a non-conforming
development.
b) "Non-conforming land use" means an activity using land, buildings, structures, or
any combination of these, for a purpose that is not currently allowed as a use in the
zoning district in which it is located.
c) "Non-conforming development" means a non-conformity other than a nonconforming
land use that does not currently conform to an ordinance standard such
as height, setback, or size.
d) "Expansion," "enlargement," or "intensification" means any increase in a dimension,
size, area, volume, or height, any increase in the area of use, any placement of a
structure or part thereof where none existed before, any addition of a site feature such as
a deck, patio, fence, driveway, parking area, or swimming pool, any improvement that
would allow the land to be more intensely developed, any move of operations to a new
location on the property, or any increase in intensity of use based on a review of the
original nature, function or purpose of the non-conforming use, the hours of operation,
traffic, parking, noise, exterior storage, signs, exterior lighting, types of operations, types
of goods or services offered, odors, area of operation, number of employees, and other
factors deemed relevant by the city.
e) "Improvement" means making the non-conforming use better, more efficient, or more
aesthetically pleasing, including any change that does not replicate what pre-existed, but
does not include an expansion, enlargement, or intensification.
f) "Replacement," "reconstruction," or "restoration" means construction that exactly
matches pre-existing conditions.
3. Non conforming Use Permit.
a) A non conforming use shall not be allowed unless a permit is issued in accordance
with this section.
b) Application.
Application for a non-conforming use permit must be made to the zoning administrator.
The application must be on forms provided by the city and must be accompanied by the
following:
1) a plat or map of the property which shows, at a minimum, all lot lines,
existing and proposed structures, driveways and parking areas, significant
topographical features and mature trees;
2) evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
3) the fee required by the code of city ordinances; and
4) such other information as may be required by the city.
c) Public Hearing.
Upon receipt of a completed application, a date will be set for a public hearing before the
City Council. The public hearing will be held only after notice has been sent by mail to
the owners of all properties situated wholly or partially within 400 feet, as reflected in the
certified records of the county auditor.
d) Decisions.
1) A permit for a non-conforming use may be granted, but is not mandated, when the
applicant meets the burden of proving that:
a. the proposed use is a reasonable use of the property, considering such things
as:
1. functional and aesthetic justifications for the use;
2. adequacy of off-street parking for the use;
3. absence of adverse off-site impacts from such things as traffic, noise,
dust, odors, and parking; and
4. improvement to the appearance and stability of the property and
neighborhood.
b. the circumstances justifying the use are unique to the property, are not caused
by the landowner, are not solely for the landowner's convenience, and are not
solely because of economic considerations; and
c. the use would not adversely affect or alter the essential character of the
neighborhood.
2) The City Council may grant a non conforming use permit only upon an affirmative
vote of at least a majority of its full membership. The City Council may impose conditions
in granting a non conforming use permit to affect the intent of this ordinance and to protect
adjacent properties. The City Council must accompany its decision to deny a
nonconforming use permit with a statement of its findings and must serve a copy of its
decision upon the applicant by mail.
3) A non conforming use permit shall not be issued for a period of more than five (5)
years. Such permit mat be renewed only upon re-application for a non conforming use
permit, pursuant to the procedures and requirements established in this section.
4) Any non conforming use damaged by fire, flood, explosion or other casualty may be
re-established and used as previously permitted if such re-establishment is approved by
the city council. Such non conforming use shall be re-established within twelve (12)
months of the casualty to having no greater size ore intensity than before the casualty.
5) In the event that any non conforming use ceases or is abandoned voluntarily, for a
period of one (1) year, such non conforming use shall not be resumed.
8/19/2014
Changes
9.6.2 USE OF BUILDING-TYPE TEMPLATES
Figures 6 through 15 contain all regulatory information governing the dimensions of lots and the dimensions, setbacks, height, mass,
and placement use of buildings in the district. The city’s review of a development application shall primarily apply the information contained in
the applicable building-type templates. The Templates as well as Section 9.6.5 hereof shall determine uses of the buildings in the district. To the
extent the Templates conflict with Section 9.6.5, the language contained in Section 9.6.5 shall control and supersede the Templates. Terms and
concepts used within the building-type Templates are further defined as follows:
9.6.5 Use of Regulations in the Gateway District.
The Gateway District’s regulatory focus is first upon the form of each building and its relation to the surrounding environment. This
section regulates the use of space within the building, except to the extent that any structure or land use existed as legally non-conforming use
prior to the adoption of this Section, as a matter secondary to the built form. Use of land in the District is regulated by the Building Type
Templates and is directly related to the building form. The use of land in the District is regulated by the Building Type Templates, the uses set
forth in this Section 9.6.5 and Figures 16 and 17 which are part of this Ordinance and is related to the building form. To the extent uses set forth
in the Templates and Figures 16 and 17 conflict with the uses set forth in this Section 9.6.5A, the uses set forth in this Section 9.6.5A shall control
and supersede the uses set forth in the Templates and Figures 16 and 17.
Commercial.
Premises for the conduct of the following activities which are not included within the meaning of “office” or “retail” for purposes of
this Section: athletic club/fitness center (primary or only use of building space); business school or trade school, veterinary clinic, funeral home,
hotel, recreation primary use (such as a bowling alley); cabinet and carpentry shop, heating, plumbing or electrical sales and service; printing
shop, upholstery shop, warehousing, conditional use of space assigned as commercial are automotive repair and service (including gas stations),
car wash, light industrial uses which manufacture, process, store and distribute foods and materials not likely to create offensive noise, odors,
vibrations, dust, smoke, heat, glare or other objectionable influences and are in general dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere.
(B) Accessory Alternative Uses. The Figures 16 and 17 provide charts stating the compatibility of listed accessory uses and
variations on categorical primary uses (such as restricting residential uses to Senior Housing) with each building type. The
items listed in Figures 16 and 17 further refine the general definitions stated above, and any perceived conflict should be
resolved in favor of the general definitions stated above. Resolved in favor of Figures 16 and 17. Placement of accessory
buildings is generally noted on the Building-Type Template and is also governed by the Design Standards.
10/21/2014
Added Appendix A non-conforming use requirements

















CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 111
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONDUCT OF PEDDLERS, SOLICITIORS,
AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS WITHIN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure citizens’
privacy rights in their homes and protect residents from fraud and other crimes. This regulation
is intended to regulate the appropriate time, place and manner of door-to-door or transient
business methods employed within the City. In doing so, the Ordinance shall be applied without
regard to the affiliations or messages of any person engaged in these practices. It is not the intent
of this ordinance to prohibit or place any prior restraint on a person’s freedom of speech, religion
or association, and any conflict between this Ordinance and those interests shall be resolved in
favor of the speech, religion or associative interest.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by
context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
ordinance, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
CANVASSER. A person who goes door-to-door for the purpose of obtaining or
attempting to further advocacy of a religious, social or political organization or cause
through collection of signatures, donations, memberships, other financial support, or
taking orders for goods to be delivered at a later date in order to raise money for the
supported not-for-profit organization or cause.
DOOR-TO-DOOR. Where used, this term refers to the act of going from house to house,
business to business, street to street, or any other type of place-to-place movement within
the City of Gem Lake in furtherance of activity described within this Ordinance, without
prior invitation by the owner or occupant of each of the places visited for that purpose.
NON-COMMERICAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-todoor
for the primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other
ideological beliefs, through personal interaction, distribution of written materials, or both.
PEDDLER. A person engaged in for-profit business with no fixed place of business, but
goes door-to-door for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell the goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting for delivery immediately upon sale. For
purposes of this ordinance, the term peddler shall have the same common meaning as the
term “hawker.”
PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership, or
similar association.
PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person, including a corporation or other entity,
who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services for a religious,
politician, social, or other charitable organization.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open for
the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be
considered regular business days.
SOLICITOR. A person engaged in for-profit business who goes door-to-door for the
purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property, or services for which delivery or performance shall
occur at a later time.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who engages in temporary or transient for-profit
business in the city selling or attempting to sell goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other property, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business hires, leases,
occupies or uses a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, portable shelter, or vacant lot for the
exhibition and sale of such items, or who leases or intends to occupy a building or portion
thereof for fewer than four (4) months for the exhibition and sale of such items.
SECTION 3. EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to:
3.1 Non-commercial door-to-door advocates and canvassers. Nothing within this
ordinance shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict non-commercial door-to-door
advocates and canvassers. Person engaging in such activity shall not be required to
register as a solicitor under Section 7.
3.2 Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise, or other personal property to a retail seller of the items being sold by the
wholesaler.
3.3 Any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the purpose of
establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of
perishable food and dairy products, such as baked goods or milk.
3.4 Any person selling products of a farm or garden which that person occupies and
cultivates.
3.5 Any person making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters, or other similar
publications on an established customer delivery route, or when publications are
delivered to the community at large, even if the publications contain advertising or
solicitations for a for-profit business.
3.6 Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as garage sales, rummage
sales, or estate sales.
3.7 Any person participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market.
3.8 Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer.
3.9 Any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.
Exemption from these definitions shall not, for the scope of this chapter, excuse any person from
complying with any other applicable statutory provision or requirement provided by another city
ordinance. A person exempt from these definitions must still obey a placard posted by a
property owner or tenant as described in Section 10.
SECTION 4. LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
4.1 County license required. No person shall conduct business as a transient merchant
within the city limits without first having obtained a Transient Merchant License from
Ramsey County.
4.2 City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this Ordinance, no person
shall conduct business within the City of Gem Lake as a peddler or a transient merchant
without first obtaining a license from the City. Solicitors need not be licensed, but are
required to register with the city pursuant to Section 8.
4.3 Application. An application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or
transient merchant shall be made at least fourteen (14) regular business days before the
applicant desires to begin conducting a business operation within the city. Application for
a license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from the
office of the city clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications
shall include the following information:
(a) The applicant’s full legal name.
(b) Any and all other names under which the applicant has or does conduct
business, or to which the applicant will officially answer to.
(c) A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight,
any distinguishing marks or features, and the like).
(d) Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.
(e) Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
(f) Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed, or
operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or an agent.
(g) Full address of applicant’s regular place of business, if any exists.
(h) Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the applicant, including
cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.
(i) The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
(j) Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
(k) The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business. If the
applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be
conducting business within the city, with a maximum of fourteen (14) consecutive
days.
(l) Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be
reached while conducting business within the city, including the location where a
transient merchant intends to set up his or her business.
(m)A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted with the last
five (5) years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for violating any
state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than minor traffic offenses.
(n) A list of the three (3) most recent locations where the applicant has conducted
business as a peddler or transient merchant.
(o) Proof of any required county license.
(p) Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s agent for
any location to be used by a transient merchant.
(q) A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
(r) Any and all additional information as may be deemed necessary by the City
Council.
(s) The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form of
identification.
(t) The license plate number, registration information, vehicle identification
number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle to be used in conjunction
with the licensed business operation.
4.4 Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee
established in the city licensing fee schedule as it may be amended from time to time.
4.5 Procedure. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the license fee, the city
clerk will, within two (2) regular business days, determine if the application is complete.
An application will be considered complete if all required information is provided. If the
city clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the city clerk must inform the
applicant of the required, necessary information that is missing. If the application is
complete, the city clerk must order any investigation, including background checks,
necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten (10) regular
business days of receiving a complete application the city clerk must issue the license
unless grounds exist for denying the license application under Section 4, in which case
the clerk must deny the request for a city peddler or transient merchant license. If the city
clerk denies the license application, the applicant must be notified in writing of the
decision, the reason for denial and the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting,
within twenty (20) days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City
Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal with twenty (20) days of the date of the
request for a hearing. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can
be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
4.6 Duration. An annual license granted under this ordinance shall be valid for one
calendar year from the date of issuance. All other licenses granted to peddlers and
transient merchants under this ordinance shall be valid only during the time period
indicated on the license.
SECTION 5. LICENSE INELIGIBILITY. The following shall be grounds for denying a
peddler or transient merchant license:
5.1 The failure of an applicant to obtain and demonstrate proof of having obtained any
required county license.
5.2 The failure of an applicant to truthfully provide any information requested by the
city as part of the application process.
5.3 The failure of an applicant to sign the license application.
5.4 The failure of an applicant to pay the required fee at the time of application.
5.5 A conviction with the past five (5) years of the date of application for any violation
of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely
reflects upon the person’s ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in a professional, honest and legal manner. Such violations shall include, but are
not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
5.6 The revocation with the past five (5) years of any license issued to an applicant for
the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant.
5.7 Established bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall
include, but is not limited to, the existence of more than three (3) complaints against an
applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General
or other state attorney general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office
or agency, within the preceding twelve (12) months, or three (3) complaints filed with the
City against an applicant within the preceding five (5) years.
SECTION 6. LICENSE SUPENSION AND REVOCATION
6.1 Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the
discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the following:
(a) Subsequent knowledge by the city of fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect
statements provided by an applicant on the application form.
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the
licensed activity.
(c) Subsequent conviction of any offense to which the granting of the license
could have been denied under Section 4.
(d) Engaging in any prohibited activity as provided under Section 8 of this
ordinance.
(e) Violation of any other provision of this ordinance.
6.2 Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of any license
issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or
transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of
each authorized person’s authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant
on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.
6.3 Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city
shall provide a license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the
licensee of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered
in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license application,
of if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
6.4 Public Hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in section 6.3, the licensee shall
have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the
city clerk within ten (10) days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed
with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of a mailed notice, service shall be
considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is
requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within twenty (20)
days from the date of the request for the public hearing. Within three (3) regular business
days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.
6.5 Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or
safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant
licensed under this ordinance, the City Council may immediately suspend the person’s
license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed
in section 6.4.
6.6 Appeal. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall
have the right to appeal that decision in court.
SECTION 7. LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY. No license issued under this chapter shall be
transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was issued.
SECTION 8. REGISTRATION.
8.1 All solicitors shall be required to register with the city prior to engaging in those
activities. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application,
but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the
city clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the
registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferrable.
8.2 Individuals that will be engaging in canvassing or non-commercial door-to-door
advocacy shall not be required to register.
8.3 Professional fundraisers not exempt. A professional fundraiser working on behalf
of an otherwise exempt group or person shall not be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this ordinance.
SECTION 9. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. No peddler, solicitor, canvasser, transient
merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate, or other person engaged in other similar
activities shall conduct business in any of the following manner:
9.1 Calling attention to his or her activities or the items to be sold by means of blowing
any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be
unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
9.2 Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, on any street,
sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.
9.3 Conducting themselves or their business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of any specific individual or the general public.
9.4 Conducting business before 8 a.m. or after 8 p.m.
9.5 Failing to provide proof of license, or registration, and identification when
requested.
9.6 Using the license or registration of another person.
9.7 Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services being sold,
including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a
license or certificate of registration to that person.
9.8 Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave.
9.9 Otherwise conducting themselves or operating their business in any manner that a
reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
SECTION 10. EXCLUSION BY PLACARD. Unless specifically invited by the property
owner or tenant, no peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, canvasser, non-commercial door-todoor
advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall enter onto the property of
another for the purpose of conducting such business when the property is marked with a sign or
placard that is:
(1) At least four inches long;
(2) At least four inches wide;
(3) With print of at least 48 point in size;
(4) Which states “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” “Peddlers, Solicitors,
and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.
No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper
with any sign or placard under this section.
SECTION 11. PENALTY. Any individual found in violation of any provision of this
ordinance, including disobedience of a property placard, shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 12. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this ordinance is found to be invalid for
any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall not
be affected.
SECTION 13. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force upon its
passage and publication.
Dated: ______________________, 2009
________________________ __________________________
Robert Uzpen – Mayor William Short - Clerk
Summary of Ordinance 111 approved by City Council and published in the White Bear Press on
________________, 2009.



















































CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 122
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE TO ADD
A NEW SECTION ALLOWING FOR A GARDEN OVERLAY ZONE.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT. A new Section 14 of Ordinance 43K is added, to read as
follows:
SECTION 14 - GARDEN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 14.1 Findings and Purpose.
14.1.1 The City Council makes the following findings:
A) The land-use plans of the City of Gem Lake historically have not assigned any land in the
City for long-term agricultural use, as the City has developed and continues to develop as a
primarily residential community surrounded by fully developed suburban neighborhoods.
The City Council reaffirms the City’s intent to encourage development of the City in
accordance with its adopted comprehensive plans.
B) At the time this Ordinance is considered, large land parcels in the City have yet to
develop any primary use and stand vacant. Additional large-lot property in the City is
projected to subdivide and develop into smaller lots over the next 10 to 30 years. The City
Council recognizes that economic conditions are not always favorable for real estate
development, and that the costs to carry vacant land can create pressures that promote suboptimal
development. Permitting small-scale agriculture as a primary use will allow owners
of large undeveloped parcels to qualify for agricultural tax classification, and thus lower tax
payments, without affecting the long-term plans for the land. The Council finds that
providing this means to temporarily ease this pressure will enhance the City’s ability to fully
realize the goals of its comprehensive plans.
C) Several cities and metropolitan areas are placing a greater emphasis on local food
production as a means of improving public health. Allowing the use of available space in the
City for “community gardens” or “market gardens” to grow food will promote local food
production and improve public health in Gem Lake and the surrounding community.
D) As an interim use of land, subject to the regulations proposed, community gardening and
market gardening will be compatible with all allowed land uses in the City of Gem Lake, and
with the goals of the City’s comprehensive plan.
14.1.2 The Council intends that the Garden Overlay District be available to overlay on parcels of
land in any existing zoning district to add the uses described in the district regulations to the list
of uses allowed upon that land. The Garden Overlay District may be applied to and
superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning Ordinance, as
existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. Nothing in this
Section is intended to affect the ability of landowners to maintain accessory uses that are allowed
without the Overlay zone upon their property, whether or not the Overlay zone covers their
property. This overlay district is intended to permit a temporary land use, and should no longer
be needed on a parcel when it eventually develops in accordance with the regulations of the
underlying zoning district.
Section 14.2 Definitions.
Community Garden means an area of land managed and maintained by a group of
individuals to grow plants and harvest food crops for personal or group use, consumption or
donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more
individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group, and may include common
areas maintained and used by group members.
Market Garden means an area of land managed and maintained by an individual or group
of individuals to grow plants and harvest food crops to be sold for profit.
Hoophouse means a structure made of PVC piping or other material covered with
translucent plastic, constructed in a half-round or hoop shape.
Coldframe means an unheated outdoor structure with a frame of wood or similar material
and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
Animal Husbandry means a use in which animals are reared or kept in order to sell,
consume or donate the animals or their products, such as meat, fur or eggs.
Aquaculture means a use in which food fish, shellfish or other marine foods, aquatic plants
or aquatic animals are cultured or grown in a body of water in order to sell, consume or donate
them or the products they produce.
Section 14.3 Requesting Garden Overlay. Applications to create a Garden Overlay District shall be
made and considered as a re-zoning request in accordance with Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. In
addition to the documents and materials generally required for a re-zoning application, the applicant
shall supply copies of draft leases, contracts or use agreements to which the groups or individuals
using the gardens will agree prior to using the garden space. Such agreements must provide the land
owner or designated representative with the legal ability to evict a tenant and bar entry to any
individual member of a group, if the tenant or individual violates the terms of this Ordinance, the
terms of the Interim Use Permit for the property, any restrictive term of the lease or agreement, or
any other applicable City Ordinance or state law.
Section 14.4 Termination of Garden Overlay. A Garden Overlay District shall remain in effect until
one of the following occurs:
14.4.1 City approval of a zoning application for a use or uses permitted in the underlying zone
(e.g. development plan, conditional use permit, or building permit); the Garden Overlay status
and any permits granted under the terms of this Section shall expire six months from the date of
approval; or
14.4.2 The Interim Use Permit for the property expires, and no application is made to renew the
permit within six months of the expiration; or
14.4.3 The Interim Use Permit for the property is revoked by the City Council for violations of
this Ordinance, permit conditions, or any other applicable law or ordinance.
Section 14.5 Interim Uses.
14.5.1 Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to be
Interim Uses in the Garden Overlay District:
A) Community Gardens.
B) Market Gardens.
14.5.2 Interim Use Permits granted under this Section expire on March 15th of each year. The
permit may be renewed annually, at the discretion of the City Council. Application for and
approval of an Interim Use Permit shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 17.5 of this
Ordinance. In addition to the requirements of that Section, the applicant shall provide a written
summary of the proposed uses of fertilizers, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals in the
maintenance of the gardens. In approving an Interim Use Permit, the City Council may attach
such additional conditions as it deems necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding land
uses, including conditions relating to the use of agricultural chemicals on the property.
Section 14.6 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the
following are allowed accessory uses to any validly issued Interim Use Permit in any Garden Overlay
District:
14.6.1 Hoophouses, coldframes and similar structures used to extend the growing season.
14.6.2 Benches, planting beds, compost bins, rain barrels and similar structures used to facilitate
the growth of plants.
14.6.3 Off-street parking and loading areas.
Section 14.7 Prohibited Practices.
14.7.1 No motorized implements or machinery may be used in the cultivation and maintenance
of any garden, except for plowing of the plots between the hours of 8:00 A.M and 5:00 P.M,
Monday through Friday. Motor vehicles of less than 7,000 lbs gross vehicle weight may be used
to deliver and carry away equipment, supplies and product.
14.7.2 Animal husbandry and aquaculture are not permitted activities within a Garden Overlay
zone.
14.7.3 No fuel, fertilizer, pesticides or similar chemicals shall be stored on the property.
Section 14.8 General Regulations.
14.8.1 The minimum land area for application of a Garden Overlay shall be ten acres.
14.8.2 All gardening activity and all structures and equipment shall be set back at least 20 feet
from the property line of any property not included within a Garden Overlay Zone, and at least
150 feet from any dwelling.
14.8.3 All gardens shall be divided into garden plots, separated from other plots and from
required setback areas by unpaved walkways of at least 6 feet in width. No single plot shall
cover more than 10% of the total land area of the property on which the plot is located.
14.8.4 Off-street parking and loading areas shall be unpaved and shall not exceed 15% of the
lot area covered by garden plots and required walkways.
14.8.5 The property owner is responsible for the collection and disposal of litter on the
property.
14.8.6 The hours of operation for a permitted garden are ½ hour before sunrise until ½ hour
after sunset.
14.8.7 The property owner is responsible for ensuring compliance with all other applicable
laws, ordinances and regulations, including city ordinances and watershed district rules governing
wetlands and stormwater control.
SECTION 2. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this
Ordinance be held to be invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to
be invalid.
SECTION 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication.
Dated: ______________________, 2011
________________________ __________________________
Robert Uzpen – Mayor William Short - Clerk
Summary of Ordinance 122 approved by City Council and published in the White Bear Press on
________________, 2011.
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 123
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE
RELATING TO THE CONSIDERATION AND ALLOWANCE OF VARIANCES FROM
THE ZONING ORDINANCE.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT. Section 3.2 of Ordinance 43K is amended, to delete the
definitions of “Hardship, Undue” and “Variance”.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Section 17.4 of Ordinance 43K is amended as follows (deleted
text struck through, new text underlined):
Section 17.4 Variances
17.4.1 Purpose and Intent. The City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeal and Adjustment,
may grant Variances from the strict applications of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
and impose conditions and safeguards in the Variances so granted. These Variances shall be
considered in cases where by reason of narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a lot or where
by reason of exceptional topographic or water conditions or where other extraordinary and
exceptional conditions of such lot exist, the strict application of the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance would result in practical difficulties an undue hardship upon the owner of such lot
in developing or using such lot in a manner customary and legally permissible within
complying with the regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located. “Practical
difficulties,” as used in connection with the grant of a variance, means that the property
owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning
ordinance; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not
created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality. Economic considerations alone shall do not constitute undue hardship for which
a Variance will be considered or issued if a reasonable use for the real property exists under
the terms of the Zoning Ordinance practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are
not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. A variance may
not be granted to allow any use that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the property
is located.
17.4.2 Application. An application for any Variance from the Zoning Ordinance shall be
made on a form provided by the City. If the Variance is to be considered in association with
any other Building Permits, Conditional or Interim Use Permits, or Subdivision, all related
applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Variance application so as to
represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee
payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The
application(s) shall state full all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented
by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the Variance as required and
communicated by the Zoning Administrator.
A) An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and
all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator.
As required by law, the City shall act on the application within the period prescribed
unless said required period is extended or waived.
B) When reviewing variance applications, impact on the following criteria shall be
reviewed and measured by the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact On The Entire Area; and
7) Consistency With The Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
17.4.3 Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall
be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the
applicant or representative thereof at its first regular meeting following receipt of complete
application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the
Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the
applicant concerning the Variance or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the
expense of the applicant concerning the application.
17.4.4 Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held
before the Planning Commission or the City Council to receive public comment on the
matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication
not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time,
place and a summary of the application.
17.4.5 Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of
fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 B. of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and
recommendation to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating
to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this
Ordinance and the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
17.4.6 Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning
Commission and public comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular
meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than the number of days
allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is
extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the
Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of its receipt, the City Council may take action
without further communication from the Planning Commission. The City Council shall, in
the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey its decision to approve or
deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The Council may impose conditions on the
grant of a variance, provided that any condition imposed is directly related to a likely impact
of the variance, and in rough proportionality to the scope of said impact. Approvals shall
require a majority vote of the City Council.
17.4.7 Issuance of Variance. Following a decision by the City Council to approve or deny
the application, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the
decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with
the US mail.
17.4.8 Lapse of Variance. Any Variance issued shall lapse if not acted upon within one (1)
year of the date of issuance.
SECTION 3. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this
Ordinance be held to be invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to
be invalid.
SECTION 4. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication.
Dated: ______________________, 2011
________________________ __________________________
Robert Uzpen – Mayor William Short - Clerk
Summary of Ordinance 123 approved by City Council and published in the White Bear Press on
________________, 2011.




CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 125
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE TO
REPLACE SECTIONS 21 AND 22 RELATING TO GEM LAKE WATERS,
WETLANDS, SHORELANDS, EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. AMENDMENT. Section 3.2 of Ordinance 43K (Definitions) is amended, as
follows (deleted text struck through, new text underlined):
ALTERATION OR ALTER – When used in connection with public waters or
wetlands, is any activity that will change or diminish the course, current or crosssection
of public waters or wetlands.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPS – Techniques proven to be
effective in controlling runoff, erosion and sedimentation including those documented
in the Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control Planning
Handbook (BWSR, 1988); Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (MPCA, 2000);
the Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual (Metropolitan Council 2001);
Minnesota Stormwater Manual (MPCA, 2005); and other sources as approved by the
VLAWMO: as such documents may be amended, revised or supplemented.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) - means erosion and sediment control
and water quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means
of controlling, preventing, and minimizing degradation of surface water, including
avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are
exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by state or designated
area-wide planning agencies.
a) Individual BMPs found in this section are described in the current version
of Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency 2000. BMPs must be adapted to the site and can be adopted from
other sources. However, they must be similar in purpose and at least as
effective and stringent as MPCA’s BMPs. (Other sources include
manufacturers specifications, Storm Water Management for Construction
Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management
Practices, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 1992, and Erosion Control
Design Manual, Minnesota Department of Transportation, et al, 1993).
BIOENGINEERING – The use of live plantings in constructed features to stabilize
streambanks and shorelines.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY – Disturbance to the land that results in a change in
the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative), or the
existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to
soil erosion and the movement of sediment into surface waters or drainage systems.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY - For these permits, construction activity includes
construction activity as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 122.26(b)(14)(x) and small
construction activity as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 122.26(b)(15). This includes
disturbances to the land that result in change in the topography, existing soil cover
(both vegetative and non-vegetative), or the existing soil topography that may result
in accelerated storm water runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment
into surface waters or drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may
include clearing, grading, filling and excavating. Construction activity includes the
disturbances of less than one acre of total land area that is a part of a larger common
plan of development or sale if the larger common plan ultimately disturbs one (1) acre
or more.
DEAD STORAGE – The permanent pool volume of a water basin, or the volume
below the runout elevation of a water basin.
DETENTION BASIN – Any natural or manmade depression for the temporary
storage of runoff.
DEVELOPMENT – The construction of any public improvement project,
infrastructure, structure, street, or road, or the subdivision of land.
DEWATERING – The removal of water for construction activity.
DRAIN OR DRAINAGE – Any method for removing or diverting water from
waterbodies, including excavation of an open ditch, installation of subsurface
drainage tile, filling, diking or pumping.
ENERGY DISSIPATION – Methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion
including but not limited to concrete aprons, riprap, splash guards, and gabions.
EROSION – The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of wind, flowing
water, ice movement or land disturbing activities.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN – A plan of BMPs or equivalent
measures developed in accordance with the requirements of Gem Lake, Ramsey
County, Regional, State of Minnesota, and Federal guidelines that includes all
proposed alterations to real property and the methods to be employed before
undertaking the proposed alterations to prevent potential erosion and contamination
of shorelands, wetlands, and watershed areas, streets and by-ways, and adjacent
private and public real property using accepted best practices control runoff and
erosion and to retain or control sediment on land during the period of land disturbing
activities.
EXCAVATION – The artificial removal of soil or other earth material.
EXTRAORDINARY MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR REDUNDANT BMP –
A stormwater management practice to control erosion and sedimentation and nutrient
loading during and for two (2) years after construction using redundant Best
Management Practices.
FILL – The deposit of soil or other earth material by artificial means.
FILTRATION PRACTICE – A stormwater control that captures, temporarily
stores, and routes stormwater runoff through a filter bed to improve water quality, as
described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended.
FLOODPLAIN – The area adjacent to a waterbody that is inundated during a 100-
year flood.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE – The replenishment of groundwater storage
through infiltration of surface runoff into subsurface aquifers.
HYDRIC SOILS – A soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding or
ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in
the upper part.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE – A stormwater retention method for the purpose of
reducing the volume of stormwater runoff by transmitting a flow of water into the
ground through the soils, as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005,
and as amended.
INFRASTRUCTURE – The system of public works for a county, state, or
municipality including, but not limited to, structures, roads, bridges, culverts,
sidewalks; stormwater management facilities, conveyance systems and pipes; pump
stations, sanitary sewers and interceptors, hydraulic structures, permanent erosion
control and stream bank protection measures, water lines, gas lines, electrical lines
and associated facilities, and phone lines and supporting facilities.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY – Any change of the land surface to include
removing vegetative cover, excavation, fill, grading, stockpiling soil, and the
construction of any structure that may cause or contribute to erosion or the movement
of sediment into water bodies. The use of land for new and continuing agricultural
activities shall not constitute a land disturbing activity under these Policies.
LAND DISTURBANCE OR LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY - mean any
activity which leaves soil or other erodible materials exposed to precipitation and/or
runoff. For the purposes of this Section, farming operations are not considered land
disturbing activities.
MPCA GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT – General Permit Authorization
to Discharge Stormwater Associated With Construction Activity Under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program
Permit MN R100001 (NPDES General Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota
Pollutant Control Agency, August 1, 2008, and as amended.
NONPOINT SOURCE – Nutrient and pollution sources not discharged from a
single point e.g. runoff from agricultural fields, feedlots or urban landscapes.
NON-DEGRADATION – Section 303 (Title 33 of United States Code [U.S.C.]
1313) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) requires states and authorized tribes to adopt
water quality standards for waters of the U.S. within their applicable jurisdictions to
maintain their chemical, physical and biological integrity. No significant increase in
stormwater runoff or pollutant loads from 2005/2006 numerical standards is
permitted.
NORMAL WATER LEVEL – For a reservoir with a fixed overflow, means the
lowest crest level of that overflow. For a reservoir whose outflow is controlled wholly
or partly by movable gates, siphons or other means, it is the maximum level to which
water may rise under normal operating conditions, exclusive of any provision for
flood surcharge. For a closed depression wetland, it is the maximum level to which
the water may rise under normal precipitation conditions exclusive of any provision
for flood surcharge.
NURP – The Nationwide Urban Runoff Program developed by the Environmental
Protection Agency to study stormwater runoff from urban development.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL - as defined by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, means the boundary of water basins, watercourses, public waters,
and public waters wetlands, and:
1. The ordinary high water level is an elevation delineating the highest water
level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence
upon the landscape, commonly the point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial;
2. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of
the bank of the channel; and
3. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating
elevation of the normal summer pool.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION – The land use on a site that exists
immediately prior to a proposed alteration. All pre-development Runoff Curve
Numbers must reference the Minnesota Hydrology Guide.
PUBLIC WATERS – Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section
103G.005, subdivision 15.
REDEVELOPMENT – The rebuilding, repair, or alteration of a structure, land
surface, road or street, or facility.
RETENTION – The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into
receiving water; examples include systems which discharge through percolation,
exfiltration, and evaporation processes and which generally have residence times less
than three days.
RUNOFF – Rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
SEDIMENT – The solid mineral or organic material that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its original location by erosion and has been
deposited at another location.
SEDIMENTATION – The process or action of depositing sediment.
SHORELAND - Real property immediately adjacent to and abutting but not
contained within the mean high water mark of any Shoreline.
SHORELAND IMPACT PLAN - A plan detailing current and future use of
Shorelands and the potential impact of said uses; an assessment of current and future
conditions and impact on those conditions for: vegetation and trees, soil and water,
human and animal habitat, natural aesthetics and environmental quality.
SHORELAND ZONE 1 - All real property located within and waterward of any
Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local
regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 2 - All real property located within and landward fifty (50')
feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state,
regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 3 - All real property located within and landward fifty (50')
feet to one-hundred fifty (150') feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as
determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority
to make such determinations.
SHORELINE - The mean ordinary high water level mark of the body of water
known as Gem Lake and any lake, pond, or flowage in the City of Gem Lake as
determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority
to make such determinations, along with all wetlands attendant to each body of water.
SOIL TREATMENT SYSTEM – A system where sewage effluent is treated and
disposed of into the soil by percolation and filtration, and includes trenches, seepage
beds, drainfields, at-grade systems, and mound systems.
STABILIZED – Exposed soil is considered to be stabilized when it has been
adequately covered through temporary measures (e.g. mulch, staked sod, riprap,
erosion control blanket, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring), or
permanent vegetation has been established over 70% of the surface.
STABILIZED - means the exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate materials
such as mulch, staked sod, rip-rap, wood fiber blanket, or other material that prevents erosion
from occurring. Grass seeding is not stabilization.
STORMWATER FACILITY – Any facility including retention and detention
ponds, wetlands, reservoirs, impoundments, infiltration practices, filtration practices,
conveyance systems, and connecting infrastructure that are constructed for or serve
the purpose of stormwater management.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) – A sitespecific,
written document that: identifies potential sources of stormwater pollution at
the construction site; describes practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges
from the construction site; and identifies procedures the operator will implement to
comply with the terms and conditions of a construction general permit.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) - means a plan for
storm water discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and sediment controls that,
when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site non-point
pollution. For the purposes of this section, the SWPPP shall be the same SWPPP as developed
as part of the NPDES permit program requirements administered by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency.
SUBWATERSHED – A portion of land contributing runoff to a particular point of
discharge.
SURFACE WATER – All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs,
spring, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and irrigation systems
whether natural or artificial, public or private.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) – A Total Maximum Daily Load, or
TMDL, is a regulation designed to improve water quality by controlling the amount
of a pollutant entering a water body.
ULTIMATE CONDITIONS – The physical, topographic, and hydrologic
characteristics of a subwatershed upon completion of the maximum level of expected
development.
UTILIZE BASIN – Documented stormwater management structures designated
strictly for treating and retaining stormwater.
WATERS OF THE STATE – All stream, lakes, ponds, wetlands, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon
the state or any portion thereof. Streams include both intermittent and perennial.
WETLAND – Any wetland as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.005,
subdivision 19.
WETLANDS 1 - An area where water stands near, at or above the soil surface during a
significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting a predominantly aquatic
form of vegetation, and which may have the following characteristics:
A) Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen, sedge meadow, shrub
land, and northern lowland forest (conifer swamp) communities. (These communities
correspond roughly to wetland types 1,2,3,4,6,7 and 8 described by the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service, Circular 39, “Wetlands of the U.S.”)
B) Mineral soils with grey horizons of organic soils belonging to the Histosol order (peat and
muck).
C) Soil which is water logged or covered with water at least three (3) months of the year.
D) Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows, and sloughs are wetlands, and such
property may be shallow water bodies, the waters of which are stagnant or actuated by very
feeble currents, and may be at times sufficiently dry to permit tillage, but would require
drainage to be made arable. The edge of a wetland is commonly that point where natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
WETLANDS 2 (Section 22) - is defined in Minn. R. 7050.0130, subp. F. and includes those
areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for living in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include
swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater
treatment are not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes:
a) A predominance of hydric soils; and/or
b) Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in a
saturated soil condition; and/or
c) Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Delete Sections 16.10 (Land Reclamation), 16.11 (Mining), and
18.12 (Drainage and Lot Flooding) in their entirety.
SECTION 3. AMENDMENT. Delete the current Section 21 (Regulation of Gem Lake
Waters, Wetlands and Shorelands) and replace with the following:
SECTION 21 – SHORELANDS AND WATERS
21.1 General Provisions.
2.1.1 Shoreland District. The land use regulations in this Section shall apply to any
land in the City of Gem Lake located within a floodplain, within 1,000 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of a public water or public waters wetland, including but not
limited to the body of water known as Gem Lake and its attendant wetlands, or within
300 feet of a stream or river. The regulations of this Section shall apply in addition to the
provisions of the zoning district applicable to the property, the Flood Hazard ordinance of
the city (No. 114), and other ordinances of the City.
2.1.2 Wetland Conservation Act. The City of Gem Lake has delegated its authority
under the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 and attendant rules to the
Vadnais Lake Area Watershed Management Association (VLAWMO). All requests for
permits, review or approval required by the Wetland Conservation Act must be submitted
to VLAWMO as the acting Local Government Unit.
2.1.3 Applied in Concert with Other Law. These regulations and requirements shall
be in addition to those imposed by Federal and State law, regional and local water
management regulations, and city ordinances, all of which shall jointly apply. Under joint
application, the most restrictive requirements shall apply.
21.2 Shoreland Use Controls.
21.2.1 Policy. Intact, vegetated and stable shorelines and streambanks provide
valuable functions to Gem Lake and other water resources in the City including
prevention of erosion, reinforcement of soils through root structure, trapping of nutrients
and sediments, and provision of fish and wildlife habitat. Gem Lake is a Natural
Environment lake under the criteria established by the Department of Natural Resources.
21.2.2 Minimum Lot Size and Setback Requirements. All lots created and structures
erected in a shoreland district following the enactment of this Section must meet the
criteria established in the underlying zoning district. No variance shall be granted, or
other approval given, which allows the creation of a lot in a shoreland district that is less
than 80,000 square feet in area (measured above the ordinary high water mark of the
water body), or less than 200 feet in width. No structure, other than water-oriented
accessory structures managed by this Section, shall be placed within 150 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of the water body. The maximum lot coverage by buildings and
impervious surfaces is 25%.
21.2.3 Accessory Structures and Facilities. All accessory structures and facilities,
except those that are water-oriented, must meet or exceed structure setback standards. If
allowed by local government controls, each residential lot may have one water-oriented
accessory structure or facility located closer to public waters than the structure setback if
all of the following standards are met:
a. The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety
rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks
must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
b. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must
be at least ten feet.
c. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from
public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased
setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of government,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
d. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or
used as a storage area.
e. The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and
must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
f. Any accessory structures or facilities not meeting the above criteria, or any
additional accessory structures or facilities must meet or exceed structure setback
standards.
21.2.4 Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative
to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes
to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
a. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width.
b. Landings for stairways and lifts must not exceed 32 square feet in area.
c. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings.
d. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on
posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in
a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
e. Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
f. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for persons with physical
disabilities are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the
dimensional and performance standards of (a) to (e) are complied with.
21.2.5. Decks. Except as provided in section 21.2.3, decks must meet the structure
setback standards. Decks to be added to structures existing on the date the shoreland
structure setbacks were established by ordinance may be allowed without a variance, if
all of the following criteria and standards are met:
a. thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location
for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of
the structure;
b. the deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15
percent of the existing shoreline setback of the structure from the ordinary high
water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive;
and
c. the deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.
21.2.6 Driveways and parking areas. Driveways and parking areas must meet all
applicable structure setbacks, and must be designed to take advantage of natural
vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from the water
body. Access ramps and approach roads are not allowed in the structure setback area
surrounding Gem Lake.
21.2.7 Shoreline alteration. Alterations of vegetation and topography in a shoreland
district is controlled to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutruents, preserve
shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect wildlife
habitat.
a. Removal or alteration of vegetation is limited to the amount necessary to
construct an approved structure, and to maintain the health of the vegetation,
provided that no such removal or alteration shall substantially reduce the
screening of structures, vehicles and other facilities as viewed from the water.
This provision shall not restrict the removal of trees, limbs or branches that are
dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards, or the removal of buckthorn and similar
invasive species identified by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
b. Any application for new construction in a shoreland district must include a Tree
and Vegetation Preservation Plan which, in addition to the requirements of
Ordinance No. 66, includes an inventory of all vegetation affected by the
construction and a plan for preservation, relocation, or replacement of the
vegetation.
b. Use of fertilizer and pesticides in a shoreland district must be done in such a
way as to minimize runoff into the water body.
c. No grading, filling, or other topographical alteration shall be allowed within 50
feet of the ordinary high water mark of the water body, with the exception that the
Zoning Administrator may approve the installation of clean beach-type sand in
this area, in accordance with DNR regulations, after review of an installation plan.
d. Any grading or filling anywhere else in a shoreland area involving movement
of more than 50 cubic yards of material requires a grading and filling permit. If
the grading or filling is to take place in a wetland, VLAWMO review and
approval must be obtained before the City can issue a permit. In addition to any
other requirements, grading and filling activity in shoreland areas must also meet
the following criteria:
1. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only
the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible.
2. Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary
bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as
soon as possible.
3. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach
any surface water feature must be used.
4. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards.
The use of bioengineering is encouraged as an alternative to engineered
stabilization techniques. Retaining walls are to be used only when there is no
adequate stabilization alternative.
5. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an
unstable slope.
6. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of the water body must
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
21.2.8 Nonconforming uses. In addition to the regulations of this ordinance applicable to
nonconforming uses generally, in a Shoreland district the following shall apply:
a. An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming
structure or facility may be permitted on the side of the structure or facility facing
away from the water body.
b. An improvement to an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may
be allowed to extend parallel to the shoreline when the improvement is otherwise
in compliance with the dimensional and setback requirements of this Ordinance.
c. Exterior decks attached to an existing lawful non-conforming structure which
do not extend any roof or foundation may be permitted to extend parallel to the
shoreline and shall be constructed to be visually inconspicuous when viewed from
the water (under summer leaf-on conditions).
d. Reconstruction of an existing historic structure, any appurtenances thereto, and
the grounds shall be allowed to preserve its historic character if the structure or
site is recognized as a historic site on the National Register of Historic Places.
21.3 Use of Gem Lake.
21.3.1 No Motorized Use. Gem Lake shall not be used by any motorized craft or traffic
including, but not limited to, motorized boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)
excluding equipment used for cleaning, plowing snow or other occasional maintenance uses.
21.3.2 No Wet Storage Of Boats. Boats shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than
forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of boats shall be on the shore of and
not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring
properties and Gem Lake while not in use.
21.3.3 Docks.
a. Docks are seasonal and temporary in nature and, therefore, shall not be permanently
affixed to the shore or lake bottom of Gem Lake.
b. Docks shall not be greater than four (4'0") feet in width, two (2'0") feet in height above
the water and twenty (20'0") feet in length from the lake shore.
c. Docks shall not be covered with any roof structure, awnings or any other type of
enclosure.
d. Only one (1) dock shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the
waterline.
21.3.4 Swimming Rafts.
a. Swimming rafts are seasonal and temporary in nature and therefore shall not be
permanently affixed to the lake bottom.
b. Swimming rafts shall not exceed one hundred (100 s.f.) square feet in total area and
shall not be more than two (2'0) feet higher than the water surface.
c. Swimming rafts shall not be located more than fifty (50') feet from the lakeshore.
d. Swimming rafts shall not be covered with a roof structure, awning or any other type of
enclosure.
e. Only one (1) raft shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the
waterline.
f. Swimming rafts shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours
at any one time. Regular storage of swimming rafts shall be on the shore, properly
secured and stored out of view from the water and from neighboring properties.
21.3.5 Water Appropriation. No person shall appropriate water from Gem Lake without first
obtaining an permit from VLAWMO.
SECTION 4. AMENDMENT. Delete the current Section 22 (Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Controls and Storm Water Management) and replace with the following:
SECTION 22 – SOIL EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section 22.1 Erosion and Sediment Control.
22.1.1 Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City of Gem Lake to require the
preparation and implementation of erosion and sediment control plans to control runoff
and erosion, to retain or control sediment on land during land disturbing activities, and to
prevent the degradation of resources and the loss or damage of property due to erosion
and sedimentation.
22.1.2 Regulation. No person shall commence land disturbing activities, unless granted a
variance, without first obtaining a permit from the City that incorporates and approves an
erosion and sediment control plan for the activity, development or redevelopment. The
proposed activity will not result in an increase in sediment off the site during construction
and post-construction activities and be in conformance with the MPCA General Permit
Construction for Activities, and as amended.
22.1.3 Criteria. Erosion and sediment control plans and the land disturbing activity shall
comply with the following criteria:
a. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with BMPs, and
shall be sufficient to retain sediment on-site.
b. Erosion and sediment control measures shall meet the standard for the General
Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated With Construction
Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State
Disposal System Permit Program Permit MNR100001 (NPDES General
Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August
1 2008, as amended; except where more specific requirements are provided in
paragraphs 3(c) and 3(d) of this Section below.
c. The permittee or applicant must ensure final stabilization of the site in
accordance with the NPDES General Construction Permit requirements. The site
will be considered as having achieved final stabilization following submission of
Notice of Termination by the permittee or applicant, and inspection and approval
by the City.
d. All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed
to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 10-year frequency storm
without erosion.
22.1.4 Exception. No permit or erosion control plan shall be required under this Section
for the following land disturbing activities:
a. Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens, repairs and maintenance
work.
b. Construction, installation and maintenance of individual sewage treatment
systems (ISTS) other than those on steep slopes, on riparian lots within a
Shoreland District or in a bluff impact zone.
c. Installation of any fence, sign, telephone or electric poles, or other kinds of
posts or poles.
d. Emergency activity necessary to protect life or prevent substantial harm to
persons or property.
e. Minor wetland impacts that have received a “certificate of exemption or no
loss” determination by the LGU (VLAWMO or RWMWD) administering the
Wetland Conservation Act, as amended.
f. All maintenance, repair, resurfacing and reconditioning activities of existing
road, bridge, and highway systems which do not involve land disturbing activities
outside of the existing surfaced roadway.
All land disturbing activities not required by this Section to obtain a permit or have an
approved erosion and sediment control plan shall nevertheless be conducted in full
compliance with this Section.
Section 22.2 Stormwater Management.
22.2.1 Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City to:
a. Manage new development and drainage alternations by requiring each
development or land disturbing activity to manage its stormwater effectively,
either on or off-site.
b. Promote and encourage a reduction in runoff rates, encourage infiltration and
promote groundwater recharge.
c. Maximize groundwater recharge as a means of maintaining drinking water
supplies, preserving base flows in streams, and limiting discharges of stormwater
to downstream receiving waters.
d. Assure that property owners control the rate and volume of stormwater runoff
originating from their property so that surface water and groundwater quantity
and quality is protected or improved, soil erosion is minimized, and flooding
potential is reduced.
e. Protect and improve natural resources within the watershed to prevent further
degradation.
22.2.2 Regulation
a. Rate Control. The proposed activity will not increase the peak stormwater
runoff rate from the site, under pre-development conditions, for anything less than
a 24-hour precipitation event with a return frequency of 1- or 2-, 10- and 100-
years. The applicant must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General
Permit for Construction Activities.
b. Volume Control. Stormwater runoff volume retention shall be achieved onsite
in the amount equivalent to the runoff generated from one-half inch of runoff over
the impervious surfaces of the development or as specified under Section 8.0.
Volume control credits can be used to control up to one-half (0.5) inch of runoff
as described under Section 22.2.5.
c. Water Quality
Stormwater management must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s
General Permit for Construction Activities and guidelines set forth in total
maximum daily load studies and sustainable lake management plans. No direct
(untreated) discharges of stormwater to natural or improved waterbodies are
allowed.
d. Waste Disposal to Waters
Stormwater management must not result in the discharge of any regulated
substance, hazardous or biological waste, or petroleum product, whether treated
or untreated, to best management practice devices that may have a deleterious
effect upon water of the state (surface and groundwater), unless the discharge is in
compliance with Federal, State and local regulations.
22.2.3 Criteria. Stormwater management plans shall comply with the following criteria:
a. A hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory will be used to analyze
runoff for the design or analysis of flows and water levels.
b. Runoff rates for the proposed activities, development or redevelopment within
the watershed shall:
1. Not exceed existing runoff rates for the 1 or 2-year, 10-year and 100-
year critical duration storm events;
2. Not accelerate on or off-site water course erosion, downstream
nuisance, flooding or damage as demonstrated by the applicant; and
3. Runoff rates may be restricted to less than the existing rates when
necessary for the protection of public health, safety and general welfare.
c. Stormwater facilities must provide:
1. An identified overflow spillway and downstream route sufficiently
stabilized to convey a 100-year critical storm event;
2. Pond outlets designed to prevent short circuiting of the flow from pond
inputs to the outlet;
3. A minimum depth for ponds of three (3) feet and conform to the design
specifications of the Stormwater Manual, 2005.
4. An outlet skimmer to prevent migration of floatables and oils for the 2-
year event; and
5. Access for future maintenance that is free of plantings and
impediments.
d. Regional ponds and practices can be used to provide for stormwater
management based on the following criteria:
1. Regional ponds are required to be designed based on ultimate
conditions for the contributing subwatershed.
2. Regional ponds are required to be constructed and operational prior to
constructing imperviousness within the contributing drainage area.
e. Design of all Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be consistent with the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended and the MPCA General
Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.
f. When using infiltration for volume control, infiltration volumes and facility
sizes shall be calculated using the appropriate hydrological soil group
classification and infiltration rate, and shall be capable of infiltrating the required
volume within 72 hours or as specified in the MPCA General Permit for
Construction Activities.
g. In evaluating the infiltration capacity of a constructed BMP under postdevelopment
conditions, the infiltration rates in the Minnesota Stormwater
Manual should be used. Select the design infiltration based on the least permeable
soil horizon within the first five (5) feet below the bottom elevation of the
proposed infiltration facility. Site-specific infiltration measurements completed by
a licensed professional (as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual,
November 2005, and as amended) may be used in place of the values in the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual, and as approved by the City.
h. All stormwater retention practices designed to meet the volume control
regulation must provide pretreatment of stormwater runoff prior to infiltrating into
the groundwater system or discharging downstream. Pretreatment methods must
comply with the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, for the
proposed practice. All highly recommended and recommended design criteria
must be met, unless specifically waived by the Technical Commission of
VLAWMO or RWMWD, as appropriate.
i. To the maximum extent practicable, volume control shall be fully met onsite
(Section 2, Subsection 2b). Site conditions may make infiltration undesirable or
impossible. The applicant must make soil corrections and/or investigate other
locations on the site for feasible infiltration locations. Infiltration practices are not
allowed:
1. For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas;
2. Within hydrologic soil group D type soils;
3. Within some Wellhead Protection Areas (Review Wellhead Protection
Plans for additional guidance);
4. Within 50 feet of a septic tank or drain field;
5. On areas with less than three (3) feet vertical separation from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high
groundwater or top of bedrock.
If the applicant claims that infiltration is not feasible or allowed onsite, the
applicant must provide supporting documentation and follow Section 2,
Subsection 4.
22.2.4 Alternative Compliance Sequencing. For sites where infiltration practices are
determined infeasible as described in Section 22.2.3(i), the following Alternative
Compliance Sequencing steps shall be taken in the order shown:
a. Use of alternative volume control practices as described in the Minnesota
Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, sized according to Section 22.2.2(b).
b. Use of on-site filtration practices and biofiltration using an impermeable liner
and under drain, sized to filter a volume of runoff according to Section 22.2.2(b).
c. Use of off-site volume control practices sized according to Section 22.2.2(b).
Off-site volume control practices can be used to provide for stormwater
management based on the following criteria:
1. Off-site practices shall be constructed within the same drainage area or
subwatershed as the project site.
2. Off-site practices are required to be constructed and operational prior to
constructing imperviousness within the contributing drainage area.
d. Use of wet sediment basins sized per the standard described within the MPCA
General Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.
22.2.5 Volume Control Credits.
a. Volume control credits will be awarded as described in the Minnesota
Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended.
b. Volume control credits must be determined based on the methods outlined
within Chapter 11 of the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended,
for the Adjusted Water Quality Volume.
1. The water quality volume (Vwq) shall be calculated by multiplying one
(1) inch of runoff over the proposed impervious surface.
2. Applied credits cannot exceed a Vwq greater than 1/2 inch of runoff
over the proposed impervious area.
3. All recommended and highly recommended conditions must be met,
unless specifically waived by VLAWMO staff and the Technical
Commission.
4. For Drainage to Stream, Wetland, or Shoreland Buffer Credits, the
credits will apply to areas outside of the minimum buffer requirement as
prescribed within these Policies.
5. Grass Channel Credits can be applied to the roadway portion of the
proposed site when grass channels have been designed with water quality
adaptations such as water quality berms.
22.2.6 Maintenance and Easement.
a. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant for (1)
access for facility inspections and maintenance and (2) preservation of stormwater
runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities, including the
overflow route.
b. Land used by stormwater management facilities shall be preserved by
dedication and/or perpetual easement to the City, when required by the City.
These easements shall cover those portions of the property which are adjacent to
the facility and which lie below the 100-year flood elevation.
c. A maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the County as part of the City
development approval process. Minimum requirements for the maintenance
agreement include:
1. A list of the responsible party(s) (City and facility owner/manager);
2. Contact information;
3. A formalized maintenance schedule, with scheduled activities;
4. A “Failure to Perform” provision laying out remedial actions if the
responsible party does not perform as expected;
5. Maintenance debris handling plans; and
6. Emergency response (environmental, spill, safety).
d. Maintenance is required for all stormwater practices constructed in compliance
with these Policies. The City will conduct periodic inspection of stormwater
practices. A minimum of 20% of all stormwater facilities shall be inspected
annually by the City. The City shall provide to the VLAWMO annual inspection
reports detailing inspection activities and proof of maintenance where required.
e. When land used by stormwater management facilities is public land or public
right-of-way, easements under this section will not be required, and a written
agreement between the City and applicant may be executed in lieu of the recorded
maintenance agreement.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of
this Ordinance be held to be invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held
to be invalid.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its passage and publication.
Dated: ______________________, 2012
________________________ __________________________
Robert Uzpen – Mayor William Short - Clerk
Summary of Ordinance 125 approved by City Council and published in the White Bear Press on
________________, 2012.
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 126
AN ORDINANCE TO PERMIT AND REGULATE THE KEEPING OF CHICKENS AND
OTHER DOMESTIC FOWL IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, AMENDING
ORDINANCE NO. 69.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. Intent and Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to permit the
keeping of chickens, ducks, turkeys, peacocks and other fowl, excluding large birds, subject to
regulations hereinafter set forth. The keeping of such animals, as defined herein, is determined
not to be a nuisance and is not detrimental to the public welfare, if regulated as hereafter set
forth. It is recognized that the keeping of such birds is increasingly requested by citizens of the
City, and such persons desire to keep their birds in suitable permanent structures constructed and
maintained for such purpose, and keep such structures in a clean and sanitary manner, and do not
permit their fowl to remain at large in the community in such manner as to disturb their
neighbors or to prevent the full enjoyment of property rights by their neighbors.
SECTION 2. AMENDMENT. Section 3.8.1 of Ordinance 69 is amended, as follows (new text
underlined, deleted text struck through):
3.8.1 Agricultural animals including, but not limited to: horses; cows; sheep; goats;
swine; ducks, chickens, turkeys, peacocks, and other fowl or poultry; llamas; ostrich, emu
and other large birds; and other animals not otherwise permitted by this Ordinance which
may be classified as agricultural animals.
SECTION 3. AMENDMENT. Section 2.3 of Ordinance 69 is amended, as follows (new text
underlined, deleted text struck through):
Animal, Agricultural. Any common farm animal including but not limited to any horse,
mule, donkey, cow, goat, sheep, pig, emu, llama, turkeys, chickens, ducks or any other
animal typically confined on a farm and the like, except for domestic fowl.
Domestic Fowl. Chickens, ducks, turkeys, peacocks, and other commonly domesticated
fowl, excluding ostrich, emu, or other large birds.
SECTION 4. AMENDMENT. Section 3 of Ordinance 69 is amended to add the following
sub-sections:
Section 3.13 Keeping of Domestic Fowl. The keeping of domestic fowl may be permitted
subject to the following:
3.13.1 A structure must be constructed and maintained to keep and confine the birds.
The structure must provide at least five square feet of floor space per bird. The structure
must provide shelter from the elements for all kept birds. The structure would be built of
suitable foundation material or built in such a way that it allows for air flow and it is
suitable for cleaning.. A structure for domestic fowl shall have a minimum of four feet of
interior space from floor to ceiling, and may have a maximum height of nine feet.
3.13.2 The bird structure must be constructed and maintained so as to be rodent-proof.
3.13.3 The owner may construct bird structures up to a cumulative maximum floor area
of 200 square feet. Any single bird structure with over 120 square feet in foundation
floor area requires a building permit, as with other accessory structures.
3.13.4 Bird structures may be located in the rear yard only and shall be at least 50 feet
from adjacent habitable structures.
3.13.5 An area outside of the bird structure must be designated and reserved for the birds
to exercise and forage outside of the bird structure. The designated area must provide a
minimum of 11 square feet per bird.
3.13.6 All grains and food stored for the use of the domestic fowl on a licensed premises
shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.
3.13.7 All premises on which domestic fowl are kept or maintained shall be kept
reasonably clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract rodents. The bird
structure and its surroundings must be cleaned daily.
SECTION 5. AMENDMENT. Section 4 of Ordinance 69 is hereby amended to add the
following sub-sections:
Section 4.3. Domestic Fowl Keeping License. No person shall own, keep or harbor domestic
fowl within the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining a license. Applicant shall complete an
application form provided by the City. The application shall include, but not be limited to the
following information: a site plan showing the location and size of the premises, and the location
size and type of all structures for housing the birds, and demonstration that said structures will
comply with City zoning requirements; a statement of the maximum number of domestic fowl to
be kept on the premises at one time, by type; and an agreement by the applicant that the premises
may be inspected by the City at all reasonable times so as to assure compliance with the
conditions outlined in Section 3.13. Only one license may be issued per property.
4.3.1 Duration of License; Fee. Each license issued hereunder shall expire one (1) year
after issuance unless sooner revoked. A license must be renewed annually to continue
the keeping of domestic fowl. The City Council shall set the annual fee for a license by
ordinance with other City fees. Fees shall be paid at the time of the making of the
application for license or renewal.
4.3.2 Number of Animals. The number of domestic fowl permitted to be kept under an
approved license is calculated by dividing the area of floor space in approved structures
by five (minimum space per bird). Exceeding the number of birds allowed by the permit
may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit, and denial of subsequent
applications for renewal. In addition to any action taken against a license, the person
responsible for keeping birds in excess of the maximum stated may be referred for
prosecution under State laws prohibiting animal cruelty.
4.3.3 Denial or Revocation. The domestic fowl keeping license may be revoked, or
renewal denied, if the licensee fails to comply with any of the conditions outlined in
Section 3.13.
SECTION 5. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this
Ordinance be held to be invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part hereof, other than the part held to
be invalid.
SECTION 6. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication.
Dated: ______________________, 2012
________________________ __________________________
Robert Uzpen – Mayor William Short - Clerk
Summary of Ordinance 126 approved by City Council and published in the White Bear Press on
________________, 2012.






















ZONING ORDINANCE


CITY OF GEM LAKE

Ordinance No. 43G
With Amendments through March, 2006 Enacted 20 March 2006


Replaces Zoning Ordinance No. 5 dated 2/19/63 which should be considered the original effective date of this Ordinance.






$ 16.25 Print Copy
$10.65 Electronic Copy
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION 1 - TITLE
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
3.1	Rules
3.2	Definitions
SECTION 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.1	Application of this Ordinance
4.2	Separability
4.3	Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
4.4	Lot Provisions
4.5	Accessory Buildings
4.6	Required Yards and Open Space
4.7	Traffic Visibility
4.8	Farming Operations
4.9	Essential Services
4.10	Land Reclamation
4.11	Mining
4.12	Relocation of Dwelling Units
SECTION 5 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5.1	Enforcing Officer
5.2	Building Permits
5.3	Duties of the Zoning Administrator
5.4	Variances
5.5	Special Use Permits
5.6	Interim Use Permits
5.7	Amendments
5.8	Appeals
5.9	Fees
5.10	Violations & Penalties
SECTION 6 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
6.1	Districts
6.2	Map
6.3	Boundaries
SECTION 7 - "R-1" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
7.1	Permitted Uses
7.2	Permitted Accessory Uses
7.3	Special Uses
7.4	Height Regulations
7.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements SECTION 8 - "R-2" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
8.1	Permitted Uses
8.2	Permitted Accessory Uses
8.3	Special Uses
8.4	Height Regulations
8.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements SECTION 9 - "R-3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
9.1	Permitted Uses
9.2	Permitted Accessory Uses
9.3	Special Uses
9.4	Height Regulations
9.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements SECTION 10 - "R-4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
10.1	Permitted Uses
10.2	Permitted Accessory Uses
10.3	Special Uses
10.4	Height Regulations
10.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
SECTION 11 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS
11.1	General Provisions
11.2	Lake Use Restrictions
11.3	Shoreland Zone 1 Restrictions
11.4	Shoreland Zone 2 Restrictions
11.5	Shoreland Zone 3 Restrictions
11.6	Shoreland Lot Restrictions
11.7	Shoreland Lot Building Restrictions For All Shoreland
11.8	Wetland Uses And Regulations
11.9	Development Alteration Regulations
11.10	Enforcement, Approvals And Appeals SECTION 12 - "R-B" RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
12.1	Permitted Uses
12.2	Permitted Accessory Uses
 
12.3	Special Uses
12.4	Height Regulations
12.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
12.6	Rezoning For “R-B” retail Business
SECTION 13 - "G-B" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
13.1	Permitted Uses
13.2	Accessory Uses
13.3	Special Uses
13.4	Height Regulations
13.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements SECTION 14 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
14.1	Requirements for Consideration
14.2	Exterior Storage
14.3	Refuse
14.4	Screening
14.5	Landscaping
14.6	Maintenance
14.7	Lighting and Glare
14.8	Vibration
14.9	Off-Street Loading
14.10	Traffic Control
14.11	Drainage & Lot Flooding
14.12	Architecture
14.13	Explosives
14.14	Radiation and Electrical Emissions
14.15	Other Nuisance Characteristics
14.16	Consistency with Plans and Policies SECTION 15 - SIGNS
15.1	Signs - General Provisions
15.2	Prohibited Signs
15.3	Real Estate Signs
15.4	Existing Signs
15.5	Method of Calculating Sign Size
15.6	Sign Permits
15.7	Use of Mobile Signs
15.8	Campaign & Election Signs
15.9	Construction Signs
15.10	Temporary Signs
15.11	Entrance/Exit Signs
15.12	Structural Regulations for Signs
15.13	Signs in Residential Districts
15.14	Signs in the Special "LD-B" District
15.15	Signs in the "RB","GB" and "GB II" Districts

SECTION 16 - OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
16.1	General Provisions
16.2	Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas
16.3	Required Off-Street Parking SECTION 17 -
SECTION 18 - "LD-B" LOW DENSITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
18.1	Purpose
18.2	Permitted Principal Uses
18.3	Permitted Accessory Uses
18.4	Special Uses or Interim Uses
18.5	Uses Not Permitted
18.6	Height Regulations
18.7	Area, Setbacks, Frontage and Yard Requirements
18.8	Lot Coverage
18.9	Hours of Operation For Businesses
18.10	Access
18.11	Materials Of Building Construction To Be Used For Commercial Structures
18.12	Reviews And Approvals
SECTION 19 - "G-B II" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT II
19.1	Permitted Uses
19.2	Permitted Accessory Uses
19.3	Special Uses
19.4	Height Regulations
19.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
 
SECTION 20 - INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.1Purpose 20.2Permitted Uses 20.3Accessory Uses
20.4Conditional Or Special Uses 20.5Lot Area and Setback Requirements
20.6Lot Coverage and Height Requirements 20.7Landscaping and Screening 20.8Procedures For Requesting An Overlay
SECTION 21 - BROADCAST / TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
21.1Purpose
21.2Zoning Districts For Construction 21.3Performance Standards
21.4Proof of Non-Interference 21.5Tower Set-Backs
21.6Permit Applications and Plan Review 21.7Exception
ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
ZONING ORDINANCE LEGEND OF CHANGES
ZONING MAPS (As Attachments From The Comprehensive Municipal Plan) Existing Land Use Map - Figure 1 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Future Land Use & Planning Area Map - Figure 2 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan Roadway System Map - Figure 3 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
Sanitary Sewer Plan Map - Figure 4 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan Wetland Management Areas Map - Figure 5 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan Zoning Map - Figure 6 From Comprehensive Municipal Plan
 
GEM LAKE ORDINANCE NO. 43G

With Amendments through             24 January 2000

THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE LOCATION, SIZE, USE AND HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS, THE ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS, AND THE DENSITY OF POPULATION IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, AND FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, ORDER, CONVENIENCE, PROSPERITY AND GENERAL WELFARE IN SAID CITY, AND FOR SAID PURPOSE, TO DIVIDE THE CITY INTO DISTRICTS, AND MAKE DIFFERENT REGULATIONS FOR DIFFERENT DISTRICTS.


The City of Gem Lake does ordain as follows:

SECTION 1 - TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the GEM LAKE ZONING ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Ordinance".

 

This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:
 
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE
 
. . .   protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
. . .   dividing the City into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of structures and land.
. . .   promoting orderly development of the residential, business and industrial areas.
. . .   providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property.
. . .   preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.
. . .   providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.

 

Section 3.1 Rules
 
SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
 
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be  interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
3.1 (1) The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
3.1 (2) The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
3.1 (3) The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
3.1 (4) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
3.1 (5) Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition thereof.
3.1	(6) All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.

Section 3.2 Definitions
The following words, and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure or portion of a structure subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.
ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE ANTENNAS
Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVRO antennas three (3) meters or less in diameter, short wave radio receiving antennas, those antennas necessary for the operation of a Federally licensed Amateur Radio station, and towers/antennas for radio systems operated by the City of Gem Lake.
ANTENNA
A device used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications, television or radio signals which is located on the exterior of or outside of any building or structure. Such antennas include, but are not limited to, broadcast radio or television, wireless communications, cellular, personal communications systems or any other dispatch type system, microwave or satellite dish, short-wave receiving or Amateur Radio transmit/receive, and other Accessory and Secondary use antennas.
ALLEY
A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building located partly underground but having less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BOARDING HOUSE
A building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed eight (8) persons.
BUILDABLE AREA
A contiguous area of real property within a lot deemed suitable by best engineering practices for construction of a principal use structure with no part of said area of real property within delineated wetlands, right-of-ways, set-backs, or easements.
BUILDING
Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel, and when said structures are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
 
BUILDING HEIGHT
A distance to be measured from the mean curb level along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for all of that portion of the structure having frontage on a public right-of-way, whichever is higher, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the upper-most point on a round or other arch type roof, to the height of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.
CARPORT
An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
CELLAR
That portion of the building having more than one-half (½) of the floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
COMMERCIAL BROADCAST SERVICES
Licensed commercial radio or television services transmitting signals for reception by the general public.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
CONTIGUOUS
Areas of real property actually in contact with one another or touching along a boundary and also touching or connected throughout in an unbroken sequence. Real property separated by a body of water or designated wet land shall not be considered contiguous regardless of whether the real property under the body of water or wetland has common ownership. The routing of a driveway through a parcel of real property shall not be considered as separating same so as to make the portions created by the driveway not contiguous.
CURB LEVEL
The grade elevation as established by the City, of the curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been established, the City Engineer shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this Ordinance.
DWELLING
A building or one (1) or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purpose, but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches.
DWELLING-ATTACHED
A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling.
DWELLING-DETACHED
A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN
A plan developed in accordance with the requirements of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Regional, State of MN and Federal guidelines that includes all proposed alterations to real property and the methods to be employed before undertaking the proposed alterations to prevent potential erosion and contamination of shorelands, wetlands and watershed areas, streets and by-ways, and adjacent private and public real property using accepted best practices.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of public utilities or municipal departments of underground or overhead telephone, gas, electrical, communication, water and/or sewer. Radio and television broadcast, cellular and PCS transmission/reception support structures shall not be considered an essential service.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES
Structures including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone exchanges, substations, wells, pumping stations and elevated tanks.
FAMILY
An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of persons not so related, maintaining a common household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
FLOOR AREA
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, but excepting that area primarily devoted to window display, storage, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized for dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made from the outside of exterior walls.
GARAGE-PRIVATE
A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated capacity not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds.
HARDSHIP-UNDUE HARDSHIP.
A situation in which real property in question cannot be put to reasonable use under the conditions allowed by official controls; the plight of the owner of the real property is due to circumstances unique to the owner’s real property that were not created by the owner; the essential character of the locality will not alter if a variance is granted. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute undue hardship if a reasonable use for the real property exists under the terms of the official controls.
HOBBY ACTIVITIES
Any activity or interest pursued for pleasure or relaxation and not as a main occupation and meeting all of the following requirements: when normally engaged in only by the persons residing in the dwelling where the hobby is pursued; when evidence of the hobby is not visible from the street, or if visible is not offensive or such as to lower neighborhood property values; when pursuit of the hobby does not interfere with enjoyment of neighboring property by its owners.
HOME OCCUPATION
Any gainful occupation of non-residential nature conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory building and carried on only by the inhabitants and no more than one (1) non-resident thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. No articles may be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediate family residing therein. Home occupations shall not include the repair of internal combustion engines (other than small engine repair), body shops, machine shops, welding shops, or other objectionable uses as determined by the City Council. The home occupation shall not be conducted in more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less. There shall be no outside display of goods or storage of equipment or material used in the "Home Occupation".
KENNEL-ANIMAL
Any place where three (3) or more of any single type of domestic animals, over four (4) months of age, are owned, boarded, bred or offered for sale.
 
LOT
 

A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or use by a use permitted in this Ordinance.
 
LOT OF RECORD
Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one (1) unit of an Auditor's Subdivision or a Registered Land Survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered, for which a Deed, Auditor's Subdivision or Registered Land Survey has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Ramsey County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
LOT AREA
The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
LOT AREA PER FAMILY
The number of square feet of lot area required per dwelling unit.
LOT-CORNER
A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
LOT DEPTH
The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE
A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Ordinance.
LOT LINE-FRONT
That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, and in the case of a corner lot it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot lines shall be designated by the owner and filed with the City.
LOT LINE-REAR
That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE-SIDE
Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT-OPEN SALES OR RENTAL LOT
Any land used or occupied for the purposes of buying, selling, or rental for use away from the premises, any goods, materials or merchandise and for the storing of same in the open prior to sale or rental.
LOT-OPEN STORAGE LOT
Any land used or occupied for storing in the open any materials, equipment, vehicles of any kind or articles of any nature.
LOT-THROUGH
A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this Ordinance.
LOT WIDTH
The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the first thirty (30) feet of the lot depth.
MOBILE HOME
Any type of structure or vehicle which can be readily adapted to or does provide facilities for a person or persons to eat or sleep which is mounted on wheels, has provisions for wheels or may be loaded on any ordinary flat bed truck, such as a house trailer, converted bus or truck, tent or small building.
MOTOR SERVICE STATION
A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.
NOXIOUS MATTER MATERIAL(S)
Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
OPEN SPACE
An area of real property on a lot which is not covered by impervious surfaces, structures, unpaved storage, or designated parking areas.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD
Qualitative or quantitative criterion established to control for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare such things as noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated or inherent in particular or ordinary uses of land or buildings.
PERMIT - INTERIM USE.
A permit allowing for the temporary use of real property issued by the City for a fee in accordance with the definitions and provisions contained in this Ordinance.
PERMIT - SPECIAL USE.
A permit allowing for the special use of real property issued by the City for a fee in accordance with the definitions and provisions contained in this Ordinance as a flexibility device to enable the assignment of dimensions to or conditions surrounding a proposed use after consideration of adjacent uses, their functions, and the special problems the proposed use presents.
PUBLIC FACILITIES
Parks, playgrounds and similar uses owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake; or, libraries and other City of Gem Lake owned facilities.
PRIVATE CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION FACILITIES
Child Care Facilities currently licensed by the State of Minnesota and Education Facilities with:
i)	an enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years;
ii)	a total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);
iii)	a maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) “full-day equivalent” students with a full-day* defined as ten (10) hours.
* The “full-day equivalent” shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during each hour of the “full-day” of school. This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.
 
PUBLIC UTILITY
Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone services to the general public. For the purposes of this Ordinance, commercial broadcast services and commercial wireless telecommunications services shall not be considered public utility uses and are defined separately.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT (RESIDENTIAL)
Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides, sand boxes, poles for net games, unoccupied boats and trailers, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar equipment.
SHORELAND
Real property immediately adjacent to and abutting but not contained within the mean high water mark of any Shoreline.
SHORELAND IMPACT PLAN
A plan detailing current and future use of Shorelands and the potential impact of said uses; an assessment of current and future conditions and impact on those conditions for: vegetation and trees, soil and water, human and animal habitat, natural aesthetics and environmental quality.
SHORELAND ZONE 1
All real property located within and waterward of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 2
All real property located within and landward fifty (50’) feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELAND ZONE 3
All real property located within and landward fifty (50’) feet to one hundred fifty (150') feet of any Shoreline in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations.
SHORELINE
The mean high water mark of the body of water known as Gem Lake and any lake, pond, or flowage in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations, along with all wetlands attendant to each body of water.
SIGN-ADVERTISING
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN-BUSINESS
An identification sign which directs attention to a business, profession or corporation or to the commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered on the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
SIGN-CONSTRUCTION
A temporary free standing sign erected on a site denoting proposed or future construction on this particular site. This sign may indicate: 1) The particulars of the proposed construction, 2) the company, firm or individual for whom it is being constructed, 3) the architect, engineer and contractor, and 4) rental, sales or lease information.
SIGN-CROSS AREA OF
Shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign, and in no case, passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN-ELECTRIC
Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior unattached light source.
SIGN-ENTRANCE/EXIT
A privately owned traffic directional sign erected on private property by the owner of such property for the purpose of guiding vehicles and pedestrians.
SIGN-FLASHING
Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color during which time such sign is in use.
SIGN-GENERAL
Any object which indicates a name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity person, institution, organization or business. However, a "sign" for application of this Ordinance shall not include any display of official court or public office notices or highway directional signs.
SIGN-GROUND MOUNTED
A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or up from the ground.
SIGN-IDENTIFICATION
In a Residential Zoning District, a nameplate sign identifying a resident (Name, address and profession or occupation), school, church or other non-business use.
b)	In a Business Zoning district, a nameplate or sign identifying the business, industry or occupant of the lot ( Name, address, business(s), industry or lot occupant).
SIGN-ILLUMINATED
Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
SIGN-MOBILE
A free standing sign on wheels, trailers or framework that is capable of being transported from place to place and is not permanently attached to the ground or any other structure.
SIGN-NAMEPLATE
A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of an occupant therein.
SIGN-REAL ESTATE
A sign offering property (land and/or buildings) for sale, lease or rent.
SIGN-REVOLVING
A sign which has moving structural but does not include flashing signs that blink on and off. It does include signs which produce moving effects through use of illumination. This definition shall include searchlights.
 
SIGN-ROOF
A sign erected upon a roof or parapet of a building.
SIGN-SHOPPING CENTER
A business sign which identifies a group of stores, shops or offices that number three (3) or more.
SIGN-TEMPORARY
A sign that is not solidly affixed to a building, structure or land that announces an event such as a bazaar, garage/rummage and estate sale and/or a sporting or special event of duration of not greater that ninety (90) days out of a twelve (12) month calendar period. Promotional and franchise-type banners and pennants, which advertise products or services sold on the site, are also defined as temporary signs.
SIGN-WALL
A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.
STORY
That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story.
STREET
A public or private right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet in width which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, or fences.
STRUCTURE, NON-CONFORMING
Any structure which is legally existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the structure were to be erected under the provisions of this Ordinance.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION
Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
TOWER OR ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Any mast, pole spire, lattice structure or similar structure including any lines, cables, wires or braces supporting the structure intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device or similar apparatus above grade. Towers may be ground or roof mounted. The term “tower” includes any antenna attached to the tower.
 
USE.
 

The purpose or activity for which the land, structure, or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this Ordinance. Uses shall be classified as principal or accessory and as permitted, special, interim and prohibited.
 
USE-INTERIM.
A temporary use of real property requiring a permit issued by the City which shall be allowed until a particular date, until the occurrence of  a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer allow for said temporary use.
USE, NON-CONFORMING
A use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance which does not comply with all the regulations of this Ordinance or any use of land, building or structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption of an amendment which would not comply with all of the regulations.
USE, PERMITTED
A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL
The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.
USE-SPECIAL.
Either a public or private use as listed which, because of it’s unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district. This includes those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning district, which for the respective conduct or performance in such designated districts may require reasonable, but special, unusual, or extraordinary limitations peculiar to the use for the protection, promotion, and preservation of the general public welfare, health, and safety as well as the integrity of the City’s Comprehensive Municipal Plan. Consideration of each case of special use shall be given to impact of such use on neighboring real property and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
VARIANCE.
A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance such that deviation will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to physical conditions unique to the individual real property under consideration and not the results of actions of the owner, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in an undue hardship.
VEHICLE-MOTOR VEHICLE
Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon railroad tracks and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle, but excepting snowmobiles and mobile homes.
VEHICLE-JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which is either abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled or legally inoperative, or which is not currently licensed for operation within the State of Minnesota.
VEHICLE-COMMERCIAL   VEHICLE
A motor vehicle exceeding one and one-half ton or equivalent in load capacity or a motor vehicle not displaying passenger car or RV license plates.
WETLANDS
An area where water stands near, at or above the soil surface during a significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting a predominantly aquatic form of vegetation, and which may have the following characteristics:
i)	Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen, sedge meadow, shrub land, and northern lowland forest (conifer swamp) communities. (These communities correspond roughly to wetland types 1,2,3,4,6,7, and 8 described by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Circular 39, "Wetlands of the U.S.").
ii)	Mineral soils with grey horizons of organic soils belonging to the Histosol order (peat and muck).
iii)	Soil which is water logged or covered with water at least three (3) months of the year.
 




YARD
 
iv)	Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows, and sloughs are wetlands, and such property may be shallow water bodies, the waters of which are stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may be at times sufficiently dry to permit tillage, but would require drainage to be made arable. The edge of a wetland is commonly that point where natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominately terrestrial.
 
A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as expressly permitted in this Ordinance. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD-FRONT
A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such a lot is located.
YARD-REAR
A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD-SIDE
A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
ZONING DISTRICT
An area or areas within the limits of the City for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.

SECTION 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section  4.1 Application of this Ordinance
4.1 (1) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
4.1 (2) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
4.1 (3) Except as in this Ordinance specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for any purpose, nor in any manner which is not in conformity with this Ordinance.
4.1	(4) When land is proposed to be annexed to the City of Gem Lake the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing upon the permanent zoning of said land. The results of the hearing, along with a recommendation, shall be presented to the City Council. In the event of annexation proceedings becoming final before the permanent zoning is determined, the annexed area shall be placed in the "R-1" District and such classification shall be considered as an interim step pending permanent classification.
4.1(5) In accordance with the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan, Section 12.1.3, when making application for development of real property in the City of Gem Lake, the developer shall submit twelve (12) sets of all plans, variance requirements, and permit requirements in forms acceptable to the Zoning Administrator or City officials including, but not limited to, the following:
A)	a Site Plan; and
B)	a Grading And Filling Plan; and
C)	a Landscape Plan; and
D)	a Tree Preservation Plan; and
E)	an Erosion Control And Runoff Plan; and
F)	a Description of the Project; and
G)	a Description of Future Expansion Plans; and
H)	all other such plans or information as may be required for specific zoning districts.
4.1(6)In accordance with the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan, Section 12.1.4, when making recommendations and decisions considering land use, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review and measure the impact of such uses including , but not limited to, the following as criteria:
A)	The impact of the use on adjacent uses; and
B)	the impact of the use on air and water quality; and
C)	the impact of the use on traffic generation; and
D)	the impact of the use on public safety, health and welfare; and
E)	the impact of the use on the area economy

Section	4.2 Separability.
4.2(1)It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with the following:
A) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any other provision of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.

Section	4.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
4.3 (1) Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified.
4.3 (2) Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the City.
4.3 (3) When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a confirming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non- conforming use.
4.3 (4) Whenever a lawful non-conforming building or structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it be reconstructed within twelve (12) months after such calamity, unless the damage to the building or structure is fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair market value, in which case the reconstruction shall be for a use in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
4.3 (5) Whenever a lawful, non-conforming use of a building or structure or land is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, any future use of said building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
 
4.3 (6) Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use.
4.3 (7) A lawful non-conforming use may be changed only to a use of the same or more restricted classification.
4.3 (8) Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing lawful non-conforming residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units.
4.3	(9) Uses Not Provided For Within Zoning Districts.
A)	Whenever, in any Zoning District, a use is neither specifically allowed or denied, the use shall be considered as prohibited. In such cases, the City Council or the Planning Commission may, by their own initiative, or upon request of the property owner, conduct a study to determine if: 1) the use can be deemed consistent with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 2) the use is acceptable to and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners; 3) the use is in the public interest and is not determined to be offensive; 4) which defined Zoning District would be most appropriate for the use; 5) what conditions and standards relating to development of the use should be imposed. Upon completion and consideration of the study, the City Council or Planning Commission or the real property owner may initiate a request for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration in accordance with the definitions and provisions contained in this Ordinance.

Section 4.4 Lot Provisions
4.4	(1) A lot or parcel of land of record upon the effective date of this Ordinance which is in an "R" District and which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance as to area, width, or other open space, may be utilized for single family detached dwelling purposes provided the measurements of such area, width or open space are within seventy-five percent (75%) of the requirements of this Ordinance; but said lot or parcel shall not be more intensively developed.
4.4 (2) Land covered by Gem Lake and its contiguous bog area (measured to the mean high water mark) and other ponds and wetlands shown on applicable section maps covering the area shall not be included in any area calculations required by this Ordinance.
4.4	(3) In all residential districts, a lot must include contiguous buildable area as shown in tables located elsewhere within the ordinance unless the lot is part of a cluster or planned unit development that has been reviewed and recommended for approval by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.

Section 4.5 Accessory Buildings
4.5	(1) No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
4.5 (2) No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory building exceed fifteen
(15) feet in height.
4.5 (3) An accessory building shall be considered to be an integral part of the principal building unless it is six (6) feet or more from the principal building.
4.5 (4) No detached accessory building shall be less than sixty (60) feet from the public right-of-way except on a corner lot, unless it conforms to the side yard requirements of the principal building. Those accessory buildings located sixty (60) feet or more behind the right-of-way line shall have a side yard of two (2) feet or more and a rear yard of three (3) feet or more.
4.5	(5) No combinations of accessory buildings shall be allowed to exceed 1000 square feet in size, except by special use permit from the City Council.

Section 4.6 Required Yards and Open Space
4.6	(1) No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this Ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
4.6 (2) No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for any other buildings.
4.6	(3) The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on set-back and height requirements:
A)	In any yards: posts, off-street open parking spaces, open terraces, awnings, open canopies, steps, chimneys, and flag poles.
B)	In front yards: service station pump islands and fences at least 80% open.
C)	In side and rear yards: fences or walls six feet in height or less. However, in a corner lot no obstruction higher than three feet above curb level shall be located within twenty feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets, or within fifteen feet of any street right-of-way.
D)	In rear yards: recreational and laundry drying equipment, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breeze ways, porches, detached outdoor living rooms, barbecue facilities.
E)	Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public utility facilities; Accessory and Secondary Use antennas and parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the building.

Section 4.7 Traffic Visibility
4.7	(1) No fences, structures or planting exceeding thirty (30) inches in height above the center line grade of the street shall be permitted within the required front yard set-back on a corner lot.

Section	4.8 Farming Operations
4.8	(1) All farms in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance and all farms which are brought into the City by annexation shall be a permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations contained herein and other City Ordinances as in effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character.

Section 4.9 Essential Services
4.9	(1) Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the City of Gem Lake.
 
Section 4.10 Land Reclamation
4.10	(1) Under this Ordinance, Land Reclamation shall be defined as the reclaiming of land by depositing of material so as to elevate the grade. In all Zoning districts, Land Reclamation shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special Use permit. Any lot or parcel upon which an aggregate amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited shall be defined as Land Reclamation. The request for a Land Reclamation permit shall contain at least the following:
A)	Completed Special Use Permit form and necessary fees
B)	Survey of the site where Land Reclamation is to occur showing land contours before and after Land Reclamation. This survey shall be large enough in scale to allow for at least the inclusion of the immediate adjacent parcels of land.
C)	A sketch showing current water drainage from/to the site and any modifications of such drainage after Land Reclamation is complete.
D)	A description or sketch showing the soil erosion control measures to be used during this Land Reclamation activity.
E)	Description of the amount, origin and types of materials to be placed on the land as part of this Land Reclamation.
F)	A sketch and/or description of the final cover material to be placed on the fill deposited by this Land Reclamation. The City Council may require a monetary deposit be placed with the City to insure that the final grading and landscaping be completed per the supplied sketches and description.
G)	Statement of when this Land Reclamation is to occur including the hours of the day and days of the week of such planned activities. The City might further limit these hours and days of operation.
H)	A route map showing the route for the trucks moving to and from the site. Copies of any special permits needed from the county or state highway departments should be attached.
4.10	(2) Each Land Reclamation Special Use permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year or as described in the Special Use permit issued by the City.

Section 4.11 Mining
4.11	(1) Under this Ordinance, mining shall be defined as the extraction and incidental processing of sand, gravel, or other materials from the land in the aggregate amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of removal thereof from a single site. In all zoning districts, the conduct of Land Mining shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special Use Permit. Each request for a permit for Land Mining shall at least include the following:
A)	Completed Special Use Permit form and necessary fees
B)	Survey of the site where Land Mining is to occur showing land contours before and after the Mining. This survey shall be large enough in scale to allow for at least the inclusion of the immediate adjacent parcels of land.
C)	A sketch showing current water drainage from/to the site and any modifications of such drainage after Land Mining is complete.
D)	A description or sketch showing the soil erosion control measures to be used during this Land Mining activity.
E)	A sketch and/or description of the final cover material to be placed on the land exposed by this Land Mining. The City Council may require a monetary deposit with the City to insure that the final grading and landscaping be completed per the supplied sketches and description.
F)	Statement of when these Land Mining activities are to occur including the hours of the day and days of the week of such planned activities. The City might further limit these hours and days of operation.
G)	A route map showing the route for trucks moving to and from the site. Copies of any special permits needed from the county or state highway departments should be attached.
4.11	(2) Each Land Mining Special Use permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year or as described in the Special Use permit issued by the City.

Section 4.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units
4.12	(1) It shall be the stated policy of the City of Gem Lake to maintain a harmonious and high standard of residential development and to protect residential areas from deleterious effects through insuring that both new and relocated dwellings from other areas, both within the City of Gem Lake and from outside, shall meet specified requirements. Such relocation of dwellings as stated above must conform to all regulations of the Building Code and shall be permitted in the zoning district where all necessary specifications as to lot sizes, setbacks, type of use, height regulations and all other conditions as laid down in this Ordinance are met.
4.12 (2) In addition, such relocations shall require a special permit from the City Council wherein the following provisions shall be met:
4.12 (3) Application shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk.
4.12 (4) A fee for the Relocation of Dwelling Units shall be required in an amount established by resolution of the City Council at it’s first meeting in January of each year. Further, the City may impose additional fees including, but not limited to, engineering costs, attorneys fees, expert opinions and publishing costs payment of which may also be required of the applicant as part of the process. The building mover shall meet all requirements for licensing and insurance as required by Minnesota Statues 221.81.
4.12 (5) The application shall be referred to the City Council, who shall set a time and place for a public hearing giving at least ten (10) days' public notice of such hearing.
4.12 (6) At least ten (10) days before such hearing, the Council shall mail a notice of said hearing to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the relocation premises. Failure of the Council to mail the notice, or failure of the title holder to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
4.12 (7) The Planning Commission shall make a report to the Council before, or at the public hearing.
4.12 (8) The Council shall make a finding and declare whether or not the structure to be moved is architecturally compatible.

SECTION 5 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Section 5.1 Enforcing Officer
5.1	(1) The Mayor shall appoint a Zoning Administrator, subject to the approval of the Council, who shall have the duty and responsibility of enforcing and administering this Ordinance.
 
Section 5.2 Building Permit
5.2	(1) No structure shall hereafter be erected, or structurally altered until a building permit shall have been issued indicating that the existing or proposed structure and the use of land, comply with this Ordinance and all Building Codes. All applications for building permits pertaining to the erection, or major alteration which will affect the outside dimensions of a structure shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a plat drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot, lots or parcel to be built upon, the dimensions of the ground plan and the extensions beyond the outside wall of the proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their location on the site in relation to the outside boundary and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One copy of the plat is to be approved and is to be made available on the site.

Section 5.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator
5.3	(1) The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority he shall:
A)	Conduct inspections of building and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;
B)	Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, all maps, amendments, and conditional uses, variances, appeals and applications, thereto;
C)	Receive, file and forward all applications for amendments, variances, conditional use or other matters to the Planning Commission and City Council;
D)	Institute in the name of the City of Gem Lake any appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as provided by law;
E)	Approve all building permits, submitted by the Building Inspector, after determining that the permit is in compliance with this Ordinance. This approval must be made before the permit is issued.
5.3	(2) The City Council may, on prior recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, empower the Ramsey County Sheriff in specific instances to perform any of the acts which the Zoning Administrator is directed or authorized to perform by this Section.

Section 5.4 Variances
5.4	(1) Purpose and Intent. The City Council may grant Variances from the strict applications of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and impose conditions and safeguards in the Variances so granted. These Variances shall be considered in cases where by reason of narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a lot or where by reason of exceptional topographic or water conditions or where other extraordinary and exceptional conditions of such lot exist, the strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance would result in an undue hardship upon the owner of such lot in developing or using such lot in a manner customary and legally permissible within the zoning district in which said lot is located. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute undue hardship for which a Variance will be considered or issued if a reasonable use for the real property exists under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
5.4 (2) Application. An application for any Variance from the Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Variance is to be considered in association with any other building permits, special or interim use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Variance application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the Variance as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
5.4 (3) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the Variance or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application.
5.4 (4) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or the City Council to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten
(10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application.
5.4 (5) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 B. Of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
5.4 (6) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
5.4 (7) Issuance of Variance. Following a decision by the City Council to approve or deny the application, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail.
5.4	(8) Lapse of Variance. Any Variance issued shall lapse if not acted upon within one (1) year of the date of issuance.

Section 5.5 Special Use Permits
5.5	(1) Purpose and Intent. The City Council may, by resolution, grant Special Use Permits for the uses and purposes described elsewhere in this Ordinance as Special Uses and may, in the granting of such Special Use Permits, impose conditions and safeguards which promote the guidelines set forth in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
5.5 (2) Application. An application for a Special Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Special Use Permit is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, interim use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Special Use Permit application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
 
5.5 (3) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Special Use on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District; conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the Special Use.
5.5 (4) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the Special Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within he same time frame.
5.5 (5) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 C. Of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5.5 (6) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed Special Use: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of  a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
5.5 (7) Issuance of Special Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals, a Special Use Permit shall apply only to the use stated on the permit and the application.
5.5	(8) Lapse of Special Use Permit. If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and implemented within one (1) year of the date of issuance, such issued Special Use Permit shall lapse.

Section 5.6 Interim Use Permits
5.6	(1) Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing an Interim Use by providing an Interim Use Permit is to allow a use or activity that is presently acceptable but that with anticipated development, redevelopment or identifiable change may not be acceptable in the future.
A)	Existing Uses. Uses defined as Interim Uses which presently exist and which were legally established within a respective zoning district and which are in accordance with standards and procedures set forth in this Ordinance shall be considered approved.
B)	New Uses. Uses defined as Interim Uses which do not presently exist within a respective zoning district shall be processed as new applications in accordance with standards and procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
5.6 (2) Application. An application for an Interim Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Interim Use Permit is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, special use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Interim Use Permit application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
5.6 (3) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Interim Use on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District; conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the Interim Use.
5.6 (4) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within he same time frame.
5.6(5) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 C. Of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5.6 (6) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed Interim Use: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) will not seriously depreciate adjacent and surrounding property values; 3) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan;
4) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
 
5.6 (7) Issuance of Interim Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals, a Interim Use Permit shall apply only to the use stated on the permit and the application.
5.6 (8) Lapse of Interim Use Permit. If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and implemented within one (1) year of the date of issuance, such issued Interim Use Permit shall lapse.
5.6	(9) Termination of Interim Use Permits. An Interim Use Permit shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever shall occur first:
A)	The date or event stated on the application and the Interim Use Permit; or
B)	Upon violation of any condition(s) under which the Interim Use permit was issued; or
C)	Upon adoption of any amendment to the City’s zoning regulations which renders the use non-confirming; or
D)	The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
5.6	(10) General Standards. All Interim Uses shall comply with the following general standards.
A)	Existing Uses. Shall be in accordance with zoning and building standards in effect at the time of initial construction and development and shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.
B)	New Uses. Shall conform as follows: 1) compliance with all zoning and other regulations as may otherwise be applicable; 2) the date or the event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty; 3) the existence of the Interim Use will not impose additional costs on the public if it becomes necessary for the public to take the property in the future; 4) the user agrees to any conditions of approval associated with the approval of the Interim Use Permit by the City Council.
C)	Existing and New Uses. Shall conform as follows: 1) shall maintain harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development; 2) shall meet or exceed all Performance Standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance; 3) shall not generate such additional traffic associated with the use that would overburden or exceed the capabilities of streets and other public services and facilities including, but not limited to, parks, schools, and utilities serving the area.

Section 5.7 Amendments
5.7	(1) General. In accordance with provisions of Minnesota Statutes, the City Council may, from time to time, adopt amendments to this Ordinance providing such amendments are consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
5.7 (2) Initiation. The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district boundaries and maps of this Ordinance. Any person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) who are the fee title owners of real property in the City or who have been designated in writing to represent the interests of the fee title owners of real property in the City may initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district boundaries and maps so as to affect the said real property or such real property adjacent thereto.
5.7 (3) Application. An application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, special or interim use permits, or subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. The City shall act on the application within sixty (60) days of the date a complete application is accepted unless said required period is extended or waived.
5.7 (4) Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed application on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the affected neighborhood(s) and Zoning District(s); conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the amendment.
5.7 (5) Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within the same time frame.
5.7(6) Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 A. Of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
5.7 (7) Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment but not earlier than thirty (30) days following the first consideration by the Planning Commission, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than sixty (60) days after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed amendment: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of  a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
5.7	(8) Adoption of The Amendment and Incorporation of Amendments Into The Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals and unless otherwise specified by the City Council, the Amendment shall be considered in effect on a date specified by the City Council, but not later than thirty (30) days subsequent to the City Council’s decision.

Section 5.8 Appeals
5.8	(1) All appeals from any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall be brought before the Planning Commission who shall act in the capacity of Board of Appeals in all matters related to this Ordinance.
 
5.8 (2) All appeals shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by any substantiating information and list of experts who shall may testify on behalf of the appellant. Upon receipt, materials shall be forwarded to the Chairman of the Planning Commission who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next meeting or a special meeting, provided a notice of the special meeting is appropriately published in the City’s legal publication. Notice of all hearings for appeals shall be mailed to all appellants.
5.8 (3) Upon review of the appeal and supplemental documentation and testimony related thereto, the Planning Commission shall decide the matter subject to judicial review or appeal to the City Council.
5.8	(4) In the event the appeal is granted, it shall be published in the City’s legal publication and shall become effective the date of publication.

Section 5.9 Fees
5.9	(1) Application Fees. The fees to be paid to the City for an application for amendment of this Ordinance, a Variance from this Ordinance, a Special or Interim Use Permit, or any construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other related permit shall be made payable to the City in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and as amended from time to time.
5.9 (2) Supplemental Fees. In addition to application fees, the City may require payment of supplemental fees related to an action or application including, but not limited to: attorney’s fees, fees of outside experts; staff time; direct expenses exceptional to the effort and as identified by City staff.
5.9	(3) Fees shall be payable at the time applications are first filed with the City and are not refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior to referral of the matter for consideration. There shall be no fee in the case of an application filed in the public interest by members of the Planning Commission or City Council.

Section 5.10 Violations and Penalties
5.10	(1) Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to a fine of not more than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars and costs for every offense or to imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.

SECTION 6 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP

Section 6.1 Districts
6.1	(1) In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Ordinance, the City of Gem Lake is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts and groups of Districts
A)	Residence Districts
1)	"R-1"  Lake Residence
2)	"R-2"  Acre Estate Residence
3)	"R-3"  Low-Density Residence
4)	"R-4"  Medium-Density Residence
B)	Business Districts
1)	"R-B"  Retail Business
2)	"G-B"  General Business
3)	"LD-B" Low-Density Business
4)	"G-B II" General Business II

Section 6.2 Map
6.2	(1) The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established on that certain map entitled "Zoning District Map of Gem Lake, Minnesota," dated 24 January 2000, which map is properly approved and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map". This map and all of the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and described herein.

Section 6.3 Boundaries
6.3	(1) District boundary lines as indicated on said map follow lot lines, the center lines of streets, alleys, or railroads, the center lines of streets or alleys projected, the center of water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto. If district boundary lines do not follow any of the above described lines, the district boundary lines are established as drawn on the zoning map. Where a District boundary line divides a lot of record which was in single ownership at the time of enactment of this Ordinance and places portions of such lot of record in two (2) or more Use Districts, any portion of such lot with fifty (50) feet on either side of such a dividing district boundary line may be used for any use of either Use District; provided, however, if any portion of such lot shall extend beyond the fifty
(50) feet limitation, the District line as shown shall prevail. Appeals from the Zoning Administrator's determination and questions of doubt concerning the exact location of District boundary lines shall be heard by the Board of Appeals.

SECTION 7 - "R-1" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section 7.1 Permitted Uses
Within the "R-1" Residential District, no structures or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:
7.1 (1) One family detached dwellings
7.1 (2) Truck gardening and other horticultural uses provided that only those products produced on the premise be sold or offered for sale.
7.1	(3) Agricultural activities, provided that no building in which farm animals or fowl are to be housed is nearer than one hundred (100) feet of a lot line.

Section 7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Within any "R-1" Use District, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses.
7.2	(1) Attached or detached housing for domestic servants
7.2 (2) Private garage, car port or parking space
7.2 (3) The keeping of not more than two (2) roomers
7.2 (4) Private swimming pool, tennis court, horse training ring, and other sites necessary to conduct a home sporting event.
7.2 (5) Home occupation
7.2 (6) Signs as regulated by this Ordinance
 
7.2 (7) Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the site for a period of time not in excess of such construction.
7.2 (8) Conservatories for plants and flowers, not including any business, trade or industry.
7.2	(9) Decorative landscape features including but not limited to pools, arbors, hedges, walls, shrubs, trees, etc. 7.2(10) Essential services

Section 7.3 Special Uses
Within any "R-1" Residential District, no structures or land shall be used for the following uses except by Special Use Permit:
7.3	(1) Country clubs, golf courses and other private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities, including swimming pools; provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any other lot in an "R" District.
7.3	(2) Essential Service Structures

Section 7.4 Height Regulations
7.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is the lesser, and no accessory structure shall exceed two stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, whichever is lesser.

Section 7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
7.5	(1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed	TABLE 7.5 (1)

TOTAL AREA	
BUILDABLE AREA	
FRONTAGE*

3.0 acres	
50% total area	
200 feet

FRONT YARD**	
SIDE YARD	
REAR YARD***

50 foot set-back	
30 foot set-back	
50 foot set-back
* All lots located on the lake shore shall be considered as having two frontages; that portion of the lot which abuts on the lake and such other lot line as determined by the City Council.
** That portion of a lot considered as the front yard shall be as determined by the City Council.
*** All Residential structures shall be set back at least 100' from the ordinary high water level of the lake. The ordinary high water level of the lake shall be as determined by the City Council.

SECTION 8 - "R-2" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section	8.1 Permitted Uses
8.1	(1) Within any "R-2" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A)	All uses permitted in Section 7,1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

Section	8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
8.2	(1) Within any "R-2" Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A)	Those uses or structures permitted in Section 7.2 and as regulated therein shall be a permitted accessory use, except as herein amended.

Section	8.3 Special Uses
8.3	(1) Within any "R-2" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A)	Those uses or structures listed as special uses in Section 7.3 and as regulated therein, except as herein amended.

Section	8.4 Height Regulations
8.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height whichever is lesser, and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

Section	8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
8.5	(1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed	TABLE 8.5 (1)

TOTAL AREA	
BUILDABLE AREA	
FRONTAGE*

1.0 acres	
75% total area	
150 feet

FRONT YARD**	
SIDE YARD*	
REAR YARD***

40 foot set-back	
15 foot set-back	
35 foot set-back
* A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.

SECTION 9 - "R-3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section	9.1 Permitted Uses
9.1	(1) Within any "R-3" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A)	All uses permitted in Section 8.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

Section	9.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
9.2	(1) Within any "R-3" Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A)	Those uses or structures permitted in Section 8.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B)	Swimming pools provided such pool is fenced so as to control access and is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any other lot in an "R" District, and subject to Council approval.
 
Section	9.3 Special Uses
9.3	(1) Within any "R-3" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A)	Those uses or structures listed as special uses in Section 8.3 as regulated therein, except as herein amended.
B)	Two-family dwellings

Section	9.4 Height Regulations
9.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height whichever is lesser, and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

Section 9.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
9.5	(1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed	TABLE 9.5 (1)

TOTAL AREA	
BUILDABLE AREA	
FRONTAGE*

36,000 square feet	
75% total area	
100 feet

FRONT YARD	
SIDE YARD*	
REAR YARD

35 foot set-back	
15 foot set-back	
25 foot set-back
* A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.

SECTION 10 - "R-4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section 10.1 Permitted Uses
10.1	(1) Within the "R-4" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A)	All uses permitted in Section 9.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

Section 10.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
10.2	(1) Within any "R-4" Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A)	Those uses or structures permitted in Section 9.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

Section 10.3 Special Uses
10.3	(1) Within any "R-4" Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A)	Those uses or structures listed as special uses in Section 9.3 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B)	Off-street parking for adjacent non-residential uses.

Section 10.4 Height Regulations
10.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height whichever is lesser, and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

Section 10.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
10.5	(1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A)	When on-site septic systems will be used for structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following appliesTABLE10.5(1) a)

TOTAL AREA	
BUILDABLE AREA	
FRONTAGE*

36,000 square feet	
75% total area	
100 feet

FRONT YARD	
SIDE YARD*	
REAR YARD

35 foot set-back	
15 foot set-back	
25 foot set-back
B)	When city sewer is currently available and will be used for the structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following
applies:	TABLE 10.5 (1) b)

TOTAL AREA	
BUILDABLE AREA	
FRONTAGE*

24,000 square feet	
100% total area	
100 feet

FRONT YARD	
SIDE YARD*	
REAR YARD

35 foot set-back	
15 foot set-back	
25 foot set-back
*A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.

SECTION 11. REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS

Section 11.1 General Provisions.
11.1(1) Descriptions Of Gem Lake Waters, Wetlands and Shorelands. For purposes of application of the provisions of this Section, the following classifications shall be based upon those found in Section 2, Table 2 and Figure 4 of the Local Water Management Plan section of the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
A)	WWS Class I. Waters, wetlands and shorelands identified as Class I shall be those contained within Wetland No 9 (DNR Protected Water/Wetland No. 62-0037P, the body of water known as Gem Lake and it’s attendant wetlands) and No. 10 (DNR Protected Water/Wetland No. 62-0128W).
 
B)	WWS Class II. Waters, wetlands and shorelands identified as Class II shall be those contained within Wetland No. 23 (DNR Protected Water/Wetland No. 62-0035W) and No. 24.
 
C)	WWS Class III. Waters, wetlands and shorelands identified as Class II shall be those contained within all remaining Wetlands numbered  1 - 8, 11 - 22, and 25 - 26.
11.1	(2) Aesthetics of Gem Lake. Gem Lake is a small body of water as well as an adjoining marsh area that, by informal agreement of the riparian owners, has been used and enjoyed as a passive nature preserve. Only canoes, row boats, and small sailboats have been used on the lake in the past. Gem Lake is a unique urban wildlife wetland and forest refuge and is home to an abundance of birds, animals, amphibians, and fish. It’s highest and best use is as a nature area and visual amenity that is graced by occasional swimmers, canoeists, sail boaters, snow skiers, and walkers. It is not suited for motorized or other more intense uses. The shorelands of Gem Lake and it’s attendant wetlands presents a pleasing balance of open spaces as well as groves of woodlands with trees and shrubs of a range of age and sizes which, in turn, provide ideal natural screening of man-made structures. The islands located within the area of Gem Lake and it’s attendant wetlands are wooded with no man-made structures and the presence of such structures would adversely affect the natural appearances to be preserved.
11.1(3) Application Of This Section.
A)	Unless otherwise specified, the various provisions of this Section 11 of this Ordinance No. 43 shall be applied only to WWS Class I. 11.1(4) Additional Provisions.
A) In addition to the Gem Lake Watershed Management Plan section of the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan and this Ordinance, additional regulations may apply to all WWS Class I, WWS Class II and WWS Class III including, but not limited to, other Ordinances of the City of Gem Lake, agencies of the United States, the State of MN, and Ramsey County as well as Regional Watershed Districts.
11.1(5) Standards For Review
A) For purposes of this section, all viewing criteria will be based upon viewing from the opposite shore and natural or vegetation screening shall be determined based upon summer growth.
11.1(6) Existing Non-Conforming Uses, Structures And Placements. Subject to compliance with all other provisions of all City Ordinances, the following provisions shall apply:
A)	Uses which are prohibited by this Ordinance but which are in existence prior to the effective adoption of these regulations shall be considered as non-conforming uses and may continue as lawful, non-conforming uses. Such uses shall not be intensified, enlarged or expanded upon beyond the permitted or delineated boundaries of the use, activity or reclamation plan as stipulated in the most current permit issued prior to the adoption of this section of the Ordinance.
B)	All structures and uses in existence prior to the adoption of this section of the Ordinance which do not meet structure set-back requirements or other dimensional standards of this section of this Ordinance shall be considered as lawful non-conforming structures or uses.
C)	Extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure, use or sanitary facility shall meet the set-back standards of this section of this Ordinance.
D)	An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure or sanitary facility may be permitted on the side of the structure or facility facing away from the lake.
E)	An improvement to an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be allowed to extend laterally (parallel to the shoreline) when the improvement is otherwise in compliance with the dimensional and set-back standards of this Ordinance.
F)	Exterior decks attached to an existing lawful non-conforming structure which do not extend any roof or foundation may be permitted to extend laterally (parallel to the shoreline) and shall be constructed to be visually inconspicuous in summer months when viewed from the lake or opposite shore.
G)	Existing lawful non-conforming structures which do not meet the set-backs of the various shoreland zones shall not be raised in elevation or roof line.
H)	Reconstruction of an existing historic lawful non-conforming, it’s appurtenances and site development to preserve it’s historic character shall be allowed if the structure is recognized as an historic site on the National Register of Historic Places.
I)	Any existing lawful non-conforming structure that needs replacing due to destruction, deterioration or obsolescence may be replaced, restored or rebuilt as necessary to remain the same as they existed on the date of enactment of this section of this Ordinance except that any change beyond established structural dimensions of each such structure shall be in compliance with the set-back requirements of this Ordinance or any variance that may be obtained or issued due to such increase in dimension.
11.1 (7) Application. All real property currently and in the future delineated as Shoreland shall be subject to these use and alteration regulations.
These regulations and requirements shall be in addition to those imposed by federal, state, regional wetland conservation district agencies, and all local ordinances governing land use, all of which shall jointly apply.  Under joint application, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

Section 11.2 Lake Use Restrictions
11.2 (1) No Motorized Use. Gem Lake shall not be used by any motorized craft or traffic including, but not limited to, motorized boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and excluding equipment used for cleaning, plowing snow or other occasional maintenance uses.
11.2	(2) Controlled Access Lots. Riparian lots or parcels of real property intended to provide owners of non-riparian lots or parcels of real property with access to the body of water known as Gem Lake are permissible provided each of the following standards are met or exceeded:
A)	The riparian access lot or parcel of real property must meet the minimum area, buildable area, frontage, depth, width and other such requirements for residential lots and must be suitable for the intended use of a riparian access lot or parcel of real property.
B)	The riparian access lot or parcel of real property must be jointly owned by all purchasers of non-riparian lots or parcels of real property in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights.
C)	Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments in form acceptable to the Gem Lake City Attorney and approved by the City Council must be developed and recorded with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles of Ramsey County, Minnesota, specifying, among other items, which non-riparian lot or real property parcel owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed and what restrictions are imposed.
D)	The riparian access lot or parcel of real property and it’s use shall comply with the Zoning and Building Codes of the City of Gem Lake in the same manner as a single contiguous riparian lot or parcel of real property containing a principal structure.
E)	Except for riparian lots or parcels of real property which meet the foregoing standards, no other riparian lot or parcel of real property shall be utilized to provide access to non-riparian lot or real property parcel owners whether by direct conveyance, easement, license or the like.
11.2	(3) No Wet Storage Of Boats. Boats shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of boats shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring properties and Gem Lake while not in use.
11.2(4)Docks.
A)	Docks are seasonal and temporary in nature and, therefore, shall not be permanently affixed to the shore or lake bottom.
 
B)	Docks shall not be greater than four (4'0") feet in width, two (2'0") feet in height above the water and twenty (20'0") feet in length from the lake shore.
C)	Docks shall not be covered with any roof structure, awnings or any other type of enclosure.
D)	Only one (1) dock shall be allowed for each parcel of real property defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with the Zoning and Building codes of the City of Gem Lake and containing a principal structure.
11.2(5) Swimming Rafts
A)	Swimming rafts are seasonal and temporary in nature and therefore shall not be permanently affixed to the lake bottom.
B)	Swimming rafts shall not exceed one hundred (100s.f.) square feet in total area and shall not be more than two (2'0) feet higher than the water surface.
C)	Swimming rafts shall not be located more than fifty (50') feet from the lakeshore.
D)	Swimming rafts shall not be covered with a roof structure, awning or any other type of enclosure.
E)	Only one (1) raft shall be allowed for each parcel of real property defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with the Zoning and Building codes of the City of Gem Lake and containing a principal structure.
F)	Swimming rafts shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of swimming rafts shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring properties and Gem Lake while not in use.
11.2(6) Irrigation Equipment
A)	If used solely for the purpose of irrigation, a pipe not to exceed two (2") inches in diameter and forty (40') feet in length may be placed along the lake shore bottom.
B)	During times of drought, the City of Gem Lake may, by resolution and at the recommendation of competent authority, temporarily suspend or restrict the amount of water drawn from Gem Lake for irrigation.
C)	Housing and placement of irrigation equipment shall be restricted as set-forth in Section 11.4(2)e).
11.3	Shoreland Zone 1 Restrictions (0' to 50' waterward of Shoreline). Within Shoreline Zone 1, the following restrictions shall apply:
11.3(1) No material, fill, debris or any other materials shall be deposited anywhere in this zone except for the depositing of clean beach type sand in accordance with state regulations for the sole purpose of establishing a beach of limited size.
11.3(2) No structures shall be erected except for those listed in Section 11.2.
11.3(3) No removal of vegetation without written approval of the Zoning Administrator. 11.3(4) No lighting or other electrical appurtenances of any kind shall be permitted.

Section 11.4 Shoreland Zone 2 Restrictions (0' to 50' landward of Shoreline):Within Shoreline Zone 2, the following restrictions shall apply: 11.4(1) No cutting or removal of vegetation unless appropriate written approval is first obtained from the Zoning Administrator for purposes including, but not limited to:
A)	as minimally necessary to construct an approved structure, roadway or utility easement; or
B)	as may be necessary for maintenance trimming to aid in the health of the vegetation and which does not result in a substantial reduction of the vegetative screen.
C)	Removal of buckthorn and other vegetation identified by the State of MN Department of Natural Resources as invasive and for which abatement plans have been encouraged shall be allowed, presuming proper disposal of materials in accordance with accepted best practices is employed.
11.4(2) No storage of materials of any type intended for the creation of compost including, but not limited to, garbage, debris, or lawn and garden waste, shall be allowed.
11.4(3) No structures except walkways, stairways, decks or irrigation housings are allowed except as follows:
A)	A permanent deck or combination of decks containing not more than two hundred (200 s.f.) square feet, not more than two (2'0") feet in height determined by the average distance from the ground surrounding the deck to the highest platform and for which a Gem Lake Building Permit has been issued shall be allowed if located more than thirty-five (35') feet from the shoreline.
B)	A deck or combination of decks may be sited in such a manner that they are unobtrusive to the natural topography, vegetation and shoreland.
C)	A deck or combination of decks shall not be covered with roof structures, awnings or any other type of enclosure and shall only contain railings as required by Gem Lake Building Codes.
D)	A deck or combination of decks may be required to be screened with natural vegetation.
E)	A housing for irrigation equipment not greater than four (4'0") feet wide, four (4'0") feet deep, and three (3'0") feet high and for which a Gem Lake Building Permit has been issued shall be allowed if located more than five (5'0") feet from the shoreland and fully screened from Shoreland Zone 1 by natural vegetation.
F)	A permanent deck, combination of decks or irrigation housing may be constructed of wood, metal, fiberglass, plastic, or any combination thereof provided they are visually unobtrusive and limited to color(s) that blend with the environment.
G)	No manicured lawns or the use of fertilizers attendant to the maintenance of such lawns shall be allowed except that those lawns in existence at the time of passage of these provisions may be retained, but not increased in total area within this shoreland zone.
H)	Stairways, landings and lifts are preferred as alternatives to major topographical alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs or steep slopes to shoreland areas. Stairways and walkways shall not exceed four (4'0") in width, landings shall not exceed thirty-two (32 s.f.) square feet, and all should be located on the site in visually inconspicuous locations with natural screening as possible.
I)	No lighting shall have it’s source directly visible from the opposite shore except for lights located inside a structure. The use of reflected light may be acceptable providing the effect is subtle and does not contaminate the scene.
J)No driveway or parking areas shall be allowed.

Section 11.5 Shoreland Zone 3 Restrictions (50' to 150' landward of Shoreline): Within Shoreline Zone 3, the following restrictions shall apply: 11.5(1) No Building Permit shall be issued for any structure nor shall any structure be built within Zone 3 if said structure constitutes a substantial feature of the landscape when viewed from the opposite shore or less than fifty (50%) percent of said structure is screened by natural vegetation.
11.5(2) No driveway or parking areas are allowed. 11.5(3) No cutting of vegetation if:
A)	the general density of a grove when viewed from the opposite shore will be visibly reduced so that man made structures are more obvious when viewed from the opposite shore except that the Zoning Administrator may allow such cutting if a replacement vegetation plan is submitted for approval, approved in writing and scheduled for completion within a predetermined acceptable period of time.
 
B)	such cutting involves the removal of live trees with a diameter of over five (5") inches measured at a point five (5') feet above the ground except that the Zoning Administrator may allow such cutting if a reforestation plan is submitted for approval, approved in writing and scheduled for completion within a predetermined acceptable period of time.

Section 11.6 Shoreland Lot Restrictions
11.6(1) The following standards shall apply to all Shoreland lots defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with the Zoning and Building codes of the City of Gem Lake:
A) a minimum buildable area above the shoreline of not less than two (2.0) acres; and
B)	the lot has minimum frontage on an improved private way or public street of two hundred (200') feet; and
C)	the minimum lot width at the building set back line of two hundred (200') feet; and
D)	the minimum lot width at the shoreline of two hundred (200') feet;
E)	the minimum set back from the shoreline of structures and uses of one hundred (100') feet; and
F)	the minimum set-back for on-site individual sewage treatment system (ISTS) is two hundred (200') feet from the Shoreline; and
G)	the maximum total lot coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces of twenty-five (25%) percent; and
11.6(2) Removal or alteration of any vegetation or trees for development of any shoreland lot shall not be conducted without first submitting a tree and vegetation inventory for each building site submitted for review and approval by the City Forester and Zoning Administrator and until receipt of a Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permit from the City. Criteria for issuance of a Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
A)	a detailed inventory of existing trees and vegetation by type and size, details of trees and vegetation to be removed, and details of reforestation and vegetation replacement plans to be implemented within twelve (12) months of final building inspector approval;
B)	verification that vegetation cutting areas shall be set-back five (5') feet on slopes less than twelve (12%) percent; and
C)	verification that vegetation cutting shall not be allowed within fifty (50') feet of the shoreland or on slopes greater than twelve (12%) percent unless specifically allowed by a Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permit.
D)	all cutting, including topping, involves trees less than five (5") inches in diameter measured at a point five (5') above the ground; and
E)	verification that all cutting, including topping, involves only vegetation which is not currently providing or proposed to provide screening of any structure from view from the lake; and
F)	verification that the essential character, quality, health and density of existing growths will be preserved and a continuous canopy cover will be maintained; and
G)	verification that all diseased trees or nuisance species of vegetation such as buckthorn that require removal will be removed and that their removal is in the public interest; and
H)	verification that the cutting is necessary for the maintenance or installation of transportation or utility rights-of-way or an otherwise specifically approved structure for which a Gem Lake Building Permit has been issued.
I)	verification that the various provisions of Ordinance No. 66 shall be jointly applied.
11.6(3) Grading, filling and excavating or changing the topography landward from Shoreline shall not be conducted without review and approval of a Grading and Filling Plan by the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator and issuance of a Grading And Filling Permit by the City.
A)	Criteria for issuance of a Grading And Filling Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
1)	slopes greater than twelve (12%) percent shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible; and
2)	earth moving, erosion, vegetation removal, drainage, filling of wetlands, and destruction of natural amenities is minimized; and
3)	the smallest amount of ground shall be disturbed for the shortest amount of time; and
4)	temporary ground cover is provided for and which shall remain in place until final landscape cover is installed; and
5)	best practices suitable to the City Engineer are demonstrated and shall be employed to generally prevent and control erosion and trap sediment and specifically to prevent pollution of the lake by said erosion and leaching; and
6)	best practices suitable to the City Engineer are demonstrated and shall be employed to stabilize all filling to accepted engineering standards; and
7)	all areas on the property to be disturbed including, but not limited to, areas for structures, roads and driveways, and ISTS’s are identified and the work is to be undertaken subject to the issuance of a Gem Lake Building Permit.
B)	All work and disturbance of the vegetative cover within one hundred fifty (150') feet of the shoreland shall be done as quickly as possible employing best practices to prevent erosion.
11.6(4) Placement and design of public and private roads, driveways and parking areas on all Shoreland shall:
A)	be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from the lakes waters and the opposite shore; and
B)	include for purposes of Site Plan approval by the City Engineer, Building Official and/or Zoning Administrator that all roads, driveways and parking areas have been designed so that when constructed they will minimize and control erosion to the lakes waters consistent with the guidelines of the local soil and water conservation district or other applicable technical guidelines; and
C)	for purposes of Site Plan approval by the Zoning Administrator shall be subject to structural set backs from property lines and shoreland and shall not be placed within Shoreland Zones 1, 2 and 3 unless no alternative exists at which time they may be placed within these areas employing designs that minimize adverse effects.
D)	Access ramps, approach roads and parking areas for purposes of launching private water craft are prohibited.
E)	Controlled pedestrian or water craft access lots for use by non-riparian lot owners or the public is prohibited.

Section 11.7 Shoreland Lot Building Restrictions For All Shoreland
11.7(1) Each building site must be served by city sewer constructed in accordance with Ordinance No. 64 or be capable of supporting an on-site individual sewage treatment system (ISTS) providing each such ISTS is designed by a qualified engineer, approved by the City’s Building Official, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No.  67; and
11.7(2) No lighting shall have their source directly visible from the opposite shore except for lights located inside a structure. The use of reflected light may be acceptable providing the effect is subtle and does not dominate the scene.
11.7(3) Parking areas shall have vegetative screens so that vehicles are not visible from the opposite shore. Parking areas and roads/driveways to parking areas shall be oriented so that lights from vehicles do not shine on the lake when cars are parked.
11.7(4) Water Supply. Any private water supply for domestic purposes shall be placed up slope from any source of contamination and in areas not subject to flooding. Water shall not be drawn from any lake, pond or flowage for any purpose except for the purposes of irrigation and fire protection for the benefit of the fee title owner of real property defined as a single contiguous riparian lot which complies with all Zoning Codes of the City of Gem Lake.
 
Section 11.8 Wetland Uses And Regulations
11.8 (1) Purpose and Intent. The City Council finds that wetlands within the City, as part of the natural ecosystem, are critical to the present and future health, safety, and general welfare of the land, wildlife, and people of the City. These wetlands conserve surface waters, provide flood water retention, and improve water quality in accordance with Federal, State, Regional and City objectives. Wetland protection through use and alteration regulation also improve subsoil moisture and serve to recharge the aquifers critical to the community. The City Council recognizes that wetlands and their natural functions, when properly maintained, provide important ecological, educational, and recreational assets as well as enhancing property value and preserving the natural beauty of the landscape.
11.8 (2) Authorization. The City recognizes its statutory obligation to comply with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103 A-G, MN Rules 8420 “Wetland Conservation Act of 1991”, Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, NPDES Phase II, the goals and policies of the City of Gem Lake Local Water Management Plan, and policies established by VLAWMO and RWMWD all as adopted and, from time to time, amended.
11.8 (3) Application. All real property currently and in the future delineated as wetland in the Gem Lake Watershed Management Plan and other federal, state and regional delineations shall be subject to these use and alteration regulations. These regulations and requirements shall be in addition to those imposed by federal, state, and regional wetland conservation district agencies, all of which shall jointly apply. Under joint application, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
11.8	(4) Wetland Alteration. Any wetland alteration shall be in accordance with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103 A-G, MN Rules 8420 “Wetland Conservation Act of 1991”, Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, goals and policies established in the City of Gem Lake Local Water Management Plan, and policies established by VLAWMO and RWMWD each as adopted and, from time to time, amended. Each of the aforementioned is by reference incorporated as if the full text and regulations were set forth herein.
A)	In addition to all other regulations, the City encourages retention or installation of a natural buffer around all wetlands where practical.
11.8	(5) Permits Required. No wetland shall be altered or developed in any manner without first obtaining all necessary permits and written approvals from the City of Gem Lake and such watershed management organizations with jurisdiction of the area. For purposes of this section, all requirements of Sections 11.2 through 11.7 inclusive of this ordinance shall apply as if fully restated here.

Section 11.9  Development and Alteration Regulations. In addition to the provisions of all other City Ordinances, all proposals for development or alteration of Shorelands shall include:
11.9(1) Erosion Control Plan. All plans for development of real property which includes shoreland zones shall include an “Erosion Control Plan” which shall set forth proposed provisions for sediment control, water management, maintenance of landscaped features, and any additional matters intended to improve or maintain the quality of the environment. Such a plan shall set forth proposed changes requested by the applicant and disclose what, if any, change will be made in the natural condition of the earth, including loss or change of ground cover, destruction of trees, grade courses, and marshes. The plan shall minimize ground cover alteration, loss of natural vegetation, and grade changes as much as possible. The purpose of the Erosion Control Plan is to eliminate, to the greatest extent possible, the potential pollution, erosion, and siltation attendant to development and maintain the natural environment. The Erosion Control Plan shall demonstrate currently accepted “best practices” and shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Gem Lake Planning Commission and City Engineer.
A)	The “Ramsey County Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook” with all amendments as of the time of application accepted as best practices and is by reference incorporated as if the full text and regulations were set forth herein.
B)	The provisions of the Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance are hereby incorporated as if the full text and regulations were set forth herein. 11.9(2) Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plan. In addition to the provisions of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 66, all plans for development of real property which includes shoreland zones shall include a Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plan which includes a tree inventory, tree removal plan, and a relocation or replanting plan for all trees to be removed from and vegetation alteration upon the real property. The Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plan shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Gem Lake Planning Commission, the City Forester, and the City Engineer.
11.9(3) Shoreland Impact Plan. All plans for development or alteration of real property which includes Shoreland zones shall include an approved “Shoreland Impact Plan” which shall set forth proposed results of the alterations proposed. The Shoreland Impact Plan shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval by the Gem Lake Planning Commission, the City Forester, and the City Engineer. Each Shoreland Impact Plan shall include, but not be limited to:
A)	How the removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent erosion into the water and to preserve shoreland aesthetics and how natural vegetation shall be restored to the greatest extent feasible after any construction project.
B)	Grading and filling activities shall be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity will affect sediment and pollutant trapping and retention, storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage, fish and wildlife habitat, recreational use, and shoreland or bank stabilization.
C)	Grading and filling which are consistent with the City of Gem Lake Local Water Management Plan. Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in areas prone to erosion or where they could run off into the shoreland area.
D)	Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible. Mulches or similar material shall be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage. A permanent vegetation cover shall be established as soon as possible.
E)	Clear cutting of trees and shrubs is prohibited. Invasive non-natural vegetation is excepted.
11.9(4) Subdivision. In addition to the requirements of Gem Lake Subdivision Regulations, no Shoreland shall be subdivided if it is determined by the City or agency of competent jurisdiction to be unsuitable for subdivision by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or general welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or the community and the environment.
11.9(5) Administration. No building permits shall be issued without proof of conformance to all requirements of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, Grading Permits, Erosion Control Plans, and Tree And Vegetation Preservation Plans reviewed and approved in writing by a competent authority.

Section 11.10 Enforcement, Approvals And Appeals
11.10(1) The Zoning Administrator appointed by the Gem Lake City Council will, in concert with other City officials and consultants as necessary, enforce the various provisions of Section 11 and will also cooperate with county, regional, state and federal authorities authorized to
carry out enforcement of the regulations established to protect bodies of water, shorelands and wetlands.
11.10(2) All plans submitted in accordance with this section shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission who, in turn, shall recommend approval of, amendment to, or denial of all plans to the City Council.
11.10(3) All plans submitted in accordance with this section shall require City Council approval.
11.10(4) All appeals regarding approval, denial, or amendment of plans submitted shall be addressed by the City Council.
 
SECTION 12 - "R-B" RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT

Section 12.1 Permitted Uses
12.1	(1) Within the "R-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A)	The following retail sales or service businesses: Appliance store, auto accessory store, banks, beauty shop, office supplies, photo supplies, drug store, furniture store, grocery, hardware store, jewelry store, laundromat, clinic, offices, tavern, liquor stores, restaurants, shoe store and repair, theater, variety store, wearing apparel and similar uses.
B)	Hotels & Motels, Hospital or Clinic for human beings, Dental Services, Medical Services, Funeral Home or Mortuary, Private Clubs.
12.1 (2) Single Family dwelling
12.1	(3) Churches

Section 12.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
12.2	(1) Within any "R-B" Use District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A)	Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal use, however, such accessary use shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area nor require more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross man hours required to conduct the permitted use.
B)	Essential Services

Section	12.3 Special Uses
12.3	(1) Within any "R-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
A)	Auto Repair
B)	Motor service station
C)	Essential service structures
D)	Commercial recreation such as bowling alleys, jump centers, and live entertainment
E)	Commercial Broadcast/telecommunication towers and/or antennas

Section 12.4 Height Regulations
12.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and no accessary structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

Section 12.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
12.5	(1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed	TABLE 12.5 (1)

AREA	
FRONTAGE	
FRONT YARD*	
SIDE YARD**	
REAR YARD***

1,000 sq. ft.	
25 feet	
10 foot set-back	
None	
20 foot set-back
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
** Except 15 feet when abutting an “R” District and 30 feet when abutting a street.
*** Except 30 feet when abutting an “R” District.

Section 12.6 Rezoning for "R-B" Retail Business
12.6	(1) No area shall be rezoned for retail business by amendment to this Ordinance unless such area is an extension of an existing "R-B" District or contains at least two (2) acres of land.

SECTION 13 - "G-B" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

Section 13.1 Permitted Uses
13.1	(1) Within the "G-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the following uses:
A)	Those uses permitted in Section 12.1 and as regulated therein except as hereinafter modified shall be a permitted use.
B)	The following retail sales and service businesses: Auto sales and repair, boat and marine sales, bakery, business and trade school, bottling of soft drinks and creameries, building material yard, provided it is conducted within a building or within a fence of such construction as to prevent view from the public right-of-way, cabinet and carpentry shops, electrical service, heating/plumbing, commercial greenhouse, dry cleaning plant, farm machinery sales and supplies, dairy farm and milk products processing, packaging and storage, garden supply store, motels, motor hotels and hotels provided the site shall contain not less than four hundred (400) square feet of lot area per unit, printing shops, upholstery shop, warehousing, except the storage of inflammable fluids, wholesale offices and showrooms, and similar uses.
C)	Open sales or rental lots, subject to the lot being surfaced or landscaped to control the dust, and all materials located on said lot shall meet front yard requirements. Should the lot be lighted, such lights shall be so located as not to have a direct source visible from the public right-of-way. Permitted uses include model homes and garage display.
D)	Veterinary clinic or animal hospital.
E)	Miniature golf course, driving ranges, archery ranges, trampoline centers.
F)	Car wash, provided off-street parking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum fifteen (15) minute period.
G)	Essential service structures
H)	Lumber yards

Section 13.2 Accessory Uses
13.2	(1) Within any "G-B" Use District, those uses or structures subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental thereto shall be permitted.
A)	Essential Services

Section 13.3 Special Uses
13.3	(1) Within any "G-B" Use District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit.
 
A)	Service and light industries which manufacture, process, store, and distribute foods and materials not likely to create offensive noise, odors, vibrations, dust, smoke, heat, glare or other objectionable influences and are in general dependent upon raw materials defined elsewhere.
B)	Truck and motor freight terminal
C)	Inflammable materials sales and storage
D)	Commercial Broadcast/telecommunications towers and/or antennas

Section 13.4 Height Regulations
13.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and no accessary structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

Section 13.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
13.5	(1) The following minimum requirements shall be observed	TABLE 13.5 (1)

AREA	
FRONTAGE	
FRONT YARD*	
SIDE YARD**	
REAR YARD***

12,500 sq. ft.	
100 feet	
20 foot set-back	
10 foot set-back	
None
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
** Except 20 feet when abutting a street or residential district.
*** When abutting an “R” District, then it shall be 20 feet.

SECTION 14 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage high quality development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are also designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause urban and rural blight. The Zoning Administrator, assisted by the Building Inspector, shall be responsible for enforcing these standards and may require the submission of information showing compliance or non- compliance with the standards.

Section 14.1 Requirements for Consideration
14.1	(1) Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or structure in any district, other than a Residential District (R1, R2, R3 and R4), or for construction or remodeling of any structure(s) allowed by a Special Use Permit in the Residential Districts, three (3) copies of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator. This information will be presented for review by the Planning Commission and if the Planning Commission deems necessary the City Engineer, as well as for final approval by the City Council. All data required by this section must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission before a building permit can be issued.
A)	Copies of a Registered Surveyors report for the lot where these structure(s) will be constructed, which shall have marked on it the location(s) of the planned structure(s), driveways, sidewalks and parking spaces. The dimension of the lot area, all building setback lines and dimensions of the front, back and side yards as required shall also be shown.
B)	Preliminary architectural floor plans and elevations of the proposed structure(s) complete with details of the exterior wall finishes.
C)	A complete site plan which shall include:
1)	A topographical survey of the proposed site including existing and proposed topography and natural features with a minimum scale of one (1) inch equaling 20 feet. The location of the planned structure(s) should also be indicated on this survey.
2)	Landscape plans showing size, quantity and species of shrubs and trees to be included. All fences, walls or other screening devices shall also be shown including identification of the materials of construction.
3)	Suggested plans for a storm water drainage system sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulation within the proposed development area. This plan will need to be approved by the City Engineer.
4)	Details showing the entrances and exits from the development  area, including an indication that they have been reviewed by Ramsey County, if they will connect to a County road.
5)	Interior driveway and road details showing traffic flow, fire department access, etc.
6)	Lighting plans for all exterior and parking, display and storage lot lighting. Location and type of lighting fixtures shall be given.
7)	Locations and dimensions of planned signs for the development.
D)	Any additional information which may be requested by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council due to conditions peculiar to a particular site.
14.1	(2) Cost of data review
A)	All costs incurred by the City in the review of the data supplied, such as City Engineer plan review costs, shall be paid by the person presenting the plans, prior to any review. The final approval of these plans will not be voted on by the City Council until all costs have been paid.
B)	Whenever the proposal may involve a potential for significant environmental impact, or if an Environmental Impact Statement or an Environmental Assessment Worksheet may be needed by state law or applicable regulation, the City will require the applicant to prepare or pay for the professional assistance needed in the preparation of these statements or worksheets.
14.1	(3) Procedures for review
A)	The Zoning Administrator will forward one copy of this data to the Planning Commission for their review and approval. The second copy shall be sent to the City Engineer, if the engineer's review is found necessary by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review this information and the City Engineer's comments on this project at their next meeting. The details of this review, as well as a copy of the data supplied by the applicant and the Engineer (if needed), shall be forwarded to the City Council for final approval before the proposed project shall to allowed to start.
B)	All of parts of this review may be waived by the City Council after consideration of the recommendations of the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator.

Section 14.2 Exterior Storage
14.2	(1) Residential Districts
 
A)	In Residential Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties or a street, except for the following; laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of passenger automobiles and pick-up trucks, except inoperative automobiles and trucks may be parked once for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
14.2	(2) Business Districts
A)	In business districts all materials, equipment and vehicles shall be stored in a building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties or a street except for:
1)	Temporary storage of construction and landscaping materials currently being used on the premises.
2)	Open Storage Lots where screening but not a building shall be required.
3)	Open Sales or Rental Lots where merchandise for retail sales or rental may be displayed in areas designated by the required Site Plan or Special Use Permit.

Section 14.3 Refuse
14.3	(1) In All Districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. Farms may be excluded from this requirement providing the waste material is that commonly associated and incidental to normal farm operations. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse, and weeds.
14.3	(2) In All Districts, no person shall store, park or permit the parking or storage of any junked vehicle, external to any structure, on any property within the city.

Section 14.4 Screening
14.4	(1) Screening shall be required in all zones where:
A)	any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential use or zone; and,
B)	where the driveway to a parking area of more than six parking spaces is within 15 feet of an adjoining residential use or zone.
14.4 (2) Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a developed residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the Building Inspector).
14.4	(3) In all districts all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
A)	retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure;
B)	materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises;
C)	merchandise located on service station pump islands.
14.4	(4) The screening in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than 5 feet high, but shall not extend within 15 feet of any street, right-of-way or driveway. The screening shall be placed along property lines or in case of screening along a street, 15 feet from the street right-of-way with landscaping between the screening and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered "solid" if it blocks direct vision. Planting of a type approved by the Council may also be used as a screening.

Section 14.5 Landscaping
14.5	(1) In All Districts, all developed uses shall provide a landscaped yard along all streets. This yard shall be kept clear of all structures, storage, and off-street parking. This yard shall be at least 20 feet in depth along all streets, measured from the street right-of-way. Except for driveways, the yard shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot, and along both streets in the case of a corner lot.

Section 14.6 Maintenance
14.6	(1) In All Districts, all structures, landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health and safety conditions to the adjoining areas.

Section 14.7 Lighting and Glare
14.7	(1) In All Districts, any lighting shall be arranged as to deflect light from all adjoining property, and from the public streets and highways. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from lighting or from high temperature processes such as welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
14.7 (2) Glare or Heat - Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located.
14.7	(3) Outdoor lighting - All outdoor lighting shall be so designed and installed so that light will not be directed onto adjoining property or public streets and highways. Lighting units shall be properly shielded to give no upward component of light to create a sky-glow.
A)	Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be mounted at the lowest possible level above ground, but in no case shall any pole or structure for mounting such fixtures exceed the maximum principal structure height restrictions.
B)	Prior to installing or remodeling any outdoor lighting, a site plan showing type, location and configuration details and proposed area of direct illumination must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his approval.
C)	After completion of any outdoor lighting system the property owner may be required to submit an affidavit, by a registered lighting engineer, that the completed project does not exceed the requirements of this section.
14.7	(4) Lighting used to illuminate sales lots - Lighting used to illuminate sales lots for new or used cars shall be arranged and designed so as to comply with the following limitations:
A)	Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the lot, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not exceed 120 foot candles.
B)	Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured 30 feet out from the property line with the meter directed toward the lot, shall be 5 foot candles.
C)	The maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point 30 feet out from the property line, shall be no greater than 600 foot Lamberts.
14.7	(5) Lighting for outdoor storage areas - Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall comply with the following limitations:
A)	Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the area, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not exceed 15 foot-candles.
B)	Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured five feet out from the property line with the meter directed toward the area in question, shall be two foot-candles.
 
C)	Maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point 5 feet out from the property line, shall be no greater than 300 foot Lamberts.
14.7	(6) Lighting for off street parking - Lighting for off street parking lots shall comply with the following limitations:
A)	Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the parking area, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not exceed 2 foot- candles.
B)	Limitations on the hours of lighting operation may be imposed by the City Council.

Section 14.8 Vibration
14.8	(1) Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge, shall be prohibited if such vibrations are perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. This standard shall not apply to vibrations created during the process of construction.

Section 14.9 Off-Street Loading
14.9	(1) In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading space on the basis of adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used incidental to the operation of the use.
A)	No loading berth of vehicles over two-tons capacity shall be closer than 100 feet to any residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls not less than eight (8) feet in height.
b) Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7 a.m.

Section 14.10 Traffic Control
14.10	(1) The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid:
A)	congestion on the public streets; and,
B)	traffic hazards; and,
C)	additional truck traffic through residential areas.
14.10(1) Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe and orderly flow.
14.10(2) Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall avoid residential areas and in all cases be forward-moving with no backing into streets.

Section 14.11 Drainage and Lot Flooding
14.11	(1) No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off, flooding, or erosion on adjacent properties. Such run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area or other public facility, and shall be consistent with overall city drainage plans.
14.11	(2) Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width as required to assure that building sites are not subject to flooding.

Section 14.12 Architecture
14.12	(1) It is hereby affirmed as public policy that the appearance of this community is a proper matter for public concern and that all developed open spaces, and all buildings, signs, plantings, surfaces and structures which may be seen from the public ways are subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
14.12 (2) In All Districts, all principal buildings other than one-family dwellings must be designed or approved by a registered architect and certified in accordance with the appropriate Minnesota State statutes.
14.12 (3) In All Business Districts, a building permit shall not be issued unless the proposed use is designed, sited, oriented and landscape- planned to produce a harmonious relationship of building and grounds with adjacent buildings and grounds and with the environment of the neighborhood.
14.12	(4) In All Residential Districts, a building permit shall not be issued if the proposed building is so similar or dissimilar to the other homes in the area as to result in depreciation of property values in the neighborhood.

Section 14.13 Explosives
14.13	(1) No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products, such as TNT or dynamite, which could decompose by detonation shall be permitted except such as are licensed by the Council.

Section 14.14 Radiation and Electrical Emissions
14.14	(1) No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radio-activity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

Section 14.15 Other Nuisance Characteristics
14.15	(1) No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, dangerous wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other such adverse influences shall be permitted in any district that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property.
14.15	(2) All wastes shall be disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to public health and safety.

Section 14.16 Consistency with Plans and Policies
14.16	(1) The proposed use shall preserve the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and shall be consistent with the goals, plans and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan.

SECTION 15 - SIGNS

Section 15.1 Signs - General Provisions
15.1	(1) Signs are a permitted accessory use in all use Districts, subject to the following regulations:
A)	A sign is a structure or a part of a structure for the purpose of applying yard and height regulations.
 
B)	Signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way or easements except that the City Council may grant a conditional permit to locate signs and decorations on or within the right-of-way for a specified time not to exceed sixty (60) days.
C)	Signs and parts of the super structure may not extend into the yards required by the Zoning Ordinance.

Section 15.2 Prohibited Signs
15.2	(1) No illuminated signs (either interior of external illumination) are permitted within the "R" Zoning Districts.
15.2 (2) Illuminated signs or other devices rotating or otherwise, giving off an intermittent, or rotating beam consisting of a collection or concentration of rays of light shall not be permitted in any Zoning District.
15.2 (3) Any sign that obstructs the vision of drivers, obstructs or detracts from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on the public streets and roads by reason of the size, location, coloring or illumination of the sign shall not be permitted in any Zoning District.
15.2 (4) Any sign unlawfully installed, erected and maintained.
15.2 (5) Any sign that now or hereafter exists which identifies a discontinued business, activity, campaign, service or product at any location.
15.2 (6) Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way.
15.2	(7) Advertising signs are not permitted in any Zoning District in the City of Gem Lake.

Section 15.3 Real Estate Signs
15.3	(1) For purpose of selling or leasing property, in the Residential Zoned areas of the City, a sign not in excess of ten (10) square feet total surface area may be placed within the front yard of the property to be sold or leased.
15.3 (2) For purpose of selling or leasing property in the Business Zoned areas of the City, a sign not in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet total surface area may be placed within the front yard of the property to be sold or leased.
15.3	(3) Such signs shall not be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line, unless mounted flat against the structure. Such property identified as for rent, sale or lease by a real-estate sign must be in conformance with City Ordinances.

Section 15.4 Existing Signs
15.4	(1) Signs existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which do not conform to the regulations set forth in this Ordinance are a non-conforming use.

Section 15.5 Method of Calculating Sign Size
15.5	(1) The square footage of a sign shall be calculated by measuring the area within the frame. If the width of a frame exceeds twelve (12) inches it shall constitute sign space. If letters or graphics are mounted directly on a wall or fascia or in such a way as to be without a frame, the dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six (6) inches beyond the periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure, bound by straight lines connecting the outer most points.
15.5	(2) Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign. Any symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walks, awnings, free standing structures, suspended by balloons or kites or on persons, animals or vehicles shall be considered as a sign.

Section 15.6 Sign Permits
15.6	(1) A Sign Permit shall be required for construction, alteration, rebuilding or relocating of all signs within the City of Gem Lake, except for certain types of signs identified in the Ordinance. All requests for signs shall be made on the approved "Sign Permit Form" available from the City's Zoning Administrator. The Sign Permit may be approved by the Zoning Administrator, without the approval of the Planning Commission, except for any Permit that would require a Variance or Special Use permit.
15.6 (2) A fee made payable to the City in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and as amended from time to time for issuance of Sign Permits shall accompany all applications. This fee shall be non-refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior to consideration and approval by the Zoning Administrator and City Clerk.
15.6	(3) The following signs ARE EXEMPT from obtaining a sign permit:
A)	Nameplate signs on residential property stating only the name, address and profession of the occupant.
B)	Real Estate signs with ten (10) square feet or less of display surface.
C)	Street, hazard and other official non-advertising signs erected by a government body or others where regulated pursuant to a legal authority.
D)	Campaign and election signs
E)	Newspaper boxes
F)	Construction signs with under ten (10) square feet of display surface.
15.6 (4) A temporary sign, including banner and pennants, is exempt from obtaining a Sign Permit, but the Zoning administrator must be notified
, in writing, when each temporary sign, banners or pennants will be erected and when they will be taken down.
15.6	(5) The exemptions permitted by the preceding paragraphs shall apply only to the requirement for obtaining a Sign Permit. This exception of not requiring a Sign Permit shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility for its construction and erection in accordance with the other requirements of these Sign regulations and for the requirement for the maintenance of this sign to keep it in a state of good and safe condition.

Section 15.7 Use of Mobile Signs
15.7	(1) Mobile signs with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet of display surface may be used NOT MORE THAN two (2) times within a calendar year on the same lot within the City of Gem Lake. Display of such a sign shall be allowed for not greater than thirty (30) consecutive days or for the duration of the event, whichever is less. These signs do require a Sign Permit. This permit must be prominently displayed during the period of validity. The sign, supports and portable stand (trailer) shall be removed from public view at the end of the display period, No such sign will be allowed that interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent land or constitutes a hazard or endangerment to the public.
15.7	(2) Mobile signs of larger dimensions than fifty (50) square feet of display surface are not allowed in any Zoning District.

Section 15.8 Campaign and Election Signs
15.8	(1) Campaign or Election signs are permitted in any District on private property when owner approval has been given. Such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days following any public election. Election signs are regulated in the size to a maximum provided by Minnesota State Statues. Election signs are exempted from any other regulations in this Ordinance.
 
15.8	(2) The volunteer or political committee, however organized and required by law or ordinance to identify itself in support of a candidate or issue, shall be the responsible entity for conformance to this section of this Ordinance regarding size, display and removal of temporary Campaign and Election signs.

Section 15.9 Construction Signs
15.9	(1) One temporary free-standing single or double faced sign, with a total height no higher than eight (8) feet and with a total display area no larger than sixteen (16) square feet in size, denoting proposed or future construction on a particular site, will be allowed for a period not to exceed one (1) year prior to construction, with a right of renewal for an additional six (6) months. Said sign may indicate: 1) the particulars of the proposed construction, 2) the company, firm or individual instrumental in its creation, 3) the architect, engineer and contractor, and 4) rental, sale or lease information.
15.9	(2) If construction commences, said sign will be allowed to remain in place until seven (7) days after completion of the project, which will be determined from the day of the occupancy permit. If construction does not start, the sign must be removed immediately after such a decision is made.

Section 15.10 Temporary Signs
15.10	(1) Temporary signs, as well as banners or pennants, are permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for any one display, but not to exceed ninety (90) days of advertising by this type of display per year. Such signs, banners or pennants shall be kept in a neat and maintained state and shall not be counted as a portion of the allowable sign area for the structure.

Section 15.11 Entrance/Exit Signs
15.11	(1) One entrance/exit signs shall be allowed at each entrance or exit to a site. This sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height or be over twelve (12) square feet in size.

Section 15.12 Structural Regulations For Signs
15.12	(1) Ground Mounted signs - All ground mounted signs shall meet the following requirements:
A)	No ground mounted sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, rebuild or relocated to a height exceeding thirty-five (35) feet above the ground.
B)	The uprights and basic sign structure of all ground mounted signs shall be of metal or other weather resistance material construction.
C)	The soil replaced after an anchor or post for these signs has been placed in the ground shall be thoroughly compacted. The anchors or posts shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line.
D)	Signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases shall be so proportioned that the width and size of the bases are adequate to resist the wind pressure specified in the Uniform Building Code.
15.12	(2) Free Standing electrical signs
A)	All free standing electrical signs shall have electrical power fed to them with underground electrical wiring, in compliance with all building and electrical codes.
15.12	(3) Attachment to Building
A)	All signs attached to a building or other structure shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured in a manner approved by the Building Inspector, and shall be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep them secure, safe and free from danger.
15.12	(4) Unsafe and Unlawful signs
A)	Written notice will be given to the owner or permittee of any sign, found by the City's Building Inspector, that is unsafe or loose from its mounting, or has been constructed or erected in violation of the safety or structural provision of this Ordinance.
B)	If the sign owner or permittee fails to remove or alter the sign and related structure so as to comply with the standards herein, within thirty (30) days after such notice, such sign shall be removed or altered by the City to comply with the Building Inspector's notes. This work will be done at the expense of the permittee or owner or the property upon which it is located.
C)	If a sign is found to be an immediate peril to persons or property, such sign shall be subject to removal without notice, with the costs of such removal billed to the sign owner or permittee.

Section 15.13 Signs in Residential Zoning Districts
15.13	(1) Within Residential Districts only the following types of signs are permitted:
A)	One (1) nameplate sign for each dwelling and such sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area per surface and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two surfaces.
B)	One (1) nameplate sign for each dwelling group of three (3) or more units, and such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per surface and no sign shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2) surfaces.
C)	Real Estate signs
D)	Election and Campaign signs
E)	Constructions signs

Section 15.14 Signs in the Special "LD-B" Zoning District
15.14	(1) Within the "LD-B" District, which is a transitional business district located close to nearby residential areas, only the following signs are permitted:
A)	One nameplate sign for each major use of each structure not to exceed twenty (20) square feet per surface. No building shall have more than one hundred (100) square feet total of nameplate signs.
B)	One office park or similar area sign not to exceed six (6) square feet in size at each entrance to the office park or similar area.
C)	Real Estate Signs
D)	Construction Signs
E)	Temporary signs
F)	Entrance/Exit sign
15.14 (2) No sign in an "LD-B" District shall be placed in or face a required yard area abutting a Residential Zoning District.
15.14 (3) No ground mounted freestanding signs in the "LD-B" District shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. This height limit supersedes all other height limitation given in the Ordinance.
15.14	(4) Illuminated signs are not permitted in this Zoning District.
 
Section 15.15 Signs in the "RB, GB and GB-II" Business Districts
15.15	(1) Within the above listed Business Zoning Districts only the following signs are permitted:
A)	There shall be no more than one (1) business sign per principal entrance or frontage on road or parking area plus one over-all shopping center sign. Total sign area per principal entrance shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet plus one (1) square foot for each one hundred (100) square feet of building over 3,000 square feet.
B)	Business signs may not be over six (6) feet above the highest wall or parapet except that a over-all shopping center sign may extend thirty (30) feet above said wall or parapet. An over-all shopping center sign shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from a street right-of-way. Wall or projection signs may project two (2) feet into required set-back area.
C)	The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of two (2) square feet per front foot of building, plus one (1) square foot per front foot of property not occupied by a building. No individual sign surface shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. Each business is limited to a maximum of three (3) signs.
D)	Real Estate Signs
E)	Construction Signs
F)	Temporary signs
G)	Mobile signs
H)	Entrance/Exit signs

SECTION 16 - OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS

The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and/or structures.

When applying for a building permit in all Districts for a new structure, the enlarging of a structure or a new or enlarged use of a parcel of land, the application shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension indicating the location of off-street parking spaces in compliance with the following requirements:

Section 16.1 General Provisions
16.1 (1) Existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in number unless said number exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
16.1 (2) Should a building, structure or use in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance be damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause, it may be re-established except that in doing so any off-street parking or loading which existed must be retained and should plans be effected for enlarging the floor area, seating capacity or other facilities which would affect the parking or loading requirements, the parking or loading spaces shall be enlarged accordingly.
16.1 (3) Floor Area - The term "Floor Area" shall mean the sum of all floor areas in a building as calculated from the outside dimensions of the building. It shall not include areas used primarily for non-public purposes such as storage, incidental repair, office of building management or maintenance, toilets, or rest rooms, utilities, or dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.
16.1 (4) Parking Spaces - Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length exclusive of an adequately designed system of access drives.
16.1 (5) Use of Parking Facilities - Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking of passenger automobiles and/or one truck not to exceed one and one-half (½) ton capacity for each dwelling unit except by Special Use permit. Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants or customers of business or manufacturing establishments except by Special Use permit. Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage or repair of commercial vehicles.
16.1 (6) Required off-street parking space in the Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
16.1 (7) Joint Parking Facilities - Off-street parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures or uses may be provided collectively in any "District" in which separate parking facilities for each separate building, structure or use would be required, provided that the total number of spaces provided shall equal the sum of the separate requirements of each use.
16.1	(8) Use of Parking Area - Required off-street parking space in any District shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or rent.

Section 16.2 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas
16.2	(1) Parking Areas - shall be designed so as to provide adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such driveway access shall not exceed twenty-two (22) feet in width and shall be so located as to cause the least interference with traffic movement.
16.2 (2) Calculating Space - When calculating the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (½) or more shall constitute another space. One parking space shall equal 300 square feet of parking and moving area.
16.2 (3) Signs - No signs shall be located in any parking area except as necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.
16.2 (4) Surfacing - All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage. Parking area for less than three (3) vehicle spaces shall be exempt. Plans for surfacing and drainage shall be subject to approval of the City Council.
16.2 (5) Lighting - Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property, and shall comply with Section 14.7.
16.2 (6) Curbing and Landscaping - All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a bumper curb not less than three (3) feet from the side property line or guard of normal bumper height no less than one (1) foot from the side property line. When said area is for six (6) spaces or more, a curb or fence not over six (6) feet in height shall be erected along the front yard set-back line with grass or planting occupying the space between the sidewalk and curb or fence.
16.2 (7) When a required off-street parking space for six (6) cars or more is located adjacent to an "R" District, a solid fence of adequate design, not over six (6) feet in height nor less than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height shall be erected along the "R" District property line. Screen planting may also be required.
16.2	(8) Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces - It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses and/or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space, access ways, landscaping and required fences.
 
Section 16.3 Required Off-Street Parking - shall be as follows:
16.3	(1) Single Family Dwellings - At least one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional parking space for each two (2) roomers accommodated. A garage will fulfill this requirement. However, a building permit shall not be granted to convert a garage to living space unless other acceptable provisions are made to provide the required parking space.
16.3 (2) Two-Family Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit, but not more than two (2) per unit.
16.3 (3) Boarding and Rooming Houses - At least two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) persons for which accommodations are provided for sleeping.
16.3 (4) Multiple Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for each four (4) two-bedroom units and one (1) additional space for each two (2) three-bedroom units.
16.3 (5) Hotel or Apartment Hotel - At least one (1) parking space for each rental unit provided in the design of the building.
16.3 (6) Motel, Tourist Home, Motor Hotel - At least one (1) space for each dwelling unit or lodging room.
16.3 (7) Church, Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each three and one-half (3-1/2) seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall.
16.3 (8) Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Rest Home, Nursing Home or Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each six (6) beds for which accommodations are offered, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on maximum shift.
16.3 (9) Medical or Dental Clinic - At least three (3) parking spaces for each staff doctor or dentist.
16.3 (10) Drive-in Food Establishments - At least one (1) parking space for each fifteen (15) square feet of gross floor space in building allocated to drive-in operation.
16.3 (11) Bowling Alley - At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as  a restaurant.
16.3 (12) Motor Fuel Station - At least one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on maximum shift, plus two (2) off-street parking spaces for each service stall.
16.3 (13) Retail Store - At least seven (7) off-street parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor space.
16.3 (14) Restaurants, Cafes, Bars, Taverns, Night Clubs - At least one (1) space for each three (3) seats based on capacity design.
16.3 (15) Banks, Offices and/or Public Office Building - At least four (4) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor space.
16.3 (16) Undertaking Establishments - At least five (5) parking spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle maintained on premises.  Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral procession.
16.3 (17) Furniture Store, Wholesale, Auto Sales, Repair Shops At least three (3) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. Open sales lots shall provide one and one-half (1-1/2) parking spaces for each employee on maximum shift, but not less than three (3) spaces.
16.3	(18) Warehouse, Storage, Handling of Bulk Goods - At least one (1) space for each two (2) employees on maximum shift or one (1) for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is the larger.

SECTION 17 - (Left Blank Intentionally)

SECTION 18 - “LDB” LOW DENSITY BUSINESS DISTRICT

Section 18.1 Purpose
18.1(1) The purpose of an “LDB” Zoned District is to provide a means by which a land area of limited size interposed between districts of widely divergent permitted uses may be developed to provide a rational and reasonable transition from the more intense uses allowed in General Business or Retail Business Districts to the less intense uses allowed in residential districts. The properties created in an Office Park would provide a rational and reasonable transition from a General Business District to a Residential District. Any development shall be designed and operated in a manner that is orderly, environmentally acceptable, and in conformity with the goals, policies and plans of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Gem Lake.
18.1(2) The City of Gem Lake has designated all “LDB” Zoned Districts for “Office Park” type development for business or professional offices that primarily have regular working daytime hours of operation. Office buildings, office-condominium buildings, office-showroom buildings, related service businesses and other businesses that complement the appearance of the office environment and also use regular daytime working hours, are also deemed suitable for this area.
18.1(3) As an alternate, development consisting of “life-cycle housing” type residential uses with a density not exceeding one (1) unit per acre (equal to “R2" Residential Zoning) would also be considered. Use of the Density Zoning or Density Transfer System including clustering, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance is encouraged in any consideration of this type of residential use.
18.1(4) A mixed use development with office, office-condominium or office-showroom use on the more intense use side of the development parcel and residential use in the balance of the parcel will also be considered as long as the “lot coverage” requirements in an “LDB” Zoned District are followed. Clustering of the business and the residential uses is encouraged to provide best use of the land parcel, provide maximum open space and to utilize the possible cost reductions of the infrastructure and the services that would serve this area.

Section 18.2 Permitted Principal Uses
18.2(1) Within any “LDB” Zoned District, the following uses shall be permitted uses:
A)	Small office buildings;
B)	Office-condominium buildings;
C)	Business, professional, medical or institutional offices;
D)	Banks and savings and loan association offices;
E)	Research laboratories, providing no hazardous waste is produced as part of the research;
F)	Insurance company buildings.

Section 18.3 Permitted Accessory Uses
18.3(1) Within any “LDB” Zoned District, the following use(s) shall be permitted accessory use(s):
A) Any incidental repair, storage or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal or special/interim use, however, such accessory use shall not occupy more than twenty (20%) percent of the floor area.
 
Section 18.4 Special Uses or Interim Uses
18.4(1) Within any “LDB” Zoned District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by Special Use Permit or Interim Use Permit:
A)	Private clubs, including athletic or tennis clubs;
B)	Office-showroom buildings;
C)	Cemetery;
D)	Churches and synagogues as provided for in the Institutional Overlay Process in this Ordinance;
E)	Government buildings and libraries as provided for in the Institutional Overlay Process in this Ordinance;
F)	Nursery or day schools as provided for in the Institutional Overlay Process in this Ordinance;
G)	Any supplemental retail use within the structure and related directly to a Permitted Principal Use, Special Use or Interim Use and conducted solely for the convenience of and use by the employees or clients of the Permitted Principal Use, Special Use or Interim Use. Such usage shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25%) percent of the ground floor area or four hundred (400sf) square feet, whichever is less. No signage shall be displayed outside the building advertising this as a retail service to the public;
H)	Those uses and structures permitted in Section 8.1 of this Zoning Ordinance (“R2" Residential District).

Section 18.5 Uses Not Permitted
18.5(1) The following list of uses, while not intended to be complete, provides examples of principal uses NOT PERMITTED in any “LDB” Zoned District and that WILL NOT generally be permitted as Special Uses or Interim Uses in any “LDB” Zoned District:
A)	Uses requiring excessive parking, which is defined as such parking which cannot be screened by bermings, plantings or the like;
B)	Uses resulting in excessive vehicle traffic which is defined as such traffic which is generally incompatible with the lands and roadways adjacent to the district;
C)	Uses requiring excessive exterior building lighting which is defined as lighting that cannot be screened from view by adjacent properties by bermings, plantings or the like;
D)	Commercial manufacturing, processing or repairing of the type which emits noises or fumes inconsistent with abutting land uses or zones;
E)	Businesses that operate continuously during any 24 hour period;
F)	Light Manufacturing;
G)	Warehouse;
H)	Shopping Center;
I)	Retail except as permitted by Section 18.4 (l);
J)	Restaurants or convenience food uses.

Section 18.6 Height Regulations
18.6(1) No principal business structure shall exceed thirty-six (36') feet in height and no principal structure, any part of which is within three- hundred (300') feet of any residential district or a roadway bordering any residential district, shall exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.

18.6(2) No accessory business structure shall exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height and no accessory structure any part of which is within three hundred (300') feet of any residential district or a roadway bordering any residential district shall exceed fifteen (15') feet in height.
18.6(3) All principal residential and accessory structures shall meet the height restrictions defined in an “R2" Residential Zoning District.

Section 18.7 Requirements for Area, Setbacks, Frontage and Yard Requirements
18.7(1) The minimum lot area for business uses in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be twenty-four thousand (24,000 sf) square feet.  The maximum lot area shall be the maximum size of an entire “LDB” Zoned District.
18.7(2) The minimum lot size for residential use in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be as described in the “R2" Residential Zoning District section of this ordinance.
18.7(3) The minimum business building setback from any lot line, public street right-of-way, parking lot or circulation drive shall be as set forth below or be equal to the average height of the nearest or tallest building, whichever is greater:
A)	Building Setbacks                                                                                                                                                         TABLE 18.7.3 a)

Interior Lot Lines Front Yard
35 foot set-back	
Interior Lot Lines Side Yard
10 foot set-back	
Interior Lot Lines Rear Yard
20 foot set-back	
Adjacent R Zoning 50 foot set-back
1)	Yards identified as the front yard will be determined by the Gem Lake City Council.
2)	Set-backs measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
3)	Side yard set-back thirty-five (35') feet when abutting any street or private way.
B)	Access Ways & Parking Lots	TABLE 18.7.3b)

Public Street Width 35 foot width	
Service Road Width 20 foot width

Circulation Drive Width 10 foot width	
Parking Lot 20 foot width
18.7(4) All setbacks, frontage, yards and other requirements for residential uses in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be as described in the R2 Residential Zoning District section of this ordinance..

Section 18.8 Lot Coverage
18.8(10 The maximum allowable Lot Coverage for any “LDB” Zoned District shall be seventy-five (75%) percent of the total area of the “LDB” Zoned District area being considered.
18.8(2) Calculation of Lot Coverage shall be the sum of the areas of: 1) all buildings (Principal and Accessory, business and residential) determined by the foundation plan; 2) the parking areas and driveways; 3) the access roads; 4) the loading, storage and trash areas; and, 5) all other areas covered by impervious material not purposely used for landscaping. The total calculated area shall then be divided by the total area of the LDB Zoning District to calculate the percent of lot coverage. The calculated area coverage shall not exceed the maximum allowable lot coverage. Wetland areas and storm water ponds, in any “LDB” Zoned District, may be defined as “open” area in these calculations.
 
18.8(3) Use of the Density Zoning or Density Transfer System, defined in this Zoning Ordinance, is encouraged to “cluster” business type buildings in any “LDB” Zoned District in areas further away form any adjacent Residential Districts. Bonuses for additional density may be provided for by the City Council, if clustering is used.

Section 18.9 Hours of Operation for Businesses
18.9(1) Any business uses in any “LDB” Zoned District shall restrict their hours of operation to 7 AM to 10 PM daily. No twenty-four (24) hour per day business operation shall be allowed anywhere in any “LDB” Zoned District.
18.9.2	Other restrictions on hours of operation may be imposed, in the Special or Interim Use Permit, on uses in any “LDB” Zoned District allowed by a Special or Interim Use Permit.

Section 18.10 Access
18.10(1) All traffic to and from any “LDB” Zoned District must be channeled to a primary public roadway through driveways and internal roads developed specifically for the uses to be developed and shall be shown on an approved traffic plan utilizing curb cuts to create one or more accesses onto a primary public roadway.
A)	All traffic plans shall require approval by the city and the governmental subdivision responsible for the primary public roadway onto which development traffic will be directed.
18.10(2) For all business uses in any “LDB” Zoned District, internal service roads should be designed and constructed to facilitate and direct internal traffic flow, type and volume to a primary public roadway via the access created in 18.10.1.
18.10(3) The creation or use of an authorized private way in any “LDB” Zoned District shall require approval by the City Council. Use of any existing authorized private ways for access to commercial or business development in any district shall not be allowed.

Section 18.11 Material Of Building Construction To Be Used For A Commercial Structures
18.11(1) All commercial structures constructed in any “LDB” Zoned District must be finished on all sides with permanent finished materials of consistent quality. Exterior wall surfaces shall be face brick, glass or stone, or other approved materials. Architecturally treated concrete, cast in place, precast panels or decorative block may be acceptable if incorporated in a building design that is compatible with other developments throughout the planning area.
18.11(2) No building, in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be constructed of sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel or corrugated aluminum. 18.11(3) Commercial structures with wood frame construction may be allowed if specifically designed to compliment structures on the site or in adjacent residential areas.

Section 18.12 Reviews and Approvals Required For Development
18.12(1) In consideration of the sensitivity required in creating a transitional district to be developed between divergent uses, all plans for specific developments within any “LDB” Zoned District must be reviewed by the City of Gem Lake Planning Commission whose findings and recommendations to approve or deny the plans shall be presented to the City Council. The City Council shall review the recommendations of the Planning Commission and shall approve or deny the plans as presented.
18.12(2) Development plans for any “LDB” Zoned District shall be presented in the form of a sketch plan with all components of this plan as described in this ordinance and the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance including, but not limited to, all Variances, Special Uses, Interim Uses and the like to be included in the development.  In addition to the other provisions of this section and ordinance, the following general criteria will be considered when this plan is reviewed:
A)	All uses must be generally compatible with the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan, and building construction must meet the provisions of the building material uses as described in this section of the Zoning Ordinance and as required by the Building Code;
B)	Use must be environmentally sound, compatible with adjacent land uses and zones, including sound, sight and smell, and compatible with the type of volume of traffic upon adjacent roadways;
C)	Overall density of strictures including parking areas, walls and roadways, front, side, and rear yards, must reflect the transitional nature of an “LDB” Zoned District from the intense uses in adjacent business districts to the less intense uses in adjacent residential districts;
D)	Signs in this district should be minimized. Sign design shall be required and shown as part of the initial site plan design reviewed by the Planning Commission for approval by the City Council.  All signs in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be consistent in both design and appearance;
E)	No outdoor lighting should be allowed in this district. Parking lots may be lighted only when necessary during business hours. Only “security type” lighting around the structures should be used.
F)	A Landscaping Plan for the entire development site shall be provided for review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council to insure that adequate landscaping is provided by means of berms, trees, shrubs or other methods to buffer the commercial buildings, parking facilities and other site areas from the adjacent residential districts. The Landscaping Plan, including installation and maintenance protocols, shall be in keeping with an upscale “Office Park” or, as necessary, a residential neighborhood.
G)	All buildings in any “LDB” Zoned District shall be served by the City of Gem Lake Municipal Sanitary Sewer System. City water shall be supplied from a water distribution system owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake.
H)	An engineered storm water collection system shall be provided in any “LDB” Zoned District to be developed. Storm water ponds and storm sewers to serve the entire Zoning District shall be shown on the plans submitted for approval.

SECTION 19 - "G-B II" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT II

Section 19.1 Permitted Uses
19.1	(1) Within the "G-B II" Use District, no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
A)	Those uses permitted in Section 12.1 and as regulated therein except as hereinafter modified shall be a permitted use.
B)	The following retail sales and service businesses: Auto sales and repair including painting and body work, boat and marine sales, bakery, business and trade school, cabinet and carpentry shops, electrical service, heating/plumbing, commercial greenhouse, farm and general equipment rental providing it is conducted within a building, dairy products processing, packaging and storage, garden supply store, printing shops, upholstery shop, warehousing, except the storage of inflammable fluids, wholesale offices and show rooms, and similar uses.
C)	Veterinary clinic or animal hospital.
D)	Single family dwelling.
 
E)	Car wash, provided off-street parking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum fifteen (15) minute period.
F)	Business offices.
G)	Funeral Home or Mortuary.

Section 19.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
19.2	(1) Within any "G-B II" District, those uses or structures subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental thereto shall be permitted subject to Section 4.5.
A)	Essential services.

Section 19.3 Special Uses
19.3	(1) Within any "G-B II" Use District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by special use permit:
A)	Essential service structures.
B)	Commercial recreation such as bowling alleys, miniature golf course, archery range, trampoline center.
C)	Dwelling for watchman and family.
D)	Open sales (or rental) lot.
E)	Open storage lot.
F)	Commercial Broadcast/telecommunications towers and/or antennas

Section 19.4 Height Regulations
19.4	(1) No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Section 19.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
19.5	(1) The following minimum and maximum requirements shall be observed	TABLE 19.5 (1)

AREA*	
FRONTAGE**	
FRONT YARD	
SIDE YARD*	
REAR YARD**

15,000 sq. ft.	
80 feet	
20 foot set-back	
10 foot set-back	
10 foot set-back
* 75,000 sq. ft. maximum
**Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
19.5 (2) The minimum open space requirement shall be 50%. For purposes of this section only, this includes all areas not covered by buildings.

SECTION 20 INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT

Section 20.1 Purpose
20.1 (1) The Institutional Overlay District is intended to provide a means of overlaying an existing Zoning district, located in the City of Gem Lake, for facilities devoted to serving the public. This District is unique in that the primary objective of uses within this district is for the providing of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than for the sale of goods or services. It is intended that all uses within such an overlay area will be compatible with all adjoining uses.
20.1	(2) This Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning Ordinance, as existing or amended by this Section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. This overlay district will remain in effect as long as the use and the user remains the same. If an overlay area is no longer used, changes uses or is rescinded the parcel will revert back to its original underlying zoning classification.

Section 20.2 Permitted Uses
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in the Institutional Overlay District:
20.2	(1) Religious institutions, such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, but with activities limited to worship and related social activities.
20.2	(2) Private Child Care and Education facilities as defined in the definitions section of this Ordinance, but with activities limited to school/educational activities.

Section 20.3 Accessory Uses
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in the Institutional Overlay District:
20.3	(1) Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the uses permitted as a permitted or special use (if a special use is allowed), will be permitted.
20.3 (2) Off-street parking and loading areas.
20.3	(3) Accessory buildings as described in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.

Section 20.4 Conditional or Special Uses
Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are Conditional or Special Uses in the Institutional Overlay District. (These uses require a Special Use Permit as described in Section 5.6):
20.4	(1) Living quarters (such as a parsonage, rectory or care-takers house) that are supplied as an accessory use to a principal use provided that:
A)	The use shall not be used as rental property.
B)	The maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.
C)	There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility.
20.4	(2) Governmental and public regulated buildings and essential service structures as defined in this Ordinance and necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, excluding public works facilities and uses provided that:
A)	Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B)	Any equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.
 
20.4	(3) Public recreational facilities provided that:
A)	The site is landscaped.
B)	The use is available to the "public"
C)	The land area of the property containing such uses or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
D)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.
20.4	(4)  Publicly  owned  or cultural buildings, such  as  libraries,  city offices,  auditoriums,  public administration offices  and  historical developments, but excluding public works type facilities and uses, provided that:
A)	Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B)	All equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.
20.4	(5) Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship activities, as an accessory use within a religious building, provided that:
A)	Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and  required  setbacks and side yard  requirements  are  met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.
B)	All equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.
20.4	(6) Accessory buildings with a cumulative total of greater than 1000 square feet.

Section 20.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an Institutional Overlay District subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Ordinance:
20.5	(1) The minimum land area for an Institutional Overlay shall be two and three quarter (2.75) acres of buildable area. For the purposes of this Ordinance, buildable area means 2.75 acres of land, not including wetlands, land seasonally flooded on a annual basis, land containing drainage ways or surface water or land containing aquatic vegetation, and land in excess of twelve (12) percent slope.
20.5	(2) Lot width:
A)	Two-Hundred (200) feet of frontage which must be located on a County or State maintained roadway.
20.5 (3) Setbacks                                                                                                                                                                          TABLE 20.5 (3)

FRONT YARD	
SIDE YARD	
REAR YARD

50 foot set-back	
50 foot set-back	
50 foot set-back
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
20.5	(4) Accessory Structure(s) Setbacks	TABLE 20.5 (4)

FRONT YARD*	
SIDE YARD	
REAR YARD

100 foot set-back	
50 foot set-back	
50 foot set-back
*Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.

Section 20.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in the Institutional Overlay district:
20.6	(1) The total lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent.
20.6 (2) The minimum open space requirement for any proposed use shall be forty-five (45) percent, including green areas not covered by buildings, parking lots, access roads, storage areas or other areas covered by impervious surfaces
20.6 (3) No building structure shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is lesser in height. For the purpose of this Section, building height means the height of a building measured from the average existing ground level prior to construction at any point on the perimeter of the building line to the top of the cornice of a flat or mansard roof and to the highest gable on a pitched or hipped roof.
20.6 (4) No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height, whatever is lesser and no accessory structure any part of which is within three hundred (300) feet of an "R" district or a roadway bordering an "R" district shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height..

Section 20.7 Landscaping and Screening
As most Institutional Overlays will occur in Residential areas or closely adjacent to Residential areas, landscaping and screening shall be provided to isolate all light and noise from the Institutional Overlay use from entering the adjacent Residential areas. This landscaping and screening must be done in accordance with the procedures in this Ordinance and the Landscaping Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.

Section 20.8 Procedures for Requesting An Overlay
20.8	(1) Application for re-zoning for an overlay.

An Institutional Overlay shall be considered a rezoning for a specific parcel of land. This overlay may occur in any zoning district in the City of Gem Lake. The application for an Institutional Overlay shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk. The fee for an Institutional Overlay shall be the same as the rezoning fee, defined in the Zoning Ordinance. This application for rezoning will only be deemed to be complete when the following are received:
A)	A properly completed application and payment in full is received;
B)	A registered property surveyors report is provided properly identifying the parcel to be rezoned;
C)	All requirements of the Plan Review described in Section 14.1 of this Ordinance have been met. These plans must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and City Council before any overlay shall be granted. If this is a rezoning to initially define an overlay, the rezoning activities and the Plan Review shall occur at the same time;
 
D)	Proof of ownership or authorization shall be provided. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the Institutional Overlay is requested, consisting of an abstract of title or registered property abstract currently certified together with unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested Institutional Overlay.
E)	A list of all the property owners within three-hundred fifty (350) feet of the proposed site. This certified list shall be obtained from the County Assessor and supplied to the City Clerk.
20.8	(2) Procedures
Pursuant to Minnesota Statues 15.99 as may from time-to-time be amended, an application for an Institutional Overlay shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days of its official and complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state and federal agencies shall extend the review and decision making period an additional sixty (60) days unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional City  requirements are as follows:
A)	Applications for rezoning for an Overlay District shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form available from the City Clerk. Such applications shall also be accompanied by five (5) large scale copies and one (1) reduced scale copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use. The request for an Institutional Overlay shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting occurring thirty (30) days after the date of submission of the application. The request shall only be considered officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied with.
B)	Upon receipt of such application the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification as applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to this hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty
(350) feet of the property in question. The City Clerk shall have the right to provide additional property owners notification beyond the three hundred fifty (350) foot distance if it is judged that the request will have an impact upon additional properties. The records of the County Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice is sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding.
C)	Failure of a property owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this Ordinance provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this section.
D)	The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed rezoning. Its judgment shall be based upon (but not limited) to the following factors:
1)	The proposed action in relation to specific policies and provisions of the Official City Comprehensive Plan.
2)	The proposed use's conformity with present and future land uses in the area.
3)	The proposed use's conformity with all performance standards contained herein.
4)	The proposed use's effect on the area in which it is proposed.
5)	The proposed use's impact upon property value in the area in which it is proposed.
6)	Traffic generation by the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets and roads serving the property.
7)	The proposed use's impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks, schools, streets and utilities and the City's service capacity.
E)	The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant, said information to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and /or to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
F)	The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer question concerning the proposed request.
G)	The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.
H)	The City Council shall not act upon such an Overlay request until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request after sixty (60) days from the first regular meeting at which the request was considered. the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action of the request.
I)	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered into and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting,
J)	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall have the option to hold another public hearing if deemed advisable.
K)	If, upon receiving such reports and recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking any final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City Council shall provide a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular request.
20.8	(3) Approvals
A)	Approval of the Overlay request shall require passage by a two-thirds (2/3) vote (four of the five (4 of 5) votes) of the entire City Council.
B)	The Institutional Overlay zoning shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves the overlay and after said approval is published in the official newspaper.
C)	Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or structure, in the Institutional Overlay Zone, a plan review, in accordance with section 14.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be made. No building permits shall be issued until this plan review is complete.
20.8	(4) Denials
A)	If the City Council finds that a proposed use contemplated for the parcel which is the subject of an application for rezoning to Institutional Overlay Classification is likely to have a material adverse effect on the public health, safety of general welfare after considering possible adverse effects which man include , but no be limited to, those delineated in Section 20.7.2D (1-7) above, then such application shall be denied.
 
20.8	(5) Recording of actions taken
A)	If a request for an Institutional Overlay receives approval by the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Recorder within thirty (30) days of the approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible, furnish the City proof of recording. No building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.
20.8	(6) Actions if the overlay is denied
Whenever an application for an overlay district has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for an overlay affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or the City Council for at least one (1) year from the date of its denial except as follows:
A)	Applications for an overlay are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter
B)	If the City Council determines by a vote of not less than four of five (4 of 5) that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
20.8	(7) Time period (duration) of this Institutional Overlay approvals. An Institutional Overlay shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:
A)	Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request, the re-zoning for an Institutional Overlay shall become null and void twelve (12) months after the date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started construction of any building, structure, addition or alternation, or use requested for this overlay. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section.
B)	If any one of the following occur the overlay shall expire:
1)	The use of the property is changed to not be in accordance with the uses outlined in this section of this Ordinance,
2)	The organization to which the permit for an Overlay District has been given is no longer the occupant of the building or facilities on the site. No leases or subletting of the building or facilities operating on an Institutional Overlay shall be permitted.
C)	If an institutional overlay is allowed to expire or is revoked for cause, the parcel of property shall revert back to the underlying zoning of the parcel.

SECTION 21 - BROADCAST/TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND ANTENNAS

Section 21.1 Purpose and Intent
21.1 (1) The purpose of this section is to establish predictable standards for siting and installing of wireless telephone, radio broadcast, television broadcast and communications antenna towers or supporting structures within the City of Gem Lake. It is the intent of this section to accommodate the communications needed of the residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
21.1	(2) Specifically, the City Council finds the regulations set forth in this section necessary to:

A)	Facilitate the provisions for wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City.
B)	Restrict the location of towers and antennas to designated areas of the City and impose design standards to minimize adverse visual effects of towers and antennas,
C)	Require evidence of structural integrity and impose setback requirements to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure,
D)	Require applicants for towers and antenna to prove their need and to apply for permits for their construction,
E)	Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new antennas and reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.

Section 21.2 Zoning Districts For Construction
21.2	(1) The following Zoning district preferences shall be followed when selecting potential commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower sites in the City of Gem Lake:
A)	General Business (GB)
B)	General Business II (GBII)
C)	Retail Business (RB)
21.2	(2) The following Zoning districts shall not be used for commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower/antenna SITES IN THE City of Gem Lake:
A)	Any R1, R2, R3, R4 or LD-B district
B)	Any Overlay district

Section 21.3 Performance Standards
21.3	(1) All stand alone towers or antennas and/or supporting structures for the same must meet the design and performance standards identified in this section.
21.3	(2) A proposal for a new tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the Broadcast/ telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one (1) mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one of the following reasons:
A)	The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost.
B)	The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
C)	Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
D)	Other unforseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
21.3 (3) Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunications service tower shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred (100) feet in height or for at least one (1) additional user if the tower is over sixty (60) feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
 
21.3 (4) Structural design, mounting and installation of any tower or antenna shall be in compliance with the manufacturer’s specifications and as may be necessary or as determined by the City Council. All such designs and installations shall be verified and approved by a qualified and licensed professional engineer employed by the applicant.
21.3 (5) All towers and antennas and related structures shall be designed and built in compliance with all City of Gem Lake building codes and electrical code requirements, and as applicable shall require related permits. Existing towers may continue in use but may not be structurally altered.
21.3 (6) The height and style of the tower and antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified by a communications engineer or other appropriate professional. However, no towers erected for Broadcast or Telecommunications service shall exceed 180 feet and no tower and accompanying antenna combined shall exceed 200 feet.
21.3 (7) All obsolete and unused towers and antennas shall be removed within six (6) months of cessation of operation at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. The City reserves the right to remove an unused tower/antenna at it’s expense then back charge the property owner to recover costs.
21.3 (8) Damaged existing towers and antennas may be rebuilt to the same physical dimensions and at the same location. Repairs and rebuilding shall be complete within one (1) year after receiving the building permit from the City. However, if the tower is destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, so that repairs would be forty (40) percent or more of a new tower, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this Ordinance.
21.3 (9) No advertising message shall be affixed to any tower and/or antenna structure.
21.3 (10) No tower or antenna shall be illuminated by artificial means and must not display strobe lights, unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal or state authority for that particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design, the tower may support light fixtures used to illuminate parking lights, ball fields, or similar areas.
21.3 (11) Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. Antenna support structures shall be painted light blue, gray, or silver or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact. All towers must be finished with a corrosion resistant material.
21.3 (12) Towers located closer to a property line than the distance equal to the height of the tower shall be designed and engineered to collapse progressively within the distance between the tower and property line. The applicant for any tower shall submit written documentation explaining tower construction and possible failure and provide assurance that blowing or falling ice from the tower/antenna can be contained on the subject property. At a minimum, the tower shall comply with the minimum setback requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located.
21.3 (13) A tower shall be located on a parcel of land so as to have the least impact on adjoining properties and any negative impact of the tower shall be confined onto the property on which it is located, to the greatest extent possible.
21.3 (14) The tower location shall provide the maximum amount of screening for off site views of the tower and/or antenna and related structure. Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
21.3 (15) All utility buildings, structures, and equipment accessory to the tower or antenna must be architecturally designed to blend in with surrounding environment and must meet the minimum design requirements of the Zoning District in which they are located.
21.3 (16) No change in the use or ownership of an approved tower or antenna may be made without the written consent of the City Council.
21.3	(17) Co-location of antennas upon overhead power line poles or street light poles is encouraged provided the said antenna meets all applicable federal and state spacing requirements and interference regulations.

Section 21.4 Proof of Non-Interference
21.4	(1) Each application for construction of a commercial Broadcast or Wireless telecommunication facility shall include either a certified statement that the construction of the tower/antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the radio, television, or other service enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If interference is found after the facility has been erected, the applicant has to solve any problems his equipment has caused, at his cost.

Section 21.5 Tower Setbacks
21.5	(1) Where adjacent parcels are zoned for commercial or industrial uses, setbacks equivalent to those established for the principle structure shall be provided for any tower/antenna. Setbacks equal to the height of the tower shall be established on sites that are adjacent to parcels developed or able to be developed for residential use.

Section 21.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review
21.6	(1) Special Use Permit. Applicants for a tower/antenna Special Use Permit must file a Special Use Permit application with the City of Gem Lake and pay any and all associated fees.
21.6	(2) Planning Commission/City Council review. All applications for a Broadcast/Telecommunications tower must first be sent to the Planning Commission which shall review the application and may recommend to City Council approval or denial. The City Council will hold the necessary Public hearing(s) on this matter and will then approve or deny the request. The applicant is responsible for supplying a certified list of all of the property owners within 350 feet of the proposed tower/antenna site and pay all costs for notifying all such parties of the public hearing(s) needed.

Section 21.7 Exceptions
21.7	(1) The following towers and/or antenna supporting structures and antennas are not subject to the restrictions of Section 21 of this Ordinance:
A)	Towers and/or antennas identified as “Accessory and Secondary Antennas” in this Ordinance are exempt. All Amateur Radio “Accessory and Secondary” antennas and/or towers must be installed in accordance with instructions furnished by the manufacturer of the tower/antenna.
B)	Towers and antennas that are located entirely with a structure that complies with the height, bulk and density and area requirements of the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance and are not visible from the exterior of the structure are also exempt.
C)	Towers/antennas for radio/telecommunications equipment owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake are also exempt.
 
ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT

The Ordinance changes contained herein will take affect immediately upon adoption by the City Council and publication of a summary of this document, but not later than thirty (30) days from the date below.

This Ordinance No. 43G as unanimously adopted with amendments defined in Resolution No. 2006-09 by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 20th day of March in year 2006 and ordered for summary publication in the City’s official newspaper and incorporation into this Ordinance No. 43G.

CITY OF GEM LAKE                                                             ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott        Frederic               C.
Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor                             Frederic C. Magnuson, City Clerk
Updated:     03 / 20 / 2006	Updated:      03 / 20 / 2006
 
CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDINANCE NO. 43 LEGEND

The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the City Council as City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 5 on 19 February 1963. Since that time, the Planning Commission has recommended and the City Council has adopted several changes in keeping with the changing times and needs and wishes of the community. The following table is added to Ordinance No. 43 as an historic reference to those changes. All changes shown have been incorporated into Ordinance No. 43, the City Zoning Ordinance.


ORDINANCE NO.	

TITLE & DESCRIPTION	

ENACTED

05	
The City Zoning Ordinance	
02/19/63

14	
An Ordinance Amending The Official Zoning Map Of Gem Lake	
07/18/67

17B	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Zoning Ordinance	
03/24/70

21	
An Ordinance Amending The Zoning Ordinance	
09/15/70

29	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As General Business	
12/16/74

30	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As General Business	
04/18/77

31	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing Minimum Area Of Certain Property In An R-4 Residential District	
06/20/77

33	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As Residential	
11/20/78

34A	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As Retail Business	
11/30/78

35	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As Retail Business	
12/27/79

36	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance	
01/21/80

38	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance	
05/18/81

40	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance	
09/22/81

41	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As Retail Business	
10/19/81

42	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The Zoning District Designated As LD-B Low Density Business District	
10/19/81

43	
An Ordinance Restating The Zoning Ordinance Of Gem Lake With All Amendments Thereto Enacted Through December 31, 1982	
12/20/82

49	
An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43	
09/19/88

51	
An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43, Including The Establishment Of A New District Known As GB II, General Business II	
02/20/89

63	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43 And Replacing Ordinance No. 5	
03/28/94

72	
An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43 Including Changes, Additions Or Deletions To The Zoning Ordinance No. 43 Of The City Of Gem Lake, MN Providing For An Institutional Overlay District Rezoning.	
05/18/98

74	
An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake, regarding: 1) the addition of Section 21 establishing Commercial Broadcast/Telecommunication tower and antenna regulations and definitions and amendments attendant thereto; and, 2) the removal of all fee schedules from the Zoning Ordinance; and 3) the revision of Section 4.10 Land Reclamation and Section 4.11 Land Mining of the Zoning Ordinance.	
11/15/99

75	
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake, regarding the rezoning of lands bordered on the west by Scheuneman Road and the East by the City’s common boundary with White Bear Lake and on the South by State Highway 61 and on the	
02/02/2000
 

	North by lot identified as PIN Number	

76	
An Ordinance amending City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 43, hereinafter the “Zoning Ordinance”, regarding: 1) adding provisions for minimum “buildable area” as Section 4.4 (3), definition for “buildable area” as Section 3.2 (4A), and amending Tables 7.5 (1), 8.5 (1), 9.5 (1), 10.5 (1) a), and
10.5 (1) b) to reflect said provisions; 2) amending definitions of and related to Variances and Special Use Permits and adding definitions for Interim Use Permits; 3) providing amended or additional provisions for the City’s consideration of applications for Variances, Special Use Permits, Interim Use Permits, Redistricting or other Amendments to Ordinance No. 43; 4) modification of the lakeshore restrictions on the water body identified as Gem Lake. Now known as Ordinance No. 43E01.	
02/20/2001

79	
An Ordinance providing for amendment of Ordinance Number 43, the “Zoning Ordinance” as follows: 1) adding definitions to Section 3.2; and, 2) deleting Section 22, Regulation Of The Body Of Water Called Gem Lake, in it’s entirety; and, 3) adding new Section 11, Regulation of Bodies Of Water, Wetlands, And Shoreland Zones to establish local controls that consistently reflect the purpose and intent stated in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and it’s attendant Watershed Management Plan; and, 4) amending tables for all districts defining Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements to include the term “foot set back”; and, 5) adding provisions for Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permits; and, 6) adding Sections 4.1(5) and 4.1(6); and, 7) amending Sections 5.4(5),
5.7(6), 5.5(5), 5.6(5); and 8) deleting Section 17 in it’s entirety and copying the text of Section 17.1 to Section 12 as Section12.6; and 9) amending the Legend of Ordinance No. 43 to record the date of all changes contained herein.	
12/15/2003

43G	
Resolution No. 2006-09, a Resolution adopting amendments to Ordinance No. 43F, The Zoning Ordinance, last amended 15 December 2003 with said amendments to include: 1) Deletion of Section 18 in it’s entirety; and 2) addition of new Section 18 as developed by the Gem Lake Planning Commission and Zoning Administrators, reviewed at multiple public hearings before the Planning Commission during 2004 and 2005, and recommended for adoption in August, 2005 by the Gem Lake Planning Commission and adopted by the Gem Lake City Council on 20 March 2006.	
03/20/2006
 
NOTES:

1)	This version Zoning Ordinance (43G) needs a Variance in order to measure the “Building Height” of structures in the Hillary Farm Subdivision from other than the: 1) Curb level along the front lot line, and 2) the mean ground level for all that portion of the structure having frontage on a public right-of-way, whichever is higher.

The variance changes the text of the “Building height” definition in Section 3.2 to:

Building Height – A distance to be measured from the mean curb level along the front lot line or from the mean ground level for all that portion of the structure having frontage on a public right- of -way, whichever is higher vertical distance measured from the ground level within 5 feet of the front entrance of the structure to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to the point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof , to the upper-most point on a round or other arch type roof, to the height of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.



Strike-thru is deleted text Italiacs is new text



2)	This Variance has been granted with a “blanket approval” for all construction in Hillary Farm, per a resolution authorized by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake.






March 2006
 










ZONING ORDINANCE CITY OF GEM LAI<E




Ordinance No . 431<
Current through 17July 2012 (Ordinance #126)




Replaces Zoning Ordinance No. 5 dated 2/19/ 63 which should be considered
the original effective date of this Ordinance.







































Gem Lake Zo11i11g Code -Page 1
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION 1 - TITLE	1
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE	1
SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS	1
3.1	Rules	1
3.2	Definitions	2
SECTION 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND !vfAP	12
4.1	Districts	12
4.2	Map	12
4.3	Boundaries	12
SECTION 5 - "Rl" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT	13
5.1	Permitted Uses	13
5.2	Permitted Accessory Uses	13
5.3	Conditional & Interim Uses	13
5.4	Height Regulations	14
5.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements	15
SECTION 6 - "R2" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT	16
6.1	Permitted Uses	16
6.2	Permitted Accessory Uses	16
6.3	Conditional & Interim Uses	16
6.4	Height Regulations	16
6.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements	17
SECTION 7 - "R3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT	18
7.1	Permitted Uses	18
7.2	Permitted Accessory Uses	18
7.3	Conditional & Interim Uses	18
7.4	Height Regulations	19
7.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requiremen ts	19
SECTION 8 - "R4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT	20
8.1	Permitted Uses	20
8.2	Permitted Accessory Uses	20
8.3	Conditional & Interim Uses	20
8.4	Height Regulations	20
8.5	Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements	21
 

SECTION 9- "G" GATEWAY DISTRICT
9.1	Intent and Purpose
9.2	Generally Applicable Regulations
9.3	Placement of Subzones
Figure 1- Gate"vay Subzone Map
9.4	Thoroughfare Standards
Figure 2 - Light-Use Thoroughfares Figure 3 -Medium Use Thoroughfares
9.5	Civic Space Standards
Figure 4 - Civic Spaces A-D Figure 5 - Civic Spaces E & F
9.6	Building Type Standards
Figure 6 -Single Family House Figure 7 -Twin Home
 

23
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
31
31
32
33
35
36

Gem Lake Zoning Code -Page i
 
Figure 8-Townhouse/Rowhouse	37
figure 9-Apartment/Condominium	38
Figure 10 - Bungalow Court	39
Figure 11 -Live/Work Unit	40
Figure 12 -Mixed-Use Building	41
Figure 13-Retail/Office Buildin g	42
Figure 14 -Single Use Building	43
Figure 14a -Liner Building	44
Figure 14b - Collar Building	45
Figure 15 -Auto-Oriented Layout	46
Figure 16 -Residential Accessory Uses	47
Figure 17 -Other r\ccessory Uses	48
9.7	Large Development Proposal Procedures	so
9.8	Small Development Proposal Procedures	53
9.9	Parking Regulations	53
9.10	Design Standards	54
SECTION 10 - Reserved SECTION 11 - Reserved SECTION 12 - Reserved
SECTION 13 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT	57
13.1	Purpose	57
13.2	Permitted Uses	57
13.3	General Standards for Approval	57
13.4	Coordination with Subdivision Regulation	58
13.5	Concept Plan Required	58
13.6	General Development Plan	59
13.7	Final Development Plan	60
13.8	Enforcement of Development Schedule	60
13.9	Conveyance and Maintenance of
Common Open Space	60
13.10	Standards for Common or Open Space	61
13.11	Review and Amendment	61
SECTION 14 - GARDEN OVERLAY DISTRCT	62
14.1	Findings and Purpose	62
14.2	Requesting Garden Overlay	62
14.3	Termination of Garden Overlay	62
14.4	Interim Use	63
14.5	Permitted Accessory Uses	63
14.6	Prohibited Practices	63
14.7	General Regulation	63
SECTION 15 - INSTITUTIONAL OVER.LAY DISTRICT	64
15.1	Purpose	64
15.2	Permitted Uses	64
15.3	Permitted Accessory Uses	64
15.4	Conditional & Interim Uses	64
15.5	Lot Area and Setback Requirements	65
15.6	Lot Coverage and Height Requirements	66
15.7	Landscaping and Screening	66
15.8	Procedures For Requesting An Overlay	66
 
SECTION 16 - GENERAL PROVISIONS	70
16.1	Application of this Ordinance	70
16.2	Separability	70
16.3	Non-Conforming Uses and Strucrures	71
16.4	Lot Provisions	71
16.5	Accessory Buildings	72
16.6	Required Yards, Open Space and Height	72
16.7	Traffic Visibility	72
16.8	Farming Operations	72
16.9	Essential Services	73
16.12  Relocation of Dwelling Units	73
16.13	Fences	73
16.14	Outdoor Swimming Pools and Spas	75
SECTION 17 - ADM INISTRATION AND ENFOR CEMENT	77
17.1	Enforcing Officer	77
17.2	Building Permits	77
17.3	Duties of the Zoning Administrator	77
17.4	Variances	77
17.5	Conditional & Interim Use Permits	79
17.6	Amendments	81
17.7	Appeals	82
17.8	Fees	83
17.9	Violations & Penalties	83
SECTION 18 - PERFORMANCE STAN DARDS	84
18.l	General	84
18.2	Requirements for Consideration	84
18.3	Exterior Storage	86
18.4	Refuse	87
18.5	Screening	87
18.6	Landscaping	87
18.7	Maintenan ce	88
18.8	Lighting and Glare	88
18.9	Vibration	89
18.10	Off-Street Loading	89
18.11	Traffic Control	89
18.13	Arcbitecrure	89
18.14	Explosives	90
18.15	Radiation and Electrical Emissions	90
18.16	Aircraft	90
18.17	Other Nuisance Characteristics	90
18.18	Consistency with Plans and Policies	90
18.19	Density Zoning or Density Transfer	90
18.20	Park Land Dedication	91
SECTION 19 - SIGNS
(superseded by Ordinance #109)
SECTION 20- OFF STREET PARKING AREAS	93
20.1	Purpose	93
20.2	Site Plan	93
20.3	General Provisions	93
20.4	Design and Maintenance of	93
Off-Street Parking Areas
20.5	Required Off-Street Parking	94
 
SECTION 21 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS, AND SHORELANDS 	96
21.1	General Provisions	96
21.2	Shoreland Use Controls	96
21.3	Use of Gem Lake	98
 

SECTION 22 - SOIL EROSION CONTROL .AN D
STORM WATER tvfANAGEMENT
22.1	Erosion and Sediment Control
22.2	Stormwater  Management

SECTION  23 - BROADCAST/  TELECOMMUNICATIONS
 




100
101
 


100
 

23.1	TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Purpose	
104	104
23.2	Zoning Districts For Construction	104	
23.3	Performance  Standards	104	
23.4	Proof of Non-Interference	106	
23.5	Tower Set-Backs	106	
23.6	Permit Applications And Plan Review	106	
23.7	Exceptions	106	
 

SECTION 24 - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
24.1	Purpose
24.2	Zoning Allowance
24.3	License Required
24.4	Code Compliance
24.5	Standards for Siting, Installation and Operation
OfWECS
24.6	Test Towers
24.7	Inspection
24.8	Abandonment

SECTION 25 - ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT APPENDIX A -  ZON ING ORDINANCE LEGEND
 


107
107
107
108

108
109
109
109
 

107












109

110
 
ORDINANCE NO. 43K
With Amendments  through 17 July 2012

THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, RELATING TO AND REGULATING TTIE LOCATION, SIZE, USE AND I IEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS, THE ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS, AND THE DENSITY OF POPULATION IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, AND FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFE1Y, ORDER, CONVENIENCE, PROSPERITY AND GENERAL WELFARE IN SAID CITY, AND FOR SAID PURPOSE, TO DIVIDE THE CITY INTO DISTRICTS, AND MAKE DIFFERENT REGULf\TIONS FOR DIFFERENT DISTRICTS.

The City of Gem Lake does ordain as follows:

SECTION 1 -TITLE

Section 1.1 This Ordinance shall be known , cited and referred to as the GEM LAKE ZONING ORDINANCE except as
referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this Ordinance".

SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE

Section 2.1 This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:

2.1.1	protecting the public health , safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.

2.1.2	dividing the City into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of structures and land.

2.1.3	promoting orderly development of the residential, business and industrial areas.

2.1.4	providing adequate Light, air, and convenience of access to property.

2.1.5	preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings
and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.

2.1.6	providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the Ciry.

2.1.7	supporting  the ideals of and providing for local controls consistent with  the Gem Lake Comprehensive  Municipal
Plan as adopted and, from time to time, amended.

SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS

Section 3.1 Rules. The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the follo,ving
rules of construction:

3.1.1	The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.

3.1.2	The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.

3.1.3	The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.

3.1.4	The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.

3.1.5	\\/henever a word or term defmed hereinafter appears in the text of this Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition thereof.

3.1.6	All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.



Gem Loke Zo11i11g Code -Page 1
 
Section 3.2 Definitions . The following words, and terms, whenever they occur in this Ordinance, are defined as follows:

ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE  - A use  or structure  or portion  of  a  structure  subordinate  to  and serving  the
principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.

ALLEY - A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting the property.

ALTERATION OR ALTER - When used in connection with public waters or wetlands, is any activity chat will change or diminish the course, current or cross-section of public waters or wetlands.

ANIMAL HUSBANDRY - A use in which animals are reared or kept in order to sell, conswne or donate the animals or
their products, such as meat, fur or eggs.

ANTENNA - A device used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications,  television  or radio signals which is located on the exterior of or outside of any building or structure. Such ancennas include, but are not limited to, broadcast radio or television, wireless communications, cellular, personal communications systems or any other dispatch type system, microwave or satellite dish, short-wave receiving or Amateur Radio transmit/receive, and other Accessory and Secondary use antennas.

AQUACULTURE - A use in which food fish, shellfish or other marine foods, aquatic plants or aquatic animals are cultured or grown in a body of water in order to sell, conswne or donate them or the products they produce.
ANTENNAS, ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE - Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVRO antennas three (3) meters or less in diameter, short wave radio receiving antennas, those antennas necessary for the operation of a Federally licensed Amateur Radio station, and towers/ antennas for radio systems operated by the City of Gem Lake.

BASEMENT - That portion of a building that is partly or completely below ground level.

BASEMENT, LOOK OUT - A Look-Out basement  has the walls extended  sufficiently above ground level so that some of the basement windows are completely above grou nd level. For purposes of this definition, the exposed windows must be at least three (3') feet in height with the bottom of the window not less than one (1') foot above ground level before that basement shall be considered a Look Out type.

BASEMENT, WALK OUT - A Walk Out basement (also known as a Daylight Basement) is used on a sloping lot where typically the rear and/or one of the two sides are above grade and part of the basement is above ground level. Occupants can walk out at that point without use of stairs, ramps, lifts and the like.

BASEMENT,  WALK UP - A basement which has an exterior exit via a stairwell or ramp. Some designs cover tl1e stairwell
with angled basement doors to prevent rainwater from accumulating in the stairwell.

BED AND BREr\KFAST (B & B) - A residential building other dun a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by pre­ arrangement for definite periods not more than one week, meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed eight (8) persons.

BEST MANAGEJ.VIBNT PRACTICES (Btv!Ps) - Techniques proven to be effective in controlling runoff, erosion and sedimentation including those documen ted in the Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control Planning Handbook (BWSR, 1988); Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (MPCA, 2000); the Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual (Metropolitan Council 2001); Niinnesota Stormwater Manual (tvlPCA, 2005); and other sources as approved by the VLAWMO: as such documents may be amended, revised or supplemented .

BIOENGINEERING -The use of live plantings in constructed features to stabilize streambanks and shorelines.  BLADE DIAMETER -The diameter of the circle created by the tips of the turbine blades when a \VECS is in operation.
BOARDING HOUSE - A residential building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods not less than one week, meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed eight (8) persons.

BUILDABLE AREA - A  contiguous area of real property \vi.thin a lot deemed suitable by best  engineering practices for construction of a principal use structure with no part of said area of real property within delineated wetlands, rights-of-way, set-backs , or easements.

BUILDING - Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel, and when said structures are divided by parry walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.


Gem Lake Zoning Code -Page 2
 
BUILDING HEIGHT - (see Height, Building)

BUILDING LINE - A line parallel  to a street, road or private way or the ordinary high-water level of a water body at any level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or any part of the building is set back from the said right­ of-way or ordinary high water level.
BUILDING SETBACK - The maximum horizont:tl distance between  the building and the lot line.

CARPORT - An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.

CLUSTElUNG - A grouping of residential or other structures arranged without regard to normal lot lines and set-backs but with the express intent of preserving open spaces and natural resources for community use, establishing a sense of community among owners/residents and reducing the cost and impact of infrastructure development and service delivery.

COLDFRAME - An unheated outdoor structure with a frame of wood or similar material and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
COl'vlMERCIAL BROADCAST SERV1CES - Licensed commercial radio or television services transmitting signals for reception by the general public.
CO:rvfMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES - Licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile  radio (S1\1R.), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (EStvIR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public.

COMMUNITY GARDEN -- An area of land managed  and maintained by a group of individuals to grow plants and harvest food crops for personal or group use, consumption or donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group, and may include common areas maintained and used by group members.

CONSTRUCTION ACTIV1TY - Disturbance to the land that results  in  a  change  in  the  topography,  existing  soil  cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative), or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and the movement of sediment into surface waters or drainage systems.

CONTIGUOUS - Areas of real property actually in contact with one another  or  touching  along  a  boundary  and  also touching or connected throughout in an unbroken sequence. Real property separated  by  a  body  of water  or designated wetland shall not be considered contiguous regardless of whether the real property under the body of water or wetland has common ownership. The routing of a driveway through a parcel of real property shall not be considered as separating same so as to make the portions created by the driveway not contiguous.

CONDOMINIUM, RESIDENTIAL - the absolute ownership of an apartment or a residential unit (generally in a multi­ unit building) based on a legal description of the airspace of the unit actually occupies, plus an undivided interest in the ownership of the common elements, which are joined with the other condominium unit owners all as provided by state law.

CONDOMINIUM, OFFICE - the absolute ownership of an office or a commercial wut (generally in a multi-unit building) based on a legal description of the airspace of the unit acrually occupies, plus an undivided interest in the ownership of the common elements, which are joined with the other office condominium unit owners all as provided by state law.

DEAD STORAGE -The permanent pool volume of a water basin, or the volume below the runout elevation of a water basin.

DETENTION BASIN - Any natural or manmade depression for the temporary storage of runoff.

DEVELOP.MENT - The construction of any public improvement project, infrastructure, structure, street, or road, or the subdivision of land.

DEWATER.ING -The removal of water for construction activity.

DRAIN OR DRAINAGE - Any method for removing or diverting water from waterbodies, including excavation of an open ditch, installation of subsurface drainage tile, filling, diking or pumping.

DWELLING - A building or one (1) or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residential purposes by a person, but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins, motor homes or trailer coaches.

D\'\IELLING, AITACHED - A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling.

D\'<IELLING, DETACHED - A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.

Gem Lake Zoning Code -Page J
 
EASEMENT - A grant by an owner of land for the use of that land or a specific portion thereof for a specific limite<l purpose by a person or persons. The purpose generally shall be for public utility facilities such as underground utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.

ENERGY DISSIPATION - Methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion including but not limited to concrete
aprons, riprap, splash guards, and gabions.

EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN - A plan of BMPs or equivalent measures that includes all  proposed alterations to real property and the methods to be employed before undertaking the proposed alterations to control runoff and erosion and to retain or control sediment on land during the period of land disruming activities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of public utilities or municipal departments of underground or overhead telephone, gas, electrical, communication, water and/ or sewer. Radio and television broadcast, cellular and PCS transmission/reception support structures shall not be considered an essential service.

ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES - Structures including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone exchanges, substations, wells, pumping stations and elevated tanks.

EXCAVATION -The artificial removal of soil or other earth material.

EXTRAORDINARY MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR REDUNDANT B.NIP - A stormwater management
practice to control erosion and sedin1entation and nutrient loading during and for two (2) years after construction using redundant Best Management Practices.

FAMILY - An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of persons not so related, maintaining a common household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.

FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - a residence or portion of a residence licensed by the Department of Human Services under
 
chapter 9502 for  no more  than  ten children  at one time  of which  no more than  six.
Group R, Division 3 occupancy requirements.

FILL -The deposit of soil or other earth material by artificial means.
 
are under  school age, and  must  meet
 

FILTRATION   PRACTICE  - A  storm..,,vater  control that  captures, temporarily  stores, and routes  stormwater runoff through a filter bed to improve water quality, as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended.

FINAL STABILIZATION - means that either:

a)	All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the native background vegetative cover for the large area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip-rap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed; or
b)	For individual lots in residential construction by either:

(i)	The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified above; or

(ii) the homebuilder establishing temporary stabili.zation including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by the homeowner and informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization.

c)	For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land) final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface waters and drainage systems, and areas which are not being returned to their preconstruccion agricultural use must meet the final stabilization criteria in (a) or (b) above.

FLOODPLAIN -The area adjacent to a waterbody that is inundated during a 100-year flood.

FLOOR AREA - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, but not excepting that  area primarily devoted to window display, storage, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized for dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off street parking or loading space.  Measurements shall be made from outside of exterior walls.


Grm Lake Zo11i11g Code -Page./-
 
GARAGE -PRIVATE - A detached accesso1y building or portion of the principal building, including a carport which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated capacity not in excess os seven thousand (7,000) pounds.

GRADING - Changing the natural or existing topography of the land.

GREEN SPACE - An area of real property on a lot which is similar to Open Space, but the general intent is to promote natural areas. Green Space includes, but is not limjted co, wetlands, prairies and grasslands, pastures, forests and wooded areas, mixed forest and grasslands, landscaped areas exclusive of impervious surfaces within the landscaped areas, or any ocher naturally occurring land form.

GROUNDWATER RECHARGE - The replenishment of groundwater storage through infiltration of surface runoff
inLo subsurface aquifers.
HEIGHT, BUILDING - A distance co be measured &om the ground level six (6'0") feet from the from door of a structure
to the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, weather vanes, cupolas, antennas and the like.

HOBBY ACTIVITIES - Any activity or interest pursued  for pleasure or relaxation  and not as a main  occupation and
meeting  all the  following  requirements:  when  normally  engaged  in  only  by  the  persons  residing  in  the  dwelling  where  me
hobby  is pursued; when  evidence of the hobby is not visible from the street or if visible is not offensive or such  to lower
neighborhood property values; when pursuit of the hobby does not interfere \\<ith enjoyment of neighboring property by its owners.

HOl-.JE OCCUPATION - Any gainful occupation of n on-resid ential nature conducted entirely within the dwelling  or accessory building and carried on only by the inhabitants and no more than one (1) non-resident thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. No articles may be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced on the premises by members of the inunediate  family residing  therein. Home  occupations  shall  not include the repair of internal combustion engines (other than small engine repair), body shops, machine shops, welding shops, contracting or landscape type businesses requiring on site storage of commercial equipment or other objectionable uses as determined by the City Council. The home occupation shall not be conducted in more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less. There shall be no outside display of goods or storage of equipment or material used in the "Home Occupation."

HOOPHOUSE - A structure made of PVC piping or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a half­
round or hoop shape.

HOUSING, LIFE CYCLE - Housing available for people at all stages of their lives. This housing mar be owned or rented single family detached housing or condominiums and townhouses. Most people when they move from one housing type to another, due to changing needs and circumstances, want to stay in the same community if possible. Life-cycle hou sing needs to meet the changing needs of people as their incomes and circumstances change.

HYDIUC SOILS - A soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding or ponding long enough during the
growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.

IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - means a constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards  the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking locs, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.

INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (ISTS)  - A facility for receiving and treating of sewage which is not a part of or connected to a public sewer system.

INFILTRATION PRACTICE - A stormwater retention method for the purpose of reducing the volume of stormwater runoff by transmitting a flow of water into the ground through the soils, as described in the l\.1innesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended.

INFRASTRUCTURE - The system of public works for a county, state, or municipality including, but not limited to, structures, roads,  bridges,  culverts,  sidewalks; stormwater  management  facilities,  conveyance  systems  and  pipes;  pump s tions, sanitary sewers and interceptors, hydraulic structures, permanent erosion control and stream bank protection measures, water lines, gas lines, electrical lines and associated facilities, and phone lines and supporting facilities.

KENNEL, PERSONAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house up to three (3) domestic animals of various types which are owned by the occupants of the premises and which is located on and maintained by the occupant of the premises in residential districts for personal use only.


Gun L:rke Zo11i11g Code -Page 5
 
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house more  than  three (3) domestic animals of various types which is owned by a person, group of persons, corporation or other legal entity who own and/or harbor said animals in the City of Gem Lake for other than persona l use. This type of kennel relates to land use matters covered by th e Zoning or Land Use Ordinance. It is defined and may only be operated within the Conditional or Interim Use regulations of the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.

LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY - Any change of the land surface to include removin g vegetative cover, excavation , fill, grading, stockpiling soil, and the construction of any structure that may cause or contribute to erosion or the movement of sediment into water bodies. The use of land for new and continuing agricultural activities shall not constitute a land disturbing activity under th ese Policies.

LANDSCAPING - Improvement and alteration of exposed ground through the establishment of lawns, gardens, planting of
trees, flowers and shrubs, grading, and other such methods using natural materials.

LOT - A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or use by a use permitted in this Ordinance.

LOT OF RECORD - Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and  filed,  or  one  (1)  unit  of  an Auditor's Subdivision or a Registered Land Survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered, for which a Deed, Auditor's Subdivision or Registered Land Survey has been recorded .in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Ramsey County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. An Outlot is not a Lot of Record.

LOT AREA - The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.

LOT AREA PER FAMILY - The number of square feet of lot area required per dwelling unit.

LOT, CORNER  - A lot situated at the junction  of, and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, tl1e interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.

LOT DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between tl1e front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.

LOT IMPROVEMENT - Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which it is situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.

LOT  LINE - A  lot line is the property  line bounding a lot except  that where any portion  of a lot extends into the public
right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Ordinance.

LOT LINE, FRONT - That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated street, road or private way, and in the case of a comer lot it shall be the longest dimension on such a street, road or private way. If the dimensions of a comer lot are equal, the front line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the City.

LOT LINE, REAR - That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line.  If the rear lot line is less tl1an ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the ma.ximum distan ce from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE - Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

LOT, OPEN SALES OR RENTAL LOT - Any land used or occupied for the pu1poses of buying, selling, or rental for use away from the premises, any goods, materials or merchandise and for the storing of same in the open prior to sale or rental.

LOT, OPEN  STORAGE - Any land used or occupied for storing in the open any materials, equipment, vehicles of any kind or articles of any narure.

LOT, INTERIOR - A lot, other than a comer lot, including through lots.

LOT, THROUG H - A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially parallel screets, and which is
not a comer lot.  On a through lor, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this Ordinance.

LOT WIDTH - The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the first thirty (30) feet of the lot depth commencing at the front lot line. If the lot is on a cul-de-sac or other curved roadway the lot width shall be measured at the front building line.

MEAN - the mid-point of two extremes.

MOBILE HOME - Any type of structure or vehicle which can be readily adapted to or docs provide facilities  for a person or persons to eat or sleep which is mounted on wheels, has provisions for wheels or may be loaded on any ordinary flat bed truck, such as a camper, house trailer, converted bus or truck, tent or small building.

Gem I.Ake Zo11i11g Code -Page 6
 
MOTOR SERVICE STATION - A place where saline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.

l\fPCA GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT - General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated With Constn1ction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program Permit MN R100001 (NPDES General Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollutant Control Agency, August 1, 2008, and as amended.

NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) - means the program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Section s 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345 and Minnesota
Rule Chapter 7090.

NONPOINT SOURCE - Nutrient and pollution sources not discharged from a single point e.g. runoff from
agricultural fields, feedlots or urban landscapes.

NON -DEGRADATION - Section 303 (ritle 33 of United States Code [U.S.(.] 1313) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) requires states and authorized tribes to adopt water quality standards for waters of the U.S. within their applicable jurisdictions to maintain tl1eir chemical, physical and biological integrity. No significant increase in stormwater runoff or pollutant loads from 2005/2006 numerical standards is permitted.

NORMAL WATER LEVEL - For a reservoir with a fixed overflow, means the lowest crest level of that overflow. For a reservoir whose outflow is controlled wholly or partly by movable gates, siphons or otl1er means, it is the maximum level to which water may rise under normal operating conditions, exclusive of any provision for flood surcharge. For a closed depression wetland, it is the maximum level to which the water may rise under normal precipitation conditions exclusive of any provision for flood surcharge.

NOXIOUS  MATERIAL(S)  - Material capable of causing injury to living organisms  by chemical  reaction,  or is capable of
causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.

NURP - The Nationwide Urban Runoff Program developed by the Environmental Protection Agency to study stormwater runoff from urban development.

OFFICES - Structures, or portions of structures, in which commercial activities take place but where goods are not produced, sold or repaired. These include: Banks, general offices, governmental offices, insurance offices, real  estate offices,  travel agency or transportation ticket offices, telephone exchange, utility office,  professional offices and similar uses which are operated by the owner or his tenants.

OFFICE, SHO\VROOM - A building in which at least twenty (20%) per cent of the floor space is devoted to office activities, the remainder being used for either display, storage, or research and testing.

OPEN SPACE - An area of real property on a lot which is not covered by impervious surfaces, structures, unpaved storage, or designated parking areas (see Green Space).

ORDINARY  HIGI I  WATER LEVEL - as defined by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, means the
boundary of water basins, watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands, and:

1.	The ordinary high water level is an elevation delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of tin1e to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly tl1e point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial;

2.	For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of ilie channel; and

3.	For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high  water level is the operating elevation  of the normal  summer
pool.

OUllOT - a lot or parcel of land created by subdivision, but not for construction, intended  for transfer of ownership, dedication or for use as a private right-of-way. An outlot can be designated non-buildable or buildable if replatted in full compliance with all the requirements of this and the Subdivision ordinance without the use of a variance.

O\'\INER  - Any individual,  firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,  corporation,  trust  or  any other legal entity having
sufficient proprietary interest in the land under this Ordinance.

PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS  - Public land  and  open  spaces  in  the  City  of  Gem  Lake dedicated  or  reserved  for
recreational purposes.


Gem Lake Zo11i11,g Code -Page 7
 
PASTURE - An area or portion of a single parcel of real property upon which agricultural animals are allowed to range and
graze and which is suitably fenced to contain such animals. PATIO - a paved outdoor area.
PEDESTIUAN  WIAY  - A public right-of-way or private  easement across a block or within  a block  to provide  access  for
pedestrians that may be used for the installation of utility lines.
PERSON - Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, or partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entiry. PERFORMANCE STANDARD  - Qualit:itive or quantitative  cricerion  established  to control for the benefit  of public
health, safety and welfare such things as noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated or inherent in particular or ordinary uses of land or buildings.
PLANNING CO:tvfMISSION - A panel of persons appointed by the Mayor and City Council  of the City of Gem Lake charged with reviewing all matters related to land use development within the City; revie·wing, modifying and developing the Comprehensive Municipa l Plan and such local controls as may be necessary to achieve the goals of the  Comprehensive Municipal Plan; and, making recommendations to the City Council as to approval and adoption of such matters.

PRE-DEVELOPivfENT CONDITION - The land use on a site that exists immediately prior to a proposed alteration.
All pre-development Runoff Curve Nwnbers must reference the Minnesota Hydrology Guide.

PRIVATE CHILD  CARE AND  EDUCATION  FACILITIES  -  Child  Care  Facilities  currently  licensed  by  the  State  of
Minnesota and Educational Facilities with:

a)	an enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years:

b)	a total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);

c)	a maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) "full-day equivalent" students with a full-day* defined as ten (10) hours.
* The "full-day equivalent'' shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during each hour
of the "full-day" of school. This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.

PUBLIC  FACILITIES - Parks, playgrounds  and similar uses owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake; or, libraries and other City of Gem Lake owned facilities.

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT - Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City of Gem Lake does or may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation, or that may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.

PUBLIC UTILITY - Persons, corporation s, or  governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, data, or telephone services to the general public. For the purposes of this Ordinance, conunercial broadcast services and conunercial wireless teleconununications services shall not be considered public utility uses and are defined separately.

PUBLIC WATERS - Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.005, subdivision 15.

RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT (RESIDENTIAL)  - Play apparatus  such  as swing sets  and  slides, sand  boxes, poles   for
net games, unoccupied boats and trailers, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar equipment.
REDEVELOPMENT  -The rebuilding,  repair,  or  alteration  of  a  structure,  land  surface, road  or street, or  facility. RESIDENTIAL  \VECS - A WECS with  a rated generating capacity  of 40 kilowatts  (k\'XI) or less which  is intended primarily
for producing electrical power used on-site.

RETENTION - The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into receiving water; examples include systems which discharge through percolation , exfiltration, and evaporation processes and which generally have residence times less than three days.

RUNOFF - Rainfall, snowmclt or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.

SEDIMENT -The solid mineral or organic material that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moYed from its original location by erosion and has been deposited at anotl1er location.

SEDIMENTATION - The process or action of depositing sediment.

SETBACK - The distance between a building, structure or other improvement and a lot line or designated right-of-way.

SHED - a roofed demountable structure not to exceed two-hundred  fifty (250 s.f.) square feet in total area. A shed shall be
considered an Accessory Structure.
 
SHORELINE - 111e ordinary water level of the body of \\Tater known as Gem Lake and any lake, pond, or flowage in the City of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the  authority to make such determinations, along with all wetlands attendant to each body of water.

SOIL  TREATMENT  SYSTEM - A  system  where sewage effluent  is treated  and  disposed  of into  the  soil by percolation and filtration, and includes trenches, seepage beds, drainfields, at-grade systems, and mound systems.

STABILIZED - Exposed soil is considered ro be stabilized when it has been adequately covered through temporary measures (e.g. mulch, staked sod, riprap, erosion control blanket, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring), or permnnenc vegetation has been established over 70% of the surface.

STABLE,  PERSONAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house up to two (2) horses which is located
on and maintained by the occupant of lands in residential districts for personal use only.

STABLE. COMMERCIAL - Any  confinement or structure designed to contain and house more than two (2) agricultural animals as described in Section 3.8.1 of this ordinance which is owned by a person, group of persons,  corporation or other legal entity who own and/or harbor  said animals in the City of Gem Lake for other than personal use. This type of stable relates to a land use marter covered by the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance. It is defined and may only be operated within the Conditiona l or Interim Use regulations of the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
STORM\\!ATER FACILITY -Any facility including retention and detention ponds, wetlands, reservoirs, impoundments, infiltration practices, filtration practices, conveyance systems, and connecting infrastructure  that  are  constructed for or serve the purpose of stormwater management.

STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP)  - A  site-specific,  written  document  that:  identifies potential sources of stormwater pollution at the construction site; describes practices to  reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from the construction site; and identifies procedures the operator will implement  to comply with the terms and conditions of a construction general permit.

STREET - A public or private right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet in width which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property.

STREET, COLLECTOR - A street that carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares.

STREET,  CUL-DE-SAC  - A local  street or private right-of-way with only one outlet and  providing  an area  for  rurning a
vehicle with a radius of not less than one-hundred twenty (120) feet.
STREET WIDTH - The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street or private way.

STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground,  or  attached  to something having a location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing advertising signs, billboards, or fences.

STRUCTURAL ALTERATION  - Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of  the  supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.

STRUCTURE, NON  CONFORMING - Any structure which is legally existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance, which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the structure were to be erected under the provisions of this ordinance.

SUBDIVISION - The division of an area, parcel, or tract of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development that will require the creation of streets and roads, except  for tl1ose resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of lot lines by the relocation of a common boundary. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of sub-dividing or to the land subdivided.

SUBWATERSHED - A portion of land contributing runoff to a particular point of discharge.

SURFACE \VATER - All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, spring, rivers, drainage systems,
waterways, watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private.

TANGENT - A straight line that is perpendicular  to the radius of a curve at the point where the line meets the curve.

THOROUGHFARE -A street for fast or heavy traffic used primarily as a traffic artery between relatively large or congested areas.

TOTAL EXTENDED  HEIGHT-The highest point reached above narural grade by the tallest part of the WECS (e.g. the
tip of the turbine blade at its highest point of travel).

Gem Lake Zo11i11g Code -Page 9
 
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL)- A Total Maximum Daily Load, or TMDL, is a regulation designed to
improve water quality by controlling the amount of a pollutant entering a water body.

TO\XIER OR ANTENNA  SUPPORT  STRUCTURE - Any mast, pole spire, lattice structure or similar structure including any lines, cables, wires or braces supporting the structure intended for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device or similar apparatus  above grade. Towers may be ground or roof  mounced. The term "rower" includes any antenna attached to the tower.
TOWN I IOME - townhome is a single-family dwelling unit constructed  in a group of three or more attached dwelling units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides nor more than three stories in height with a separate means of ingress and egress.

ULTIMATE  CONDITIONS - The physical,  topographic, and hydrologic characteristics  of a subwatershed upon completion of the maximum level of expected development.

USE - The Purpose or activity for which the land, structure, or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and shall include the perform::mce of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this Ordinance.  Uses shall be classified as Principal or Accessory and as Permitted, Conditional, Interim  and Prohibited.

USE, CONDITIONAL - Either a public or private use as listed which, because of  its  unique  characteristics,  cannot  be properly classified as a permitted t1se in a particular district. This includes those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning district, which for the respective condt1ct or performance in such designated districts may require reasonable, but special, unusual, or extraordinary limitations peculiar to the use and for the protection, promotion, and preservation of the general public welfare, health, and safety as well as the integrity of the City's Comprehensive Municipal Plan. Consideration of each case of Conditional Use shall be given to impact of such use on neighboring real property and of the public need for the particular conditional use at the particular location .

USE, INTERIM - a time limited use that is personal to the user or occupant and which does not run with the land. Consideration of each case of Conditional Use shall be given to impact of such use on neighboring real property and of the public need for the particular conditional use at the particular location.

USE, NONCONFORMING - A  use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing at the  time of adoption of this Ordinance which does not comply with all the regulations of this Ordinance or any use of land, building or structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption of an amendment which would not comply with all of the regulations.

USE, PERMITTED - A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards of such district.

USE, PRINCIPAL - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.

UTILIZE BASIN - Documented stonnwater management structures designated strictly for treating and retaining stormwater.

VEHICLE,  MOTOR  VEHICLE - Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon  railroad  tracks and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle, but excepting snowmobiles and mobile homes.

VEHICLE, JUNKED  MOTOR  VEHICLE - Any motor vehicle which  is  either  abandoned, wrecked,  partially  dismantled or legally inoperative, or which is not currently licensed for operation within the State of Minnesota.

VEHICLE,  COMMERCIAL  VEHICLE  - A motor vehicle exceeding one and  one-half  ton  or equivalent  in  load capacity
or a motor vehicle not displaying passenger car or RV licen se plates.

WATER  BODY - a body of water (such as a lake or pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed
basin that holds water.

\VATERS OF THE STATE - All stream, lakes, ponds, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aguifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained \vithin, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. Streams include both intermittent and perennial.

WATERCOURSE - a channel or depression through which water flows continuously or intermittently,  such  as  rivers, streams, or creeks.

WATERSHED - the area drained by a natural or artificia l drainage system, bounded peripherally by a ridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas.


Gem Lak e Zoning Code -Page 10
 
WIAY, AUTHORIZED PRIVATE - a road with a right-of-way not less than forty (40)  feet  wide  across  private  land designed and built for vehicular traffic between a public srreet and two or more private residences. This road shall have been authorized or approved by the City Council, to be built and maintained by private interests. Authorized private ways are allowed only in residential districts.

\VETLAND -Any wetland as defined in Minnesota St:arutes, section 103G.005, subdivision 19.

\VIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (\'<'ECS) - An electrical generating facility consisting of a turbine, tower. and
associated control and conversion electronics.

YARD - A required open space on a lot, which is unoccu pied and unobstrucred by a srruclure from its lowest ground level to the sky except as expressly permit ted in this Ordinance. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Y1\RD, FRONT - A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting fron l street right-of -way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such a lot is located. In the case of a corner lot abutting one or more major roads, both yards shall be considered front yards . A major road is any road that is of a collector designation or greater.

YARD,  REAR - A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between  the side lot lines and extending toward the
front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.

YARD, SIDE - A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.

ZONING ADMINISTRATOR - Any person(s) duly appointed by resolution of the Gem Lake City Council for the purpose of interpreting and enforcing th e several local land use and development controls including, but not limited to, local controls known as the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Ordinance.

ZONING  DISTIUCT - An area or areas within  the limits of the City for which  the regulations  and requirements governing
use are unifor m.





































Gelll Lake Zo11i11g  Code- Page  11
 
SECTION 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP

Section 4.1 Districts

4.1.1	In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Ordinance, the City of Gem Lake is hereby divided into the
following Zonii1g Districts and groups of Districts.

A)	Residence Districts

1)	"R1" Lake/Executive Residence (5.0 acre minimum lot size)

2)	"R2" .Acre Estate Residence (3.0 acre minimum lot size)

3)	"R3" Low-Densi ty Residence (0.75 acre minimum lot size)

4)	"R4" Medium-Density Residence (0.50 acre minimum lot size)

B)	Gateway District

Section 4.2 Map

4.2.1 The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established on that certain map entitled "Zoning District Map of Gem Lake, Minnesota," dated 24 January 2000 and &om time to time amended, which map is properly approved and hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map". This map and all of the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as it fulJy set forth and described herein.

Section 4.3 Boundaries

4.3.1 District boundary lines as indicated on said map  follow lot lines,  the center  lines  of  streets,  alleys,  or  railroads,  the center lines of streets or alleys projects, the center of water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they  exist upon  the effective date of this Ordinance  or  amendments  thereto.  If district  boundary  lines  do  not  follow  any  of  the  above described lines, t11e district boundary lines are established as drawn on  the zoning  map.  Where  a  District  boundary  line divides a lot of record which was  in  single ownership  at  the  time  of  enactment  of  this  Ordinance and  places  portions  of such lot of record in two (2) or more Use Districts,  any portion of such lot with fifty (50'0")  feet on  either side of such  a dividing  district  boundary  line  may  be  used  for  any  use  of  either  Use  District;  provided,  however,  if  any  portion  of such
lot shall extend beyond  the fifty (50'0") feet limitation, the District line as shown shall prevail. Appeals from the Zoning
Admin istrator's determination and questions of doubt concerning the exact location of District boundary lines shall be heard by the Board of Appea ls.























Gem Like Zoning Code -Page 12
 
SECTION 5 - "Rl" RESIDENTIAL DISTIUCT

Section 5.1 Permitted Uses.   Within any ''Rl" Zoned Residential Use District, no structures or land shall be used except for
one (1) or more of the following uses:

5.1.1	family detached dwellings

5.1.2	Truck gardening and other horticultural uses provided  that only those products produced on the premise be sold or offered for sale.

Section 5.2 Permitted Accessory Uses.  Within any "Rl" Zoned Residential Use District, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses.

5.2.1	Attached or detached housing for domestic servants

5.2.2	private garage, car port or parking space

5.2.3	The keeping of not more than two (2) roomers

5.2.4	Private swimming pool, tennis court, horse training ring, and other sites necessary to conduct a home sporting event.

5.2.5	Home occupation

5.2.6	Signs as regulated by this Ordinance

5.2.7	Structures temporarily located for purposes of construction on the site for a period of time not in excess of such construcnon.

5.2.8	Conservatories for plants and flowers, not including any business, trade or industry.

5.2.9	Decorative landscape features including but not limited to pools, arbors, hedges, ,v,ills, shrubs, trees, etc.

5.2.10	Essential services

Section 5.3 Conditional & Interim Uses.  \Vi thin any "Rl"  Zoned  Residential Use District, no structures or land shall be used for the following uses except by Conditional Use Permit:

5.3.1	Country clubs, golf courses and other private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities, including swimming pools; provided that :my principal building or swimming pool shall be located not less than fifty (50') feet from any other lot in an ''R" District.

5.3.2	Essential Service Structures

5.3.3	Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height

5.3.4	Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:

A)	the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;

B)	the structure shall be at least one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;

C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;

Gem Lake Zonilf!. Code -Page 1J
 
D)	the design and construction  materials  of the of the structure shall be consistent  with  the main dwelling on  the
property;

E)	such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.

5.3.5	Bed and Breakfast Establis hments

5.3.6	Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length .

5.3.7	Pamily Day Care Home

Section 5.4 Height Regulations

5.4.1	No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed rwenty ­ five (25'0'') feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of the roof structure.

5.4.2	Back and side facades may exceed thirry-five (35'0") feet in height but not more than forry-five (45'0") feet in heighr subject to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:

A)	The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be  by existing or plan ted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season; and,

B)	the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an  uninterrupted  vertical  plane  of greater than thirty-five (35'0") feet at any point; and,

C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the strucrure for
height measurements; and,

D)	lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively is required or created; and

E)	whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus cwo (2'0") feet for every one (1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,

F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances of the
lot and itd surroundings.
 
Section 5.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements

5.5.1	The following minimum requirements shall be observed:

TABLE 5.5.1


TOTAL AREA
5.0 acres	
BUILDABLE  AREA
50% total area	
FRONTAGE
200 feet

FRONT YARD
SO foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
30 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
SO foot set-back

OPEN SPACE
75% total area	
L\KE FRONTAGE
200 feet	
		

A)	That portion of a lot considered as the front yard shall be as determined by the City Council.

B)	All Residential structures shall be set back at least one-hundred (100') feet from the ordinary high water level of the lake. The ordinary high water level of the lake shall be as determined by the City Council.

5.5.2	The following structures can be erected within set backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front of
the lot than the rear of the principal structure:

A)	Fences

1)	Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission  of the adjacent property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and

2)	All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide for owner
maintenance; and

3)	All fences installed within the set back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent property.

B)	Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
 
SECTION 6 - "R2" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section 6.1 Permitted Uses

6.1.1	Within  any ''R2"  Zoned  Residential District, no structure or land shall be used  expect for one (1) or more of the
following uses:

A)	All uses permitted in Section 5.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

Section 6.2 Permitted Accessory Uses

6.2.1	Within any "R2"  Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:

A)	Those uses or structures permitted in Section 5.2 and as regulated therein shall be permitted accessory use, except as herein amended.

Section 6.3 Conditional & Interim Uses

6.3.1	Within  any "R2"  Zoned  Residential District, no structure  or land shall be used  for the following uses  except by
Conditional Use Permit.

A)	Those uses  or structures  listed as Conditional  Uses  in  Section  5.3 and as regulated  therein,  except as herein
amended.

B)	Two (2) family dwellings.

6.3.2	Strucrurcs with side or rear devations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height

6.3.3	Agricu ltural Strucrures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the following conditions may provide for casing the restriction:

A)	the strucrure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening co be existing or plan ted and maintained vegetation or the natura l topography of the lot and surrounding lands and with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;

B)	the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;

C) the drninage characteristics  of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;

D)	the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on the property;

E)	such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.

6.3.4	Bed and Breakfast Establishments

6.3.5	Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.

6.3.6	Family Day Care Home

Section 6.4 Height Regulations

6.4.1 No principal strucrure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance co the highest point of the roof structure.

Gem Lake Zo11ing Codt -Page  16
 
6.4.2	Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject to
a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:

A)	The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by  existing or plan ted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surroundin g lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season; and,

B) the verticality of any faco.de in question shall be inte::rrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or other such three-dimensional architectural featurc(s) which preclude the creation of an  uninterrupted  vertical  plane  of greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,

C)	chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure for
height measurements; and,

D)	lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively is regui.red or created; and

E)	whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further set back from the side and rear Joe lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one (1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,

F) such other factors as the City may detennine based upon the special or unigue conditions and circumstances of the
lot and its surroundings.

Section 6.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Regui.rements

 
6.5.1	The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
 


TABLE6.5.1
 


TOTAL AREA
3.0 acres		
BUILDABLE  AREA
75% total area	
FRONTAGE
150 feet

FRONT YARD
40 foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
35 foot set-back

OPEN SPACE
50% total area		

A)	A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20') feet.

6.5.2	The following structures can be erected within set backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:

A)	Fences

1)	Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission  of the adjacent propercy owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and

2)	All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide for owner
maintenance; and

3)	All fences installed within the set back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent property.

B)	Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
 
SECTION 7 - “R3" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section 7.1 Permitted Uses

7.1.1	Within any “R3"  Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:

A)	All uses permitted in Section 6.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

B)	The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots less than one (1.0) acre shall not be allowed. Section 7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
7.2.1	Within any “R3" Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:

A)	Those uses or structures permitted in Section 6.2, excluding and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

B)	Swimming pools provided such pool is fenced so as to control access and is located not less than fifteen (15') feet from any other lot in an “R’ District, and subject to Council approval.

Section 7.3 Conditional & Interim Uses

7.3.1	Within any “R3"  Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by Conditional Use Permit.

A)	Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 6.3 as regulated therein, except as herein amended.

B)	Two-family dwellings.

C)	The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots greater than one (1.0) acre.

7.3.2	uctures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.

7.3.3	Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:

A)	the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;

B)	the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;

C)	the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;

D)	the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on the property;

E)	such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.

7.3.4	Bed and Breakfast Establishments

7.3.5	Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.

7.3.6	amily Day Care Home
 
Section 7.4 Height Regulations

7.4.1	No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of the roof structure.

7.4.2	Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A)	The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season; and,

B)	the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical plane of greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,
C)	chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure for height measurements; and,

D)	lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively is required or created; and
E)	whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one (1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,
F)	such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances of the lot and it’s surroundings.


Section 7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements

 
7.5.1	The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
 


TABLE 7.5.1
 


TOTAL AREA
36,000 square feet	
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area	
FRONTAGE
100 feet

FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back

OPEN SPACE
40% total area		

A)	A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.

7.5.2	The following structures can be erected within set backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:

A)	Fences, patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.

1)	Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2)	All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide for owner maintenance; and
3)	All fences installed within the set back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent property.

B)	Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
 
SECTION 8 - “R4" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Section 8.1 Permitted Uses

8.1.1	Within any “R4" Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the following uses:

A)	All uses permitted in Section 7.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended. Section 8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
8.2.1	Within any “R4" Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:

A)	Those uses or structures permitted in Section 7.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended. Section 8.3 28.3 Conditional & Interim Uses
8.3.1	Within any "R4" Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
Conditional Use Permit.

A)	Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 7.3 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.

8.3.2	uctures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.


8.3.3	Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:

A)	the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;

B)	the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;

C)	the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;

D)	the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on the property;

E)	such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.

8.3.4	Bed and Breakfast Establishments

8.3.5	Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.

8.3.6	amily Day Care Home Section 8.4 Height Regulations
8.4.1	No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of the roof structure.
 
8.4.2	Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:

A)	The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season; and,

B)	the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical plane of greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,

C)	chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure for height measurements; and,

D)	lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively is required or created; and

E)	whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one (1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,

F)	such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances of the lot and it’s surroundings.

Section 8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements

8.5.1	The following minimum requirements shall be observed:

A)	When on-site septic systems will be used for structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following applies:

TABLE 8.5.1 A


TOTAL AREA
36,000 square feet	
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area	
FRONTAGE
100 feet

FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back

OPEN SPACE
40% total area		
 
B)	When city sewer is currently available and will be used for the structures constructed in the R-4 zoning district the following applies:

TABLE 8.5.1 B


TOTAL AREA
24,000 square feet	
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area	
FRONTAGE
100 feet

FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back

OPEN SPACE
40% total area		


C)	A side yard set-back for property abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.

8.5.2	The following structures can be erected within set backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:

A)	Fences
1)	Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and

2)	All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide for owner maintenance; and

3)	All fences installed within the set back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent property.

B)	Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
 
SECTION 9 – GEM LAKE GATEWAY DISTRICT

9.1.	The intent of the Gem Lake Gateway District (“Gateway” or “G”) is intended to allow for development and redevelopment of the real property associated with Hoffman Corner and points westward along Ramsey County Road E extending northward to the border with the zoning districts identified in Sections 5 and 6 of this Ordinance. This area has been the subject of a visioning study and includes both commercial and residential opportunities as described in the City of Gem Lake Comprehensive Plan and other city documents. As introduced by the visioning plan and envisioned by the Comprehensive Plan, the Gateway will emphasize commercial development and/or redevelopment in the Hoffman Corner intersection which traditionally has been the location of the Gem Lake commercial district. As one moves westward along County Road E the intent of the Gateway is to transition into more residential type neighborhoods becoming less dense until it transitions to either the Estate Residential district or the Executive Residential district.

9.1.1	rposes. Specifically, the Gateway zoning district will attempt to:

A)	Promote development and redevelopment consistent with the visioning plan for the Gateway area by encouraging residential uses in conjunction with commercial and expanded recreational activities which in turn will create an active street life, while enhancing the vitality of businesses and reducing vehicular traffic.

B)	Provide for mixed-use development(s) that are carefully planned to promote efficient use of land, parking and roadway systems.

C)	Provide enhanced oversight through conditional use permit provisions, to ensure compatibility of mixed uses and consistency with the approved master plan for the site.

D)	Ensure compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.

E)	Provide significant incentives to promote mixed-use redevelopment projects.

F)	Encourage sustainable architectural, engineering and landscape design that is implemented by responsive green construction practices.

G)	Preserve natural resources, minimize the carbon footprint of the City, and establish a key zone within Gem Lake that is respectful of neighboring areas and is instructive for future generations.

H)	Encourage pedestrian and bicycle use.

I)	Ensure that commercial and residential uses in a development are designed to be compatible with each other.

J)	Ensure high standards of site design, spatial relationships, architectural design, building materials and landscape design.

K)	Seek to put in place those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan (as supported by the master plan) that includes four “sub-zones”:

1.	Neighborhood Edge: Intended for lower density single-family residential housing development to act as a transition between new mixed-use construction and existing single-family detached structures on adjacent lands. This subzone in its basic form will accommodate single-family dwellings on larger lots, or with application of incentives, more compact homes on common larger lots or on compact lots with enhanced buffers (used in clustering), shared with accessory buildings and generally served from a front or side driveway.

2.	Neighborhood General: Intended to begin the transition from purely residential use at low densities to more intensive mixed-use development at the district’s center. This subzone will accommodate a variety of residential structures at varying densities, and also begin to integrate lower-impact office or retail activities which complement the residential setting.
 
3.	Neighborhood Mixed Use: Intended to establish a neighborhood focus that is distinguished by mixed use buildings, together with denser residential options and smaller-scale commercial and office buildings without residential components. This subzone will accommodate a variety of activities and services within easy walking distance from homes throughout the District, supporting daily convenience shopping and personal service needs, and also providing opportunities for public gathering and social contact.

4.	Neighborhood Center: Intended for the most urban conditions within all of the shown mixed use areas. The mixture of land uses emphasizes ground-floor retail with offices and residential/rental above (as market acceptance matures) and structures providing commercial space for medium and large–sized retailers. Street frontages throughout this subzone should be pedestrian-oriented, and the public space should be defined by placing building facades at the edge of the sidewalk. Neighborhood Center land that abuts other subzones on the north and west sides will be carefully planned to ensure lower-density buildings.

9.1.2	Definitions specific to this Section. The terms listed below have the meaning given to them here for purposes of this Section. An effort has been made to define other key terms as they appear within the applicable parts of this Section, and should be given the explicit or contextual meaning given to them within the remainder of this Section. If a term is not defined in the Section, terms used herein have the meaning given to them in the Definitions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance, or its common-usage meaning if not defined within the Ordinance.

Applicant. The owner of land, or the owner of a leasehold interest therein, or the owner’s authorized representative, or a governmental entity proposing an action or development requiring City development review and approval or the issuance of a permit for the development of land.

Application. Any application for a development permit or development approval pursuant to this Ordinance and which application was not complete and filed on or before the date of adoption of this Ordinance.

Encroachment. A porch, deck, balcony, patio or similar unenclosed space, or an awning, that extends into space that is otherwise reserved for setbacks or public right-of-way. Permitted encroachments are indicated on the Building Type Templates.

Garage. A structure intended for the parking and storage of passenger cars and light-duty trucks. A garage may be attached to a building or a separate structure, where allowed by Building Type Template.

Open Hours (also “Operation”). The time within the day in which a business invites customers, clients or the general public to the property or business location in order to conduct the purpose of the business. These hours will not begin earlier than 7 A.M., and will not extend beyond 8 P.M. unless approved by conditional use permit (see Figure 17).

Shed. A structure on a property that is not a primary building nor a structure intended to house parked cars or trucks. Generally a smaller building intended for the storage of home maintenance equipment and other personal belongings. When allowed, a shed with a footprint of 200 square feet or less may be built and maintained without a permit from the City.

9.2	enerally Applicable Regulations

9.2.1	Relationship to other portions of this Ordinance and other City Ordinances. The requirements of this Section may conflict with or duplicate some portions of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance of Gem Lake. Any such conflict, when it relates to the use of land in the Gateway District, shall be resolved in favor of the language in this Section. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance apply within the Gateway District, including provisions for Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Institutional Overlay. PUD or institutional overlay proposals may be used in combination with or in place of the regulations and procedures set forth in this Section. All other Gem Lake ordinances which relate to the construction of buildings and use of land (including but not limited to the Landscaping Ordinance, Adult Use Ordinance, Tree Preservation Ordinance, Building Code Adoption, and Pawnbroker Ordinance) apply within the Gateway District.
 
9.2.2	Administration, Conditional Uses, Variance, and Appeal.

A)	The Building Type standards are intended to be employed and used to entitle the construction of a building upon land in the same manner that listing a use as “permitted” entitled land in other Zones defined by this Ordinance. The processing of conditional use permits, variances, amendments, platted subdivisions and other land use applications which may necessarily accompany an application for building approval in the Gateway District shall be processed simultaneously with the review of the Gateway District proposal, whenever possible.

B)	All new construction, remodeling or expansion (except for the remodeling or expansion of single-family detached dwellings) within the Gateway District requires a Zoning Compliance Permit. The Zoning Compliance Permit is indefinite in duration and the entitlements stated on the permit shall run with the land. A Zoning Compliance Permit is granted after determination that the proposal complies with all applicable standards set forth within this Section (Thoroughfare Standards, Civic Space Standards, Building Type Standards, Parking, and Design Standards). As set forth below, the final approval for the Zoning Compliance Permit will come from the City Council for proposals which require Council approval in some form (such as a platted subdivision or conditional use permit), and the Zoning Administrator for proposals which do not otherwise require Council review (such as single buildings or minor subdivisions without variances).

C)	For the purpose of providing administrative review and processing of development proposals within the Gateway District, the City Council hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to serve as the primary point of contact between the City and applicants for zoning approval. Upon receipt of an application for land use in the Gateway District, the Zoning Administrator shall ensure that the application is complete within five (5) business days of receipt. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall return all materials with an explanation of what is required to make the application complete. When the application is determined to be complete, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of all submitted documents to the City’s appointed consultants in architecture, engineering and planning. The Zoning Administrator shall obtain written comment on the application from each consultant before the scheduled Planning Commission review of the application, or before making an administrative approval where authorized.

D)	If a City consultant identifies a failure to meet the standards of this Section, the Zoning Administrator may not administratively approve a permit for the proposal. The Zoning Administrator shall meet with the applicant to attempt to resolve the deficiency, and re-submit any revised or clarified proposal to  the consulting professional who identified the problem for review. If the consultant agrees that the deficiency is corrected, the Administrator may issue the permit.

E)	For applications on a City Council approval track, the Zoning Administrator shall also attempt to resolve any deficiencies noted in consultant review with the applicant prior to the final Council action on the proposal. The Planning Commission and City Council may choose to act on the proposal within their reasonably used discretion, even if the matter is not resolved prior to final action.

F)	All applicants seeking a Zoning Compliance Permit must submit a development plan with their application.

G)	Conditional Uses. All elements of a development plan which require conditional use permit approval may be combined into a single conditional use permit application for the proposal, with a single applicable CUP fee for review and processing in addition to other required application fees. Portions of proposed buildings which may be used for permitted or conditional uses need not apply for conditional use approval as part of the development application, unless the tenant, occupant or owner of the space is known at the time of application and will need a conditional use permit. All applications for conditional use permit approval shall otherwise be processed in the same manner as other applications for conditional use permit approval, using the procedures and criteria stated in Section 17.5 of the Zoning Ordinance.

H)	Any variances requested in connection with a Gateway District development proposal shall be processed in the same manner as variances from other Sections of the Zoning Ordinance, using the procedures and criteria stated in Section 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance
 
I)	Any applicant aggrieved by a decision, mandate or other action of the Zoning Administrator may appeal the matter in the manner provided by Section 17.7 of the Zoning Ordinance.

9.2.3	Existing Uses and Structures at Adoption of Chapter. The standards generally applicable under Section 16.3 of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to existing structures and uses located within the Gateway District upon the adoption of this Section, or existing on land later added to the Gateway District by re-mapping on the date a new zoning map becomes effective. An applicant seeking a building permit to materially alter or expand a legally nonconforming structure within the Gateway District shall submit a partial development plan, containing information as requested by the Zoning Administrator to allow review of the alteration or expansion’s compliance with Design Review requirements set forth at 9.8 and the Connectivity Requirements set forth at 9.5.3.

9.2.4	Incentives. The City Council may establish incentives which apply to encourage certain types of land use or preservation activity within the Gateway District. The Council may set the incentives by adopting a separate ordinance which identifies clearly the item or items the Council seeks to encourage, the allowance or allowances which the Council is willing to offer applicants, and sufficient criteria to allow the Zoning Administrator and City consultants to evaluate and score applications seeking to apply the incentives and allowances. The following text is an exampleonly:

The City of Gem Lake seeks to improve transit options within the City. Proposals which incorporating public transit options into an overall development plan will receive enhanced civic space credit for the space dedicated to the public transit option.   Space bonuses will apply as follows:
Bus waiting area, uncovered:	2% bonus
Bus waiting area, covered:	4%
Bus waiting area, integrated w/ building:	8%
Bus Rapid Transit access:	10%
Rail access or access to station:	10%
Rail transit station:	30%
Intermodal transit center:	50%
Proposed spaces must meet the criteria for public transit facilities established by the Metropolitan Council in order to
qualify for space bonuses.   The City Council shall approve all requests for transit incentive bonuses. The Zoning
Administrator shall consult with the City Engineer to review and make recommendations on the request for incentive treatment  within  an  application.

The ability to alter or change incentives may not be used to allow a variance from the standards of this Section or the Zoning Ordinance overall. An ordinance establishing or modifying available incentives shall not take effect until 45 days after adoption and publication, and shall not apply to any applications filed with the City prior to the effective date. The ordinance creating incentives may, at the City Council’s discretion, provide a method for an applicant to propose an incentive as part of a development application in lieu of only seeking a modification of dimension or placement standards through amendment or variance.

9.3	lacement of Subzones and Integration with Neighboring Zones

9.3.1	The Gateway district is composed of four sub-zones:
A)	Neighborhood Edge
B)	Neighborhood General
C)	Neighborhood Mixed-Use
D)	Neighborhood Center

9.3.2	Mapping requirements. The City Council shall assign the sub-zones to land included within the Gateway District. The Council shall assign land to each sub-zone without reference to existing lot lines or tax parcels contained within the Gateway District.  In assigning land to sub-zones, the Council shall at a minimum:

A)	assign all land lying within 200 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or Executive Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Edge; and

B)	not assign any land lying within 450 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or Executive Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Center.
 
Figure 1: Gateway District Sub-Zone Map



City of Ge111 Lak e
GatcH•ay Zo11e
Sub Zones f.1ap

a ll	•












IJ










1·	F
 
!-va
 
I
na1S'
 
L1Q
 	I 	
 
·•   ·
 



May 2009
 
........
-,..._C....M-i­
r..--J "-" -	.IO
-·S.Z-
......."'°"'*'
 




SEH
 
'...,";";..c:";";.. --
 


-......,."*'-.._V. <WU1
-._.., .,_C-IM::e
 


Figure 1
 
9.4	Thoroughfare standards. Streets, sidewalks and other pedestrian or bicycle ways within dedicated rights-of-way shall be considered and designed together as “thoroughfares.” The street and pedestrian circulation system in any development plan shall be used to organize and define the community, acting as functional and visual links between neighborhoods, the neighborhood center, civic and commercial areas and open space. The circulation system shall be based on a defined, interconnected network to provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes, control through traffic, limit lot access to streets of lower traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the community.

9.4.1	eneral street design principles. The following principles should be followed in street layout and design:

A)	Local street lengths should be short.

B)	Streets should be designed with gentle curves and changes in grade to break the sight line of the road into smaller visual elements and cause drivers to slow down.

C)	Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians should be used to encourage slow traffic speeds.

9.4.2	Thoroughfare Types Permitted by Subzone. The thoroughfare design in a given area of the Gateway District is determined in part by the subzone to which the land is assigned. Right-of-way dedication and the use of the right- of-way is set forth in the Thoroughfare Type diagrams at Figures 2 and 3. The presence of trees within a diagram indicates a requirement to plant “street trees” within the indicated area. A development plan’s thoroughfares shall comply with the dimensional and layout standards applicable to each thoroughfare type. The following Thoroughfare Types are allowed in each sub-zone:

i)	Neighborhood Edge:  A, B, Alley;
ii)	Neighborhood General: A, B, C*, Alley, Boulevard
(Type C only allowed within 250’ of Mixed-Use sub-zone boundary);
iii)	Neighborhood Mixed-Use: C, D, Alley, Boulevard;
iv)	Neighborhood Center: D, Alley, Boulevard; Scheuneman Road and Hoffman Road should be treated as Type D thoroughfares in plans.
(May also propose a Plaza with a thoroughfare as regulated by Figure 5).

NOTE:  County Road E and Highway 61 are not included within these Thoroughfare Types and should not be used or depicted as “frontage” for any Building Type when using this Code.
 
Figure 2: Light-Use Thoroughfare Types


Type A: Residential Access Lane

Average Daily Traffic:	Less than 250

Travel Lanes:	1, 14’ - 16’
Parking:	Parallel, one or both sides Sidewalks:	One or both sides, 5’ minimum
May not cover side ROW Curb/Gutter:	None.





 
Sidewalk 5’ min
 
Parking 7’
 
Travel Lane 14’ to 16’
 
Roadside ROW 10’ minimum
 

Overall ROW: 41’ to 43’

Type B: Low-Volume Residential Street

Average Daily Traffic:	250—750

Travel Lanes:	2, 8’ - 10’   Parking:	Parallel, both sides
Sidewalks:	Both sides, 5’ minimum
May not cover side ROW Curb/Gutter:	None required.




 
Sidewalk 5’ min
 
Parking 7’
 
Travel Lane Min: 8’
 
Travel Lane Max: 10’
 
Parking 7’
 
Side ROW 10’ minimum
 

 


Type: Alley
 
Overall ROW: 50’ to 54’
 

Runs behind lots and buildings to provide off-street parking, loading, utility and waste-hauling access.

Travel Lane:	12’ to 16’
ROW:	20’
Curb/Gutter:	Inverted curb for asphalt;
None for concrete







Travel Lane: 12’ to 16’

Overall ROW: 20’
 
Figure 3: Medium-Use Thoroughfare Types


Type C: Medium Volume Residential Street

Average Daily Traffic:	750—1500

Travel Lanes:	2, 10’ - 12’
Parking:	Both sides, parallel or angle Sidewalks:	Both sides, 6’ minimum
May cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: Required for fully paved side ROW, op- tional if grass or permeable surface used for parking lane and/or side ROW.







Type D: Medium-Volume Commercial Street

Average Daily Traffic:	750+

Travel Lanes:	2-3, 12’ - 16’ with optional
10’ center turn lane
Parking:	Both sides, angle
Sidewalks:	Both sides, 12’ minimum
Must cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter:	Required; pedestrian bump-outs required at intersections (see Boulevard diagram)





Overall ROW: 80’ to 94’

Type: Boulevard

Non-roadway portions considered Civic Space. Average Daily Traffic:	750+
 











Side ROW 20’ Walkway min.
8’
 











Park. 7’
 











Lane min.
12’
 











Greenway: 15’ min
 











Lane max.
16’
 











Parking 16’
 











Side ROW 20’ Planting Strip Min. 6’
 
Travel Lanes:	2-3, 12’ - 16’ with optional
10’ center turn lane
Parking:	Both sides, angle Sidewalks:	Both sides, 12’ minimum
Must cover side ROW
Curb/Gutter: Required only when side ROW more than 50% impervious surface. Pedes- trian bump-out required at intersections and every 150’ for angle parking.
 
Overall ROW: 93’ - 129’
 
9.5	Civic space standards. The City of Gem Lake’s visioning plan requires well-planned and functional open spaces, preservation areas, parks and gathering places, which are generally referred to in this Section as “civic space.” An application’s development plan shall dedicate or otherwise set aside sufficient land for public civic space. At a minimum, 10% of the total acreage in development shall be identified on the plans as Civic Space. The acreage of wetlands protected by state statute and any wetland buffer required by a governing watershed district shall be excluded from calculations of “total acreage in development” and from the calculation of the 10% dedication to civic space. A Civic Space shall conform to one or more of the Civic Space Templates at Figures 4 and 5. The Civic Space Type used to design a given Civic Space shall be indicated on any plan or diagram intended to show compliance with this section.

Figure 4: Civic Spaces
	

A













B	











C	A.	Passive Open Space
B.	Preserved Tree Line
C.	Green/Small Park


A.	Passive Open Space. The  concentration of open spaces which separates more urbanized areas from less dense residential and naturalized areas.  This open space has no required features but may contain environmental preserves, paths and trails, and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed.
B.	Preserved Tree Line.   Area used to preserve tree
lines indicated on the City’s Existing Land Use Plan or areas with pre-existing tree screening of 50% opac- ity or greater.
C.	Green/Small Park. An open space available for recreation and neighborhood gathering. Area may be unimproved or used for playground, community gar-
den, pergola, picnic areas, or similar park activities. The civic space is defined by at least one through street and should be accessible via sidewalk or path.	




Park Type	

Area (acres)	Min. Streets Fronting Park	Type Streets Fronting Park		
	
Min.	
Max				
Green	0.1	1	1	A, B		
Passive	N/A	N/A	1	Any		
Treeline	N/A	N/A	0	Any		
	
D. Neighborhood Park

A larger open area available for recreation, which may include facilities for structured activities such as athletic fields or courts (limited to 40% of space). The landscape shall provide paved paths and trails, and some combina- tion of open lawn, trees, and open shelters.	




Park Type	
Area (acres)	Min. Streets Fronting Park	Type Streets Fronting Park		
	
Min.	
Max				
N’hd Park	.3	5	2	B, C, Blvd		
 
9.5.1	No cash payment in lieu of civic space may be approved for applications within the Gateway District.
9.5.2	The minimum width required for any Building Type under Figures 6 through 15 may be reduced by up to 30% if the area which would have been contained within that building lot before the reduction is transferred to a Civic Space located within 1/4 mile of the lot.
9.5.3	For Civic Spaces which include at least one automotive traffic lane or access, the area of the traffic lane or access is not applied toward the 10% minimum requirement. Areas within the Civic Space, areas within a thorough- fare adjacent to the Civic Space, or approved areas in lots adjacent to the Civic Space, which are dedicated for public or shared parking can apply toward the requirement if designed in conformity with applicable Thoroughfare or Building Type templates and the Parking regulations in Section 9.9.

Figure 5: Civic Spaces

E.	Square 	

An open space, available for unstructured recreation and civic pur- poses. A square is spatially defined by roadway and building front- ages. Its landscape shall consist of paved paths, lawns and formally arranged trees. The paved paths within the square shall be distin- guishable from surrounding sidewalks and streets by choice of ma- terials and design.

Improvements such as fountains, pergolas, bandshells, kiosks and pedestrian amenities such as benches may be installed within the square.

 



Park Type
 
Area (acres) Min.	Max
 

Min. Streets Fronting Park
 

Type Streets Fronting Park
 
Buildings adjacent to or across the street from the square shall treat the square (or street shared with the square) as the building’s pri- mary frontage.

Angle parking on at least two of the streets fronting the square is
 
Square	0.4	1	3	C, D,
Blvd.
 
encouraged  to  provide  additional  on-street  parking  for  nearby buildings.
 

F.	Plaza 	

An open space, available for civic purposes and commercial activi- ties. A plaza shall be spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement and formally ar- ranged trees. Materials used to pave the plaza shall be different than the adjacent sidewalk and street, and should complement the colors used in nearby buildings. It shall be located near the inter- section of important streets.  The plaza itself may be configured as a street, with a single travel lane no wider than 14’ placed between pedestrian-only walkways of at least equal width..

 





Park Type
 



Area (acres) Min.	Max
 



Min. Streets Fronting Park
 



Type Streets Fronting Park
 
Improvements such as bandshells or similar public gathering spaces are permitted. Benches and similar pedestrian amenities shall be installed.

Adjacent buildings shall treat the plaza as the primary frontage. When approved as part of a Development Plan, a portion of the
 
Plaza	0.1	1	1	D, Blvd.
 
plaza shall be designated as available to commercial uses which front the plaza(such as outdoor seating for restaurants).
 
9.6	Building Type Standards.

9.6.1	New construction in the Gateway District shall conform to one of the following Building Types:
A)	Single Family Detached House (Figure 6)
B)	Single-Family Attached Housing
1.	Twin Home (Figure 7)
2.	Townhouse/Rowhouse (Figure 8)
C)	Apartment/Condominium (Figure 9)
D)	Bungalow Court (Figure 10)
E)	Live/Work Unit (Figure 11)
E)	Mixed Use Building (Figure 12)
F)	Commercial
1.	Retail/Office Building (Figure 13)
2.	Single Use Building (Figure 14)
a.	With Liner Building (Figure 14a)
b.	With Collar Uses (Figure 14b)
3.	Auto-Oriented Layout (Figure 15)

9.6.2	Use of Building Type Templates. Figures 6 through 15 contain all regulatory information governing the dimensions of lots and the dimensions, setbacks, height, mass, placement and use of buildings in the District. The City’s review of a development application shall primarily apply the information contained in the applicable Building Type Templates. Terms and concepts used within the Building Type Templates are further defined as follows:

A)	Frontage Street. The Thoroughfare Type on which the Building Type may be placed. The building must be oriented toward the frontage street and have its primary entrance on the permitted frontage street, unless an alternative is allowed by the terms of the Building Type chosen. “Width” is measured along frontage street; “depth” measured perpendicular to the frontage street. For purposes of placing buildings, Highway 61 and County Road E are not frontage streets, and the property boundary with those roads’ rights-of-way should be aligned as the rear lot line to the greatest extent possible. Parking lots may abut the Highway 61 or County Road E rights-of-way, subject to the landscaping requirements of the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance.

B)	Height by Story. The permitted height of any building is determined by the number of stories allowed and built. The height of each story is determined by the space between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or the ceiling (peaked roof) or roof (flat roof) above for top stories. A story must have a minimum height of 12 feet and a maximum height of 15 feet; buildings with assigned ground-floor retail and commercial shall have a ground-floor height of at least 15 feet and no more than 20 feet. The top of a peaked roof is limited to the average story height of the building, measured from the ceiling of the topmost floor to the highest gable of the roof. Half-stories (finishing the space, if any, between the roof and the topmost full-story ceiling) are permitted for all building types in all subzones.

C)	Building types with specified height limits shall be measured from the average elevation of the sidewalk on which the building’s primary entrance is located and the coping of a flat roof or the deck line of a mansard roof.

D)	Basements. All building types are permitted to have basements if it is technically feasible to build basements on the chosen building site. A walk-out basement is considered a “story” for height regulation, but other kinds of basements are not counted against the height of the building.

E)	Footprint. The building footprint is the area occupied by the horizontal projection of the building’s first floor, excluding the floor area of attached garages and porches or decks built as allowed encroachments into setbacks. Within the building envelope defined in the Building Type Template, the horizontal projection of upper floors may not extend more than ten feet in any direction over the footprint, except for portions of the upper floor built directly over an attached garage.

F)	Mass, Ratio. When used on a Building Type Template, the percentages listed in the Mass table define the maximum area allowed the horizontal projection of one floor in relation to the area of the horizontal
 
projection of the building footprint and attached garage, if any.

G)	Building Placement Diagram. The diagram on each Building Type Template provides regulatory information on the setbacks, build-to lines (lines on which some or all of the building façade must be placed), the “building envelope” in which the footprint may be placed, frontage types, permitted encroachments of porches, decks and balconies, placement of accessory structures, and other items which regulate the built environment on a given lot.

9.6.3	Combination of Building Types on Single Lot. The Building Type templates regulate lot size, but it is not required that each building be on a separately conveyed lot. If multiple building types are proposed, the dimensional standards should be applied as though the lot were being divided. Any total surface coverage or building footprint standards may be combined among all of the buildings included on a particular lot.

9.6.4	New Building Types. New building types may be proposed in the manner of other amendments to the Zoning Code using the procedure in Section 17.6 of the Zoning Ordinance. A proposal must contain all information included in existing analogous Building Types, including but not limited to the dimensional standards, use designations, and frontage requirements.

9.6.5	Use Regulation in the Gateway District. The Gateway District’s regulatory focus is first upon the form of each building and its relation to the surrounding environment. This section regulates the use of space within buildings, except to the extent that any structure or land use existed as a legally nonconforming use prior to the adoption of this Section, as a matter secondary to the built form. The use of land in the District is regulated by the Building Type Templates and is directly related to the building form.

A)	General Terms and Permitted Uses. The Building Type Templates assign categories of uses to certain floors of a building. When multiple use categories are listed and separated by a slash (such as “office/retail”), the uses may be combined on the floor at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. When multiple use categories are stated as alternatives (such as “office or residential”) the floor may only be assigned one category of use, at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. Building Type Templates may also contain specific exclusions or limitations which modify the application of a use category to the particular building.  The categorical terms are defined as follows:

Residential.       Premises for long-term human dwelling.

Office. Non-residential  premises  used  for  administrative,  clerical,  professional  or  similar activities. Office as used in this section includes medical and dental offices used by five (5) or fewer medical principals (doctor, dentist, chiropractor or similar professional).

Retail.       Premises for the sale of merchandise and food service.  For purposes of this Section, banks with teller service are considered “retail” instead of “office.” Athletic clubs and fitness centers that are not the primary use of the building space are considered a “retail” use. Certain personal service businesses are considered “retail” if not the primary use of a building: barbershop/beauty salon; clothing rental and dry cleaning pickup (but not on-site processing); and tailor shops.

Commercial. Premises for the conduct of the following activities, which are not included within the meaning of “office” or “retail” for purposes of this Section: Athletic club/fitness center (when primary or only use of building space); business school or trade school; veterinary clinic; funeral home; hotel; recreational primary use (such as a bowling alley); cabinet and carpentry shops, heating, plumbing or electrical sales and service; printing shop, upholstery shop, warehousing. Conditional uses of space assigned as “commercial” are: automotive repair and service (including gas stations); car wash; light industrial uses which manufacture, process, store and distribute foods and materials not likely to create offensive noise, odors, vibrations, dust smoke, heat, glare or other objectionable influences and are in general dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere.
 
Figure 6: Single Family Detached House



Definition:  One dwelling unit on its own lot, detached from other adjoining lots. It may have an attached or detached garage, and an ac- cessory unit to the rear of the property.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	200’ minimum, no maximum Width/Depth:	1:1 minimum, no maximum Frontage Street::	Type A or Type B
 
Alley:	Permitted, not required

Parking:	2 off-street spaces
(street parking not applicable)

Total impervious   Surface coverage:	40%
 

Height and Use

Minimum Height:	1 story
Maximum Height:	2 stories
 


2	Residential

 
Building Disposition

Building Footprint:
Footprint: lesser of 10% of lot or 2,500 sf
 
Residential/
1	Parking
 

 


Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
 
Modifications and Exclusions:

Building may have attached or detached ga-
 
Lot line
 
25’ Build-to line






Encroachments allowed (15’ front, 10’ corner side)







Building Envelope
 



15’ sideyard on corner street

Primary building located in front 40% of lot



10’ interior sideyard







Driveway may be located in side setback
 








No rear setback with alley










1/6 of lot depth (max. 50’) rear setback without alley
 
rage of up to 800 sf as part of initial proposal or by separate building permit approval. Lar- ger garages may be approved by CUP. Lots for this type may have a separate shed in ad- dition to any garage, up to 200 sf, without need for any permit approval. Larger sheds (up to 1,000 sf) may be approved by CUP.

May apply to use building for Bed & Break- fast as a conditional use in Neighborhood General subzone.

See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type.
 
Figure 7: Twin Home



Definition: A structure with two dwelling units sharing a common wall or stacked one over the other, architecturally presented as a larger single-family house in a typical neighborhood setting.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	150’ minimum, no maximum Width/Depth:	1:1 minimum, no maximum Frontage Street:	Type B or Type C
 
Alley:	Permitted, not required

Parking:	2 off-street spaces per unit (street parking not applicable)

Total impervious   Surface coverage:	40%
 

Height and Use

Minimum Height:	1 story
Maximum Height:	2 stories
 

2	Residential

 

Building Disposition


Building Footprint:
Footprint: lesser of 15% of lot or 3,000 sf


Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
 
Residential/
1	Parking



Modifications and Exclusions:
Not authorized in Neighborhood Edge. Building may have attached or detached ga-
rage of up to 800 sf as part of initial proposal
 
Lot line
 
25’ Build-to line





Encroachments allowed (15’ front, 10’ corner side)


Building Envelope
 




15’ sideyard on corner street


Primary building located in front 50%
of lot	No rear
setback with alley


10’ interior sideyard
 
or by separate building permit approval. No larger garage is permitted with this type. Property may have a separate shed of up to 200 sf without need for any permit approval. A larger shed may be approved by CUP in the Neighborhood General subzone only.

May apply to use building for Bed & Break- fast or for unassisted Senior Housing as a conditional use.

See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type.
 

Driveway may be located in side setback

1/6 of lot depth (max. 50’) rear setback without alley
 
Figure 8: Townhouse/Rowhouse



Definition:  An individual structure on a parcel with a rear yard and individual (standalone or tuckunder) garage accessed from an alley, oc- cupied by one primary residence in an array of at least three such struc- tures side by side along the common frontage.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	30’ minimum, 80’ maximum (see below for courtyard lot)

Width/Depth:	No set ratio

 
Frontage Street:	Type B or Type C Alley:	Required
Parking:	2 off-street spaces per unit
(street parking not applicable)

Total Impervious  Surface Coverage:	75%






Building Disposition


Building Footprint:
Footprint: limited to of 70% of lot


Building Placement and Relation to Streets:

STREET
 

Height and Use

Minimum Height:	2 stories Maximum Height:	B: 2 stories
C: 3 stories





3


2


1



Modifications and Exclusions:

Not authorized in Neighborhood Edge subzone.
 

May have combined lot width equal to maximum x 50% of units



Encroachments permitted up to sidewalk; buildings
 

Sidewalk





No sideyard or
 




Building Envelope
 


5’ front and corner lot setback/ build-to line
 

Building may have attached or detached garage of up to 800 sf as part of initial proposal or by separate building permit approval. Property may have a separate shed of up to 200 sf without need for
 
required to
address public right-of way
 
Common landscape feature
 
setback between townhouse/ rowhouse units




10’ setback to non- townhouse lot
 
Allowed
Encroachments: Front: To sidewalk
Rear: 10’






Separate or tuck-under garage
 








Corner lot must build to rear lot
 
any permit approval.

May apply to use building for Bed & Breakfast or for unassisted Senior Housing as a conditional use.

See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and  conditional  uses  associated  with
 
Total building footprint limited to 60% of lot area
(excl. accessory bldgs.)
 
line
 
this Building Type
 



Common Yard Arrangement	Separate Lot Arrangement
 
Figure 9: Apartment/Condominium



Definition:  A structure with more than two dwelling units on a single lot.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	125’ minimum, 200’ maximum
Width/Depth:	4:1 minimum, 1:4 maximum Frontage Street:	Type C or Type D
Alley:	Required
Parking:	2 off-street spaces per unit (street parking not applicable)
 
Total Impervious  Surface Coverage:	70%





Building Disposition
 


Height and Use

Minimum Height:	2 stories Maximum Height:	C: 3 stories
D: 4 stories
 

Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: limited to 65% of lot
Max. Ratio of Each Story (see 9.6.2(F))	4

3


2


1


 

Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
 
Modifications and Exclusions:
 

 












Garden wall 42” high min.
54” high max







5’ build-to line
 

12’ Build-To Line, Side Setback



Encroachment allowed on sideyard of corner lot, bldg. must address street



Doorway

12’ Side setbacks

20’ max setback

Dooryard/Terrace



12’ Side setbacks

25’ max setback

Forecourt
 





Building in corner lot condition must build to rear lot line









Parking attached, tuck-under or detached

Min. 1/6 of lot left open
 
Building in Neighborhood General sub- zone may have additional residential features such as separate sheds for resi- dents.

May use building for unassisted Senior Housing without city approval, or as an assisted-living facility as a conditional use.

See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type
 
Figure 10: Bungalow Court


Definition:  Four or more smaller standalone homes around a shared central court or walk on a single lot, with pedestrian access to the street.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Size:	.1 acre minimum per unit

Lot Width:	100’ minimum, no maximum Depth/Width:	no set ratio required
 
Frontage Street:	Type C, Boulevard Alley:	Required
Parking:	2 off-street spaces per unit
(street parking not applicable)

Total Impervious  Surface Coverage:	50%
 


Height and Use

Minimum Height:	1 stories
Maximum Height:	2 stories





2	Residential
 


1	Residential

 
Building Disposition

Building Footprint:
Footprint: min 750 sf, max 1,500 sf per unit.

Building Placement and Relation to Streets:

10’ front build-to line







Common landscape feature











Total building footprint limited to 40% of lot area (excl. accessory bldgs.)
 












Encroach- ments permitted up to sidewalk;
buildings
required to address
public right- of way
 


Modifications and Exclusions:

Building may provide detached garage of up to 800 sf per unit as part of initial pro- posal or by separate building permit ap- proval. Larger garages may be approved as part of initial development proposal. Lots in Neighborhood General may have a separate shed in addition to any garage, up to 200 sf, without need for any permit ap- proval.

May apply to use one or more units for Bed & Breakfast (mixed-use subzone only) or as an assisted-living facility as a condi- tional use.

See Figure 16 for full list of accessory and conditional uses associated with this Build- ing Type.
 

Figure 11: Live/Work Unit

Definition:  Integrated rowhouse-style dwelling unit and ground floor working space, consisting of at least 3 units arrayed side-by side along the primary frontage.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	30’ minimum, 80’ maximum Width/Depth:	No set ratio
Frontage Street:	Type B, Type C, Boulevard Alley:	Required
Parking:	2 off-street spaces per dwelling (street parking not applicable) 2 spaces per 1000 sf office uses 4 spaces per 1000 sf retail uses

Total Impervious  Surface Coverage:	75%	
	Height and Use
	
Min. Height:	2 stories Max. Height:	B: 2 stories
C/Blvd: 3 stories Office/Retail:	400 sf min., entry from
street frontage req’d.






3


2


1
Building Disposition		

Building Footprint:
Footprint: limited to 70% of lot


Building Placement and Relation to Streets:	

Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over sidewalk






Arcade

5’ max. setback if adjacent lot not built or built with dissimilar building with residen- tial use.	Entrance façade of building	Continuous, unoc-	May have entryway   set back maximum 9’ from lot     cupied cover (i.e.	encroach up to 6’ onto line; type limited to 15% of	awning) at least 9’	sidewalk, max. 30% of block frontage	over sidewalk	bldg. frontage.

STREET



Dooryard	Gallery	Storefront


No setback if similar type
(rowhouse, live/work) in	Units may have deck adjacent lot.	or patio encroach-
ments up to 10’ into
rear yard, or over attached/tuckunder parking.






Tuck-under, attached, or de- tached garages accessed from alley.



ALLEY	




Lot line = Build-to line






5’ corner lot setback on Type B street; no setback on Type C








Corner lot building must build to rear lot line.	
Modifications and Exclusions:

Not authorized in Neighborhood Edge sub- zone.
Retail use of first floor space is only allowed Boulevard in the Neighborhood Mixed-Use
subzone.

See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and office/retail accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type
 
Figure 12: Mixed Use Building


Definition:  A structure with a vertical mixture of uses.  The upper floors may be used for office or residential uses and the ground floor may be used for office or retail.

 
Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	150’ minimum Width/Depth:	4:1 minimum, 1:4 maximum Frontage Street:	Type C, Type D, Boulevard Alley:	Required
Parking:	2 off-street spaces per dwelling (street parking not applicable) 2 spaces per 1000 sf office uses 4 spaces per 1000 sf retail uses
 











Height and Use
 
Total Impervious
Surface Coverage:	80%




Building Disposition
 


Min. Height:	3 stories
Max. Height:	C/Blvd: 3 stories
D: 4 stories Office/retail:	400 sf min.
 

 
Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: limited to 65% of the lot.


Mass Scenarios (I
 



4
Ratio of Each Story
(see 9.6.2(F))	3
2
 






Building Placement and Relation to Streets:
 


1



Modifications and Exclusions:
 

Continuous, occupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over sidewalk
 
Entrance façade of building set back maxi- mum 9’ from lot line; type limited to 15% of block frontage







No minimum setback; 5’ maximum setback
 
Continuous, unoccupied cover
(i.e. awning) at least 9’ over sidewalk







Units may have deck or patio encroachments up to 10’ into rear yard, or over attached/ tuckunder parking.
 
May have entryway encroach up to 6’ onto sidewalk, max. 30% of bldg. frontage.
 





Lot line = Build- to line





5’ corner lot setback on Type B street; no setback on Type C
 

Residential component may be used as an assisted living facility as a conditional use, and restricted to senior housing community with- out permit.

See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and office/retail accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type.
 


 
Tuck-under, attached, or detached garages accessed from alley.
 


Corner lot building must build to rear lot line.
 




 







	Office/Parking
	Office/Retail/Parking
	Office/Retail/Parking



 

Entrance façade of
 

Continuous,
 

May have entryway
 
May be oriented using Building Placement
 

Figure 14: Single-Use Building

Definition:  A building designed for occupancy by retail, service or office uses on the ground floor with an optional mezzanine. May also be used as template for placing a standalone parking structure in a pro- posed development

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Width:	60’ minimum; 300’ maximum

Width/Depth:	4:1 minimum, 1:4 maximum Frontage Street:	Type D (w/o liner bldg) Alley:	Permitted, not required
Parking:	4 spaces per 1,000 sf of retail 2 spaces per 1,000 sf of other

Total Impervious Surface Coverage: 80%	
	Height and Use
	
Maximum Height: 35 feet; for application of massing rule, portion of building over 20 feet is considered 2nd story.

35’
2	Office/Retail/
20’	Commercial/Parking
1


Modifications and Exclusions:

Alternate placements and alignments are al- lowed by use of Liner Building (Figure 14a), Collar Building (Figure 14b), or Auto- Oriented Layout (Figure 15).
Building Disposition		

Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: maximum 60% of lot


Building Placement and Relation to Streets:

Entrance façade of	Continuous,	May have entryway	
Continuous, occupied cover    building set back maxi-	unoccupied cover
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over     mum 9’ from lot line; type     (i.e. awning) at least
sidewalk	limited to 15% of block	9’ over sidewalk frontage




Maintain sidewalk integ- rity over driveway access.







No setback unless needed for parking access




10’ max setback for parking access and 30’ max for access and side parking if no alley or side- street access. Side parking may begin 10’ to rear of front façade.	encroach up to 6’
onto sidewalk, max.
30% of bldg. frontage.	“Commercial” uses in any single-use building
arrangement are allowed on sites east of Highway 61 only.  A single-use building may
Lot line =	not be used as an off-sale liquor store.
Build-to line
Outdoor storage and outdoor display and sales of merchandise or equipment may be approved as a conditional use.

No corner lot Surface parking lot landscaping is subject to sidewalk; frontage the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance. A allowed for               parking structure is permitted by CUP.

See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and office/retail accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type.

Corner lot building is not required to build to rear lot line, but parking must be accessed from side street or alley.
 

Figure 14a: Liner Building
Definition: A building that conceals from street view a Single-Use build- ing for which it is impractical to design compliant front or side façades (such as a warehouse or a parking garage) . Liners may have retail or office uses on the ground floor and office or residential uses on the upper floors, if any are built.

Lot Size and Placement:

Lot Dimension: See Single-Use Building Frontage Street: Type C, Type D, Boulevard Alley:	Permitted, not required
Parking:	See Single Use Building;
2 spaces per residential unit if used (on-street parking not applicable)	
	Height and Use
	
Minimum Height: Same as inner bldg.
Maximum Height: 1 story over inner single-use building.




3

35’
2

20’

1



Modifications and Exclusions:
Building Disposition		

Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: within maximum footprint allowed to the Single Use Build- ing on the site, no minimum/maximum size.

Building	Place-
Entrance façade of	Continuous,	May have entryway Continuous, occupied cover    building set back maxi-	unoccupied cover	encroach up to 6’	
(i.e. balcony) at least 9’ over     mum 9’ from lot line; type     (i.e. awning) at least	onto sidewalk, max. sidewalk	limited to 15% of block	9’ over sidewalk	30% of bldg. frontage.
frontage	Can only be constructed in connection with a
single-use building.   The liner building itself
Lot line =	may be separated from the Single-Use Build-
Build-to line
Maintain sidewalk integ-	ing by up to 20’ to provide an access drive or
rity over driveway access.	pedestrian arcade, provided that the Single-
Use  Building  remains  shielded  from  street view.
No corner lot
setback from	See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
sidewalk; frontage
encroachments	office/retail  accessory  and  conditional  uses
allowed for
No setback unless	entrances.	associated with this Building Type.
needed for parking
access




10’ max setback for	Corner lot
parking access and	building is not
30’ max for access	required to build
and side parking if	to rear lot line, but
no alley or side-	parking must be
street access.  Side	accessed from side
parking may begin	street or alley.
10’ to rear of front façade.
 

Figure 14b: Collar Building

Definition: Structure(s) accompanying a commercial use with large parking requirements, intended to maintain storefronts and entrances on the public street. A Collar Building configuration permits an excep- tion to Design Standards, allowing the primary entrance of the Single- Use Building to face an interior parking lot instead of the frontage street. The Collar Building can be integrated with the Single Use Build- ing, built with common walls, or separated by up to 20’ for vehicle ac- cess or a pedestrian arcade.  The side and rear facades of the Single-Use
Building which are not screened from the street by the Collar Building must satisfy Design Standards applicable to side and rear façades.

Lot Size and Placement:
See single-use building

Parking: 2 spaces per 1,000 sf of retail/office space; any off-street space required should be shared with central single-use building parking	
	Height and Use
	
Minimum Height: 1 story
Maximum Height: 5’ over inner	sin- gle-use building.



35’

2
20’

1



Modifications and Exclusions

Can only be constructed in connection with a
Building Disposition		

Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: within maximum footprint allowed to the Single Use Build- ing on the site, no minimum/maximum size.	
Build-	ing	single-use building.
Standard set of retail/commercial frontage choices for each separate tenant space. Strongly consider
varying frontage type along façade. Separations in façade up to 8’ are allowed to permit pedestrian
access to sidewalk from rear parking area.	The minimum height of a collar building is
measured by use of a “story.”  However, the
Lot line =
Build-to line	interior of the building is not required to have
a second story floor in order to exceed 20 feet;   the   building   (and   individual   tenant
No setback from      spaces within the building) may be open for
side street	its entire height.
frontage/parking
area access drive.
If pedestrian way used, the front façade entrances remain the “primary entrances” for	Parking area
application of design standards.	access drive may	See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and
be up to 30’ to
accommodate	office/retail  accessory  and  conditional  uses
side parking,	associated with this Building Type.
beginning at a
line set back 10’
from the front façade.

Side façade beyond depth of collar on frontage can be collar, single-use building, or combination of both.

No requirement
No requirement to separate collar	to build to rear
from single-use building; may	lot line; parking
separate buildings for pedestrian	must be
walkway from parking area to	screened in
collar building entrances.	accordance with
design stan-
dards.
 

Figure 15: Auto-Oriented Layout

Definition:  Alternative layout standard for Single-Use Buildings and Re- tail/Office Buildings designed and intended for occupancy by automotive service businesses using drive-through lanes, service bays, or a combina- tion thereof.

Lot Size and Placement:
Lot Dimension:	See Template for building used..

Frontage Street:	Type D

Alley:	Permitted, not required

Parking:	See template for building used For automotive services:   Greater of 1 space per 1,000 sf or 3 per service bay

Total Impervious  Surface Coverage:	80%	
	Height and Use
	
Maximum Height: See Type Template for applicable building.


Modifications and Exclusions:

Alternative layout in this Template is avail- able through conditional use permit, either for an automotive-oriented use (such as auto repair or other auto services) or for a drive- through service window. A Retail/Office building type or Single Use Building with a Liner Building may employ this layout along any Type D thoroughfare; a proposed Sin- gle-Use Building standing alone or with a Collar Building may request this layout east of Highway 61 only.

See Figure 17 for a full list of residential and office/retail accessory and conditional uses associated with this Building Type.
Building Disposition		

Building Footprint and Mass:
Footprint: See template for building used.

Building Placement and Relation to Streets:

As drive-through for permitted retail use, may use setbacks shown below for access, but otherwise must comply with applicable build-to line and façade rules for building type. For auto-specific uses, no specific build-to line for front or side facades. Front facades must comply with design standards (by itself or with use of liner building). Side facades may have service bay openings if set back 25’ or more from sidewalk. Access drives must preserve integrity of sidewalk.	

 
Figure 16: Building Use Matrix: Residential Buildings and Lots 	

 
SF Detached House
 
Twin Home	Townhouse/ Rowhouse
 
Apartment/Condominium	Bungalow Court
 

	Edge	General	General	M-U	General	M-U	General	M-U	Center	General	M-U
Accessory Structures/Uses

Garage,  less than 800 sf	

P	

P	

P	

P	

P	

P	

*	

*	

*	

P	

P
Garage, 800 sf or larger	CUP	CUP	*	*	1	1	P	P	P	1	1
Shed, less than 200 sf	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	*	*	A	*
Shed, 200-1000 sf	CUP	CUP	CUP	*	CUP	*	CUP	*	*	*	*
Storage of large vehicles	CUP	CUP	CUP	*	CUP	*	*	*	*	*	*
Deck or Patio	P	P	P	P	P	P	*	*	*	P	P
Pool, tennis court or similar	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Conservatory/Greenhouse	P	P	P	P	P	P	*	*	*	CUP	CUP
Health/fitness facility	*	*	*	*	*	*	P	P	P	CUP	CUP


Alternative Residential Uses

Bed & breakfast

Senior housing (unassisted)	*

n/a	CUP

n/a	CUP

CUP	CUP

CUP	CUP

CUP	CUP

CUP	*

P	*

P	*

P	*

P	CUP

P
Assisted living facility	*	*	*	*	*	*	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP
Occupancy of dwelling unit by more than 3 unrelated indi-
viduals	R	R	R	R	R	R	R	R	R	R	R
Notes:
A = allowed without permit
P = use permitted with initial zoning review or with building permit CUP = conditional use permit required
* = not allowed for this combination
R = as required by Minnesota Statute or requested as a reasonable accommodation under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
Fair Housing Act, or related law.
1 = combined garage for 2 or more units may be approved on initial zoning review
 
Figure 17: Building Use Matrix: Commercial-Use Buildings and Lots 	

Live-Work Unit	Mixed Use Building	Retail/Office	Single Use Building	Liner Building	Collar Building
	Gen- eral	M-U	Gen- eral	M-U	Center	M-U	Center	M-U	Center	M-U	Center	Center
Accessory Structures/Uses												
Detached Garage, 2 or fewer
cars	P	P	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
Detached Parking Structure	*	*	CUP	P	P	CUP	CUP	2	2	3	3	3
Shed, less than 200 sf	A	A	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
Shed, 200-1000 sf	CUP	*	CUP	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
Outdoor storage	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	CUP	CUP	3	3	3
Storage of large vehicles	CUP	CUP	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
Deck or Patio	P	P	1	1	1	CUP	*	*	*	*	*	*
Pool, tennis court or similar	P	P	P	P	P	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
Conservatory/Greenhouse	P	P	P	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	3	3	3
Health/fitness facility (4)	*	*	P	P	P	*	*	*	*	CUP	CUP	*


Alternative Residential Uses	
Senior housing (unassisted)	n/a	n/a	P	P	P	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	*	*	n/a
Assisted living facility	*	*	CUP	CUP	CUP	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	*	*	n/a

 
Notes:
A = allowed without permit
P = use permitted with initial zoning review or with building permit CUP = conditional use permit required
* = not allowed for this combination
1 = combined garage for 2 or more units may be approved on initial zoning
review
 
2 = Parking structure may be primary use of building or otherwise integrated 3 = may be allowed in connection with the single-use building on site
4 = as amenity for residents of building
 
Figure 17: Building Use Matrix: Commercial-Use Buildings and Lots 	

Live-Work Unit	Mixed Use Building	Retail/Office	Single Use	Liner Building	Collar
			Building		Building
 


Office-Related Uses
 
General	M-U	General	M-U	Center	M-U	Center	M-U	Center	M-U	Center	Center
 

Showroom(6) Supplemental Retail(6) Related Repair(6)
“Open” hours between 8—11 PM

Retail/Commercial Related	CUP CUP CUP
*	A CUP A CUP	CUP CUP CUP
*	A CUP A CUP	A   A   A CUP	A CUP A CUP	A   A   A CUP	A   A   A CUP	A   A   A CUP	A CUP A CUP	A   A   A CUP	A   A   A CUP
Uses												
Operation between 8 - 11 PM	*	P	*	P	A	P	A	P	A	3	3	3
Operation between 11 PM - 8
AM	*	*	*	*	*	*	CUP	*	CUP	*	3	3
Drive-through window	*	*	*	*	*	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	3	3	3
Outdoor seating(7)	*	P	*	P	P	*	P	P	P	P	P	P
On-sale liquor	*	P	*	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Off-sale liquor	*	CUP	*	CUP	P	P	P	*	*	P	P	P
Live entertainment	*	CUP	*	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP
Single-tenant space over 50,000 sf	n/a	n/a	*	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP
Related repair (6)	*	A	*	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A
Outdoor display and sales (5)	*	*	*	*	*	CUP	CUP	CUP	CUP	3	3	3

 
Notes:
A = allowed without permit
P = use permitted with initial zoning review or with building permit CUP = conditional use permit required
* = not allowed for this combination
3 = may be approved in connection with accompanying single-use building
5 = not permitted as a primary use; not including outdoor restaurant seating
 
6 = limited to 25% of related floor space; non-automotive repair
7 = applicable to restaurants and bars, administrative permit required
 
9.7	Proposals for Undeveloped Land or for Large Redevelopment. An applicant shall follow the following procedure when seeking approval for construction upon land undeveloped at the time this Section was adopted, or upon any plan requiring the platted subdivision of land or the construction of new streets. Proposals which include a major subdivision of land shall proceed through the platting procedure mandated by the Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance, and shall submit the materials requested herein in addition to the materials required to support the application for subdivision.

9.7.1	Pre-application Meeting. Before making a formal application for a land use plan which will involve the creation of new streets or platted subdivision of land, the potential applicant shall prepare sketch plans and preliminary descriptions which reflect the six items addressed below and any additional items required by Section 12.1 of the Subdivision Ordinance. The applicant shall schedule and attend the pre-application meeting described in Section 11.1 of the Subdivision Ordinance, in which the participants shall address all of the following areas:

-	Subdivision plat and related infrastructure;
-	Thoroughfare network and civic space;
-	Building Type placement and disposition;
-	Proposed Design of completed buildings;
-	Potential incentives, if any, which may apply to the proposal; and
-	Likelihood that environmental review under Ordinance 92 is necessary.

9.7.2	Submission of Development Plan. An applicant shall submit an application for a Zoning Compliance Permit and supporting documentation to the City which addresses all components of the proposed development. The applicant shall submit twelve (12) sets of all applications and required supporting materials in forms acceptable to the Zoning Administrator, including:

A)	Development Plan.   All attachments to development plans shall be drawn to scale and provide the following information, unless otherwise specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator:

1.	A vicinity map, to include locations of any public streets, railroads, major streams or rivers and other major features within 500 feet of the site.
2.	Boundaries and dimensions shown graphically, along with a written legal description of the property.
3.	Present and proposed topography of the site and adjacent areas within 50 feet by contour lines at intervals of no more than five feet, and directional arrows showing proposed flow of stormwater runoff from the site.
4.	The location of existing and proposed structures, with height and gross floor area noted.
5.	Elevation views of all proposed buildings and structures, with building materials and proposed colors noted.
6.	Phasing plans, where applicable.
7.	Location and dimensions of existing and proposed curb cuts, aisles, offstreet parking and loading spaces, and walkways.
8.	Location, height and material for screening walls and fences, and other screening devices.
9.	Location of all existing and proposed water and sewer facilities and storm drainage systems.
10.	Existing and proposed public streets or rights-of-way, easements, or other reservations of land on the site.
11.	Location and method of screening of outdoor trash storage areas.
12.	Location and size of all proposed signage.
13.	Location and height of proposed lighting facilities.
B)	Subdivision Plat supporting data as required by Section 12 of the Subdivision Ordinance (if subdivision is proposed);
C)	Grading and Filling Plan;
D)	Tree Preservation Plan;
E)	Sediment and Erosion Control Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, as applicable; and
F)	Landscaping Plan.




Gem Lake Zoning Code — Page 50
 
9.7.3	Thoroughfare Network.

A)	Orientation of Thoroughfares. The orientation of streets and pedestrian access should enhance open spaces and prominent buildings and provide for the maximum number of lots with southern exposure. All streets shall terminate at other streets or at public land, except as specified below:

i)	Type A thoroughfares that terminate in cul-de-sacs may be permitted only when topography prevents the use of loop streets.

ii)	Any thoroughfare may terminate in a stub street when the stubs act as connections to future phases of the development or adjacent undeveloped areas. A stub requires a dedication of public right-of-way or similar title restriction encumbering the area on the property from the closest intersection to the phase line or property boundary over which the thoroughfare would run if built out.

B)	Street Layout.

i)	No lot shall be more than 550 feet from a street intersection. A future intersection proposed as part of a later phase of the same development may be used to meet this requirement. Local streets shall be designed to limit and slow through traffic by narrower roadways, short lengths and other geometric configurations.

ii)	Low volume streets (Types A and B) should be aligned to form three-way intersections when possible. Three-way intersections create an inherent right-of-way assignment (the through street receives precedence), which significantly reduces accidents without the use of traffic controls.

iii)	A low volume street that intersects a higher-order street (Types C, D and Boulevard), should be aligned with another street to form a four-way intersection, which can easily be regulated by a stop sign or other traffic control device.

iv)	Right angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 75 degrees.

v)	The roadway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 20 feet for low-volume streets and 30 feet for intersections involving higher-order streets.

a.	Where the intersection of low-volume streets will be controlled by the placement of stop signs, the radius may be reduced to 15 feet.

b.	The intersection of a low-volume street and an alley shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of 10 feet.

vi)	Pedestrian crossing distances at intersections shall be shortened to the greatest extent possible, using curb bump-outs to cover space assigned to parking in other parts of the thoroughfare (see Figure 5, Boulevard, for example), or similar methods to reduce the average time required for a pedestrian to cross the travel lanes of a thoroughfare.

vii)	Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at intersections, unless controlled by traffic signal devices.

a.	For Type C and D streets intersecting low-volume streets the minimum required clear sight distance shall be 120 feet.

b.	For a Type C or D street intersecting another Type C or D street the minimum required clear sight distance shall be 130 feet.

c.	For any street intersecting either County Road E or U.S. Highway 61, the minimum required clear sight distance is subject to the standards of Ramsey County or the Minnesota Department of Transportation..

d.	For Type A and B streets intersecting any other streets the minimum required clear sight distance shall be 15 feet.

C)	Pedestrian Network. Pedestrian sidewalks, paths and walkways shall be provided within the community and shall constitute an integral element of the overall site design. They shall provide safe, convenient and attractive connections to, from and among community focal points, including residential neighborhoods, town and neighborhood centers, transit stops, schools, parks and recreation areas, municipal buildings, and other public facilities.
 
i)	Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets, except for residential access lanes (Type A streets), which may have sidewalks on one side.

ii)	Pedestrian paths shall be landscaped to provide scale, enclosure and shade.

iii)	Intersections of pedestrian paths with streets shall be designed with clearly defined edges. Crosswalks shall be well-lit and defined with contrasting paving materials or striping.

iv)	Sidewalks and paths shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width in residential areas, and 10 feet within commercial and civic areas, where practicable. Where space for the minimum width is not available, the maximum practicable width shall be used.

v)	Within lots, walkways shall provide pedestrian access through parking areas or open space to building entries. Such walkways shall be located and aligned to directly and continuously connect areas and points of pedestrian origin and destination. Such walkways shall be at least 5 feet in width and be delineated by grade separation, planters, or alternate paving material.

vi)	Where the primary pedestrian access to a building or site crosses an internal traffic lane or other automotive access, the pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place priority on pedestrian access and safety. The material and layout shall be continuous as the pedestrian access crosses, with a break in continuity of the automotive paving and not in the pedestrian access way.

vii)	All sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be handicapped accessible. Curb cuts and ramps shall be located at convenient, safe locations for the physically disabled, bicyclists, and people pushing strollers or carts. The location and design of curb cuts and ramps shall meet the requirements of County and State Americans with Disabilities Act ramp standards, and shall avoid crossing or directing pedestrian and bicycle traffic through loading areas, drive-in lanes, and solid waste storage and collection areas.

viii)	Where transit service is available or planned, site plans shall provide pleasant and convenient access to transit stops. Where transit shelters are provided, they shall be placed in locations that promote security through natural surveillance and visibility, and shall be well-lighted and weather-protected.

9.7.4	Civic Space Placement. The plans should identify the 10% or more of the total acreage in development which will be developed as Civic Space. Layout and relation to surrounding thoroughfares should be clearly depicted on the plans. If a development is proposed in phases, the 10% Civic Space requirement shall be calculated for the development as a whole, instead of for each phase. The apportionment of Civic Space dedication may be unbalanced among the proposed phases, though any initial phase of a development must include at least one Civic Space in proportion to the size of the phase. Phased development plans which propose to meet over half of the Civic Space requirement in a second or later phase must include a timetable which shows the development dedicating or building at least half of the required Civic Space within 3 years of initial development approval.

9.7.5	Building Placement Standards. The types of buildings proposed in the plan and their placement within the property is governed by the Building Type Standards set forth at Section 9.6 and depicted in Figures 6 through 15. The plan must depict the types of buildings intended for construction, their proposed disposition, any incentives sought by virtue of the intended design of any buildings or arrangement of building types, and any special requirements or requests for variance required to implement the building placement plan.

9.7.6	Design Review. The Zoning Administrator shall refer all applications requiring evaluation of the Design Standards in 9.10 to the City Architect. The Architect shall review the development plan and supporting documents for conformance with the Design Review guidelines at Section 9.10 and provide written comment to the Zoning Administrator. If any deficiencies are noted by the City Architect in the design when the applying the Design Standards, the Architect shall describe the deficiency and suggest at least one complying alternative.

9.7.7	Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time of development application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and their effect on the overall Development Plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically delegated within the ordinance creating the applicable incentive. The Zoning Administrator shall confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by ordinance or at the Administrator’s best discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make recommendations to the approving authority. If incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall  reach  agreement  on  the  application  of  incentives  prior  to  submitting  the  application  to  the  Planning
 
Commission. If any applied-for incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of the plans to incorporate the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant electing to re-submit plans shall submit a written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358, and other applicable laws and ordinances. The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the re-submitted materials within the timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any applicable time period.

9.8	Plans for Re-development of Single Lots or Small Subdivisions. An applicant shall follow the following procedure when seeking approval for new building construction (not an addition or expansion to an existing building) upon land which was developed at the time of the application, either requires no subdivision or is eligible for minor subdivision approval, and for which no new streets are required. Such applications should be processed for a Zoning Compliance Permit administratively by the Zoning Administrator unless the proposal requires conditional use permit or variance approval.

9.8.1	Suggested Presentation. The plans for this type of development shall use the Building Type templates at Figures 6 through 15, as allowed by the sub-zone in which the property lies. Plans should introduce new lot lines, if any, and then depict the placement and disposition of the proposed building type for each lot.

9.8.2	Required Submissions. The applicant shall submit four (4) sets of the application materials listed in 9.7.2. The Zoning Administrator may allow the applicant to omit certain items if it is clear that they are not applicable to the overall proposal. In all circumstances, the proposal shall include the elements required for review under Sections 9.7.5 (Building Type) and 9.7.6 (Design).

9.8.3	Connectivity requirements. While improvements to an existing roadway are not required, plans under this subsection must indicate how the proposed construction would relate to the roadway if it were reconstructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.7.3. Proposals under this Section 9.8 involving more than one lot shall comply with Section 9.7.3(C). Single-lot proposals must indicate design incorporating the requirements of 9.7.3(C), but only must build the improvements when the adjacent lots on the same side of the right-of-way also have built such improvements or have been approved for construction under this Section.

9.8.4	Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time of development application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and their effect on the overall development plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically delegated within the ordinance creating the applicable incentive. The request for incentive approval does not require City Council approval of the entire plan. The Zoning Administrator shall confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by ordinance or at the Administrator’s best discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make recommendations to the approving authority. If incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall reach agreement on the application of incentives prior to submitting the application to the Planning Commission. If any applied-for incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of the plans to incorporate the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant electing to re-submit plans shall submit a written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358, and other applicable laws and ordinances. The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the re- submitted materials within the timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any applicable time period.

9.8.5	Administrative Approval. If the application satisfies all applicable criteria, the Zoning Administrator shall approve the Zoning Compliance Permit. The applicant shall execute a Development Agreement with the City prior to the receipt of any building permit under the plan.

9.9	Parking Regulations.

9.9.1	On-street parking, either diagonal (angled) or parallel, shall be provided along all streets other than Alleys. Parking is indicated on the Thoroughfare standards at Figures 2 and 3. Where angle parking is permitted or required, the parking may be forward or reverse angle. Parking spaces (other than handicapped spaces) on thoroughfares and on-grade parking lots shall be no wider than 9 feet. Plans for new development and other major subdivisions are encouraged to plan thoroughfares and civic spaces to provide a significant portion of the parking required for planned buildings. On-street parking within 1/8 of a mile of a building entrance may be applied toward that building’s applicable parking requirement.
 
9.9.2	A parking plan shall be included for all buildings, indicating how the parking requirement for each proposed building is met through on-street parking, shared off-street parking or dedicated off-street parking. Reductions in the number of spaces required by the Building Type regulations may be approved if the proposal is supported by a parking study specific to the proposed building(s) and likely tenants. Shared parking proposals are encouraged and should reference the Urban Land Institute’s Shared Parking Guidelines or similar guidance. Plans including off-street parking and loading facilities within the Gateway District shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner. If, upon review, either consultant determines that an alternative to the proposed parking plan is desirable, it will recommend an alternate parking plan to the Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the City
Council for final review and approval.

9.9.3	The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require a contribution of land or money toward community parking facilities in lieu of providing off-street parking facilities on the property to be developed.

9.9.4	On-grade parking areas within lots are prohibited within any front yard setback or in front of the principal building. On-grade parking areas shall be located at the side or the rear of buildings in mid-block areas, and may not be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any public streets (excluding Alleys). Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance.

9.9.5	Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of interlocking pavers or similar materials is strongly encouraged for areas that serve low-impact parking needs, such as remote parking lots, parking areas for periodic uses and parking in natural amenity areas.

9.9.6	Bicycle Parking. Parking plans shall include designed space and facilities for bicycle parking, at a ratio of 1 bicycle parking space for each 4 residential units or 20 required automobile spaces. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located within fifty (50) feet of building entrances and shall be visible from the uses they serve. They shall not be located so as to impede pedestrian or automobile traffic flow or to cause damage to plants and trees from bicycle traffic. The facilities shall be of permanent construction, attached to the ground, and designed to allow the bicycle frame and both wheels to be securely locked to the parking structure. Facilities shall be at least two feet in width and six feet in length, and be placed to allow a minimum of five feet of back-out or maneuver space.


9.10	Design Review Standards. The guidelines established in this section are for the purpose of promoting quality development that is attractive, convenient and compatible with surrounding uses. These guidelines are intended to be general in nature and not to restrict creativity, variety or innovation. However, unless site characteristics or conditions dictate otherwise, Gem Lake’s expectation is that these guidelines be adhered to. In cases where building and site design standards are specific to Building Types, those standards are noted within the Building Type Template.

9.10.1	ite layout guidelines.

A.	Site design shall incorporate existing topography and natural features, such as hillsides, wooded areas and greenways. Important vistas and viewpoints, both from the site and into the site, should be protected and enhanced.

B.	Building arrangement. When multiple buildings are proposed for a site, care should be taken to provide maximum street exposure for all buildings.

C.	Service and docking facilities. Loading, delivery and service bays should be oriented away from existing residences and public streets. When this is impractical, service and docking areas shall be screened from view through the provision of walls, fencing or landscaping.

D.	Drive-through facilities, where permitted, shall be designed with safe and easily understood traffic patterns and shall provide sufficient stacking space, based on requirements of Section 9.9. Drive-through windows should not face public streets; and loudspeakers should not create nuisances for adjacent properties.

E.	Shadowing. Where possible, buildings shall be located so that they minimize shadowing on adjacent properties. A sun and shadow study may be required for any building that is more than 2 ½ stories or 35 feet in height.

9.10.2.	Building placement – Nonresidential and Mixed uses. At least 70 percent of the front facade of any building shall be located on the front build-to line as indicated by the Building Type Template (with the exception of a “dooryard” layout as indicated on the template’s layout diagram). The placement of buildings shall reinforce the street wall, maximize natural surveillance and visibility, enhance the character of the surrounding area and facilitate pedestrian access and circulation. Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building or use
 
served. The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement, provided that any adverse effects shall be mitigated by a masonry wall, decorative fence or planted materials, between 38 and 46 inches in height, which reinforces the street wall.

9.10.3.	Building placement – Residential-only uses. Buildings shall be located so that the front doors of the building or individual units face the public street rather than the interior of the site, unless a courtyard layout is authorized on the Template for the particular building. Parking areas and garages larger than 3 cars shall be located to the rear or interior of the site, or underground. The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement when one or more of the following occurs:

A)	The proposed building has primary or corner frontage on a Type C or Type D street.

B)	Commercial buildings are located across the street from the proposed building.

C)	Unusual or unique site conditions make the requirement impractical.

9.10.4.	Building height and scale. In addition to the height and mass instructions contained within the Building Type Templates, the height and scale of new buildings shall be related to the prevailing scale of surrounding development and shall be compatible with surrounding buildings in roof form and pitch. Larger buildings, where permitted, shall be designed to reflect the same architectural massing and style as other buildings built or proposed within a two-block area. If no other single, large buildings are present or proposed in the area, then the facade of the new building shall be designed to reflect the form, mass and shape of several contiguous smaller buildings within the two block area. The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement if a larger building is proposed, to reduce its apparent size by dividing the building mass into smaller sections, including:

A)	Stepping back or extending a portion of the building façade;

B)	Emphasizing architectural elements, including windows and entries; and

C)	Emphasizing architectural elements of the roof, including dormers, chimneys and gables.

9.10.5.	Building facades. Building facades shall provide architectural detail and shall contain windows at the ground level in order to create visual interest and maximize outdoor surveillance and visibility. Exterior materials and appearance shall be compatible with surrounding buildings.

A)	Front Facades and Entries.

1.	Primary entries to residential buildings shall be emphasized through the use of architectural features such as porches and roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details that express the importance of the entrance. At least 20 percent of the first floor facade that faces a public street or sidewalk shall consist of windows and doors. Windows shall be distributed in a more or less even manner. Plans should avoid placing garage doors and openings on the front façade of a building. If the garage door or opening is placed on the front façade, it shall not be located on the building’s leading edge facing the street, but shall be set back at least six feet from the front line of the building or an approved front yard encroachment (such as a porch, or a deck over a tuck-under garage).

2.	Primary entries to nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be emphasized through the use of architectural features such as roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details that express the importance of the entrance. At least 60 percent of the first floor facade that faces a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly-tinted glass that allow views into and out of the building. The windows shall be distributed in a more or less even manner. The use of traditional window dimensions and a one-over-one or two-over-one sash arrangement is strongly preferred. Buildings shall have entrances to a street or public open space placed no more than sixty (60) feet apart. Buildings are strongly encouraged to use awnings on the front façade, particularly over the main entry. The awning should be compatible in style, material and color to the rest of the building, and the width of the awning should fit the geometry of the building façade. There may be signage on the end panel or front valance of an awning, proportional to the space available. The installation of the awning should not hide any architectural detail or character features of the building.

B)	Side and Rear Facades. The exterior materials and appearance of the rear and side walls of any building shall be similar to and compatible with the front of the building. Where the façade is visible from a public street or right-of-way or any residential district and concrete-block construction is used, the façade shall use integrally colored block or textured block.  Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public
 
street, public open space, or abutting property may not exceed sixty feet (60’) in length without significant visual relief consisting of one or more of the following:

1.	The façade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different materials or textures;

2.	Horizontal offsets of at least four feet (4’) in depth;

3.	Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet (4’); or

4.	Fenestration at the first-floor level which is recessed horizontally at least one foot (1’) into the façade.

9.10.6.	Architectural variety. The use of a variety of architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character. When accent colors are proposed, the number of colors should be limited to prevent a gaudy appearance.

9.10.7.	Materials. All buildings shall be constructed with materials that are attractive in appearance, durable with a permanent finish, and of high quality. New mixed-use or commercial buildings erected within the Gateway District shall be of masonry construction, an equivalent, or better. Exterior building materials shall be classified as either primary, secondary, or accent materials. Primary materials shall cover at least sixty percent (60%) of the façade of a building. Secondary materials may cover no more than thirty percent (30%) of the façade. Accent materials may include door and window frames, lintels, cornices and other minor elements, and may cover no more than ten percent (10%) of the façade.

A)	Primary materials may be face brick, stone, glass, architectural concrete or precast concrete units (integrally colored block or textured block), provided that surfaces are molded, serrated examples or treated with a textured material in order to give the wall surface a three-dimensional character.

B)	Secondary materials may be decorative block or integrally colored stucco, fiber cement siding (integrally colored or painted) with hidden seams. Synthetic stucco may be used as a secondary material on upper floors only.

C)	Accent materials may be wood, metal or fiber cement when used in trim, fascia or soffit if appropriately integrated into the overall building design and not situated in areas which will be subject to physical or environmental damage.

D)	Prohibited Materials. No buildings shall be constructed of sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel, corrugated metal, plastic or fiberglass siding. Face materials which rapidly deteriorate or become unsightly such as galvanized metal or unfinished structural clay tile are not permitted.

9.10.8	Colors. Colors used for exterior surfaces shall be harmonious with surrounding development and shall visually reflect the traditional concept of the town center. Contrasting colors should be used to emphasize architectural detail. Where a development plan proposes multiple buildings, the plan shall carry over colors and materials across adjacent buildings.

9.10.9	Roofs. The predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood Center subzone is flat with articulated parapets; the predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood General subzone is peaked. Roof shapes in the Neighborhood Mixed- Use subzone should achieve a gradual transition between the two roof types.

9.10.10	Outdoor Storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either materials or products except through the issuance of a conditional use permit.

9.10.11	Screening. Property boundaries abutting property that is not included within the Gateway District shall have significant dense vegetative screening.

9.10.12	Signage. Signage should be integrated as an architectural element, with attention given to the color, scale and orientation of all proposed signs in relation to the overall design of the building. Signs shall conform to the regulations in Section 19 of the Zoning Ordinance.

SECTIONS 10 TO 12 RESERVED.
 
SECTION 13 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT

13.1.	URPOSE

13.1.1	The purposes of this article are:

(A)	To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its improvements through the preservation of natural features and amenities than is possible under the more restrictive application of zoning requirements. This section may allow modifications such as non-standard lot sizes, private streets and driveways, reduced rights-of-way and street widths, housing types, zero lot lines and building setbacks. These changes shall meet the standards and purposes of the comprehensive plan while preserving the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.

(B)	To allow for the potential mixture of uses in an integrated and well planned area.

(C)	To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and a preservation of the natural resources of the site.

(D)	To facilitate the economical provision of streets and public utilities.

(E)	To facilitate mixed use developments, and/or affordable housing, recreational uses and institutional uses.

(F)	Parks and open space. The creation of public open space may be required by the city. Such park and open space shall be consistent with the comprehensive park plan and overall trail plan.

(G)	Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and sightings and the clustering of buildings and land uses.

(H)	Use of traffic management and design techniques including the provision of transit and pedestrian linkages to reduce the potential for traffic conflicts. Improvements to area roads and intersections may be required as appropriate. Where appropriate, the use of transportation demand management strategies may be required within a project.

13.2	ERMITTED USES.

13.2.1	ecific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a development plan.
(A)	Each PUD shall primarily be used for the use or uses for which the site is designated in the
comprehensive plan. Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a PUD development plan.

(B)	Where the site of a proposed PUD is designated for more than one land use in the comprehensive plan, the city may require that the PUD include all the land uses so designated or such combination of the designated uses as the city council shall deem appropriate to achieve the purposes of this ordinance and the comprehensive plan.

13.2.2	PUD is an allowable conditional use in all zoning districts in the City of Gem lake except for land zoned Open Space/Recreational (‘OS/R”).

13.3.	ENERAL STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL

13.3.1	conditional use permit shall be required of all planned unit developments. The city may approve the planned unit development only if it finds that the development satisfies all of the following standards:

(A)	The planned unit development is consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city.

(B)	The planned unit development is an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities on
 
the project site and the development plan provides for the preservation or creation of unique amenities such as natural streams, stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, manmade landforms or landscaping and similar areas.

(C)	The planned unit development can be planned and developed to harmonize with any existing or proposed development in the areas surrounding the project site.

(D)	The tract under consideration is under single ownership or control.

(E)	The tract is at least five (5) acres in size unless the applicant can show that a PUD of less acreage meets the standards and purposes of the comprehensive plan and preserves the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and that all of the following conditions exist:
1.	The proposal better adapts itself to the physical and aesthetic setting of the site and with the surrounding land uses than could be developed using strict standards and land uses allowed within the underlying zoning district.
2.	The proposal would benefit the area surrounding the project to greater degree than development
allowed within the underlying zoning district(s).
3.	The proposal would provide mixed land use and/or site design flexibilities while enhancing site or building aesthetics to achieve an overall, workable higher quality of development than would otherwise occur in the underlying zoning district.
4.	The proposal would ensure the concentration of open space into more workable or usable areas and would preserve the natural resources of the site than would otherwise occur in the underlying
zoning district.

(F)	Single-family detached units or clustering of housing units may be allowed as a PUD providing parks and open space are an integral part of the plan.

(G)	The planned unit development shall use city water and sanitary sewer for all structures and facilities unless the City Council makes a specific finding that doing so would not be economically feasible.

13.3.2	The exact density allowable in a PUD shall be determined by standards agreed upon between the applicant and the City.

13.4	COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATION.

13.4.1	It is the intent of this article that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned development under this article.

13.4.2	The plans required under this article must be submitted in a form, which will satisfy the requirements of the Gem Lake subdivision ordinance for the preliminary and final plats.

13.4.3	lexibility of design standards and criteria of the Gem Lake subdivision ordinance may be allowed as part of a planned unit development.

13.5	CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED

13.5.1	ior to submitting an application for a proposed planned unit development, an applicant shall submit a general concept plan to the City, and meet with City staff.

13.5.2	The concept plan shall address and represent the following items:

(A)	Overall maximum PUD density range.

(B)	Summary of site conditions, including location and extent of any water bodies.

(C)	General location of streets, sidewalks, and trails.
 
(D)	General location and extent of public and common open space.

(E)	General location of each type of land use, with approximate intensities of development.

(F)	Style of structures to be built in the development.

(F)	Concept for harmonizing the PUD with neighboring land uses.

(G)	Staging and time schedule of development.

13.6	ENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN

13.6.1	llowing a meeting on the concept plan, an applicant shall make an application for a planned unit development permit following the procedural steps as set forth for the processing of conditional use permits in the Gem Lake zoning ordinance.

13.6.2	In addition to the criteria and standards set forth for the granting of conditional use permits, the following additional findings shall be made before the approval of the outline development plan:

(A)	The proposed PUD is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.

(B)	The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and will not be detrimental to potential surrounding uses.

(C)	Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be completed, is of sufficient size, composition, and arrangement that its construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete unit, and that provision and construction of dwelling units and common open space are balanced and coordinated.

(D)	The PUD will not create an excessive burden on parks, schools, streets, and other public facilities and utilities, which serve or are proposed, to serve the area.

(E)	The proposed total development is designed in such a manner as to form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.

13.6.3	The following exhibits and written narratives shall be submitted to the zoning administrator by the proposed developer as a part of the application for a conditional use permit:

(A)	An explanation of the character of the planned development and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the planned development regulations.

(B)	A list of the present ownership of all the land included within the planned development and a list of property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the outer boundaries of the property as obtained through Ramsey County records.

(C)	A general indication of the expected schedule of development including progressive phasing and time schedule.

(D)	A map giving the legal description of the property including approximate total acreage and also indicating existing property lines and dimensions, ownership of all parcels, platting, easements, street right-of- ways, utilities, and buildings for the property and for the area five hundred (500) feet beyond.

(E)	Natural features, maps or maps of the property and area five hundred (500) feet beyond showing contour lines at no more than two-foot intervals, drainage patterns, wetlands, vegetation, soil, and subsoil conditions.

(F)	A map indicating proposed land uses including housing units and types, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and open space uses.
 
(G)	Full description as to how all necessary governmental services will be provided to the development including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water systems, streets and other public utilities.

(H)	An engineering report presenting results of percolation tests and soil analysis of the site.

(I)	Any additional information requested by the city staff, the planning and zoning commission and city council that may be required for clarification of the proposed project.

(J)	Ten (10) copies of all required information shall be submitted.

13.6.4	The applicant shall also submit a preliminary plat and all the necessary documentation as required under the Gem Lake subdivision ordinance of all or that portion of the project to be platted. For purposes of administrative simplification, the public hearings required for the conditional use permit and preliminary plat and potential rezoning of property may be combined into one (1) hearing or may be held concurrently.

13.7.	INAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN

13.7.1	The final development plan with recommended modifications, if any, and if necessary, the modified preliminary plat, shall be filed with the zoning administrator containing the information required in the general development plan plus any changes recommended by the planning and zoning commission and the city council as a result of the public hearing.

13.7.2	The applicant shall also submit a final plat for all or that portion to be platted. Such plats may be submitted in smaller increments as may be economical to finance or construct at one time.

13.7.3	The final general development plan shall be submitted with the first final plat which shall conform to the approved general development plan and approved preliminary plat. This plan shall include any recommended changes by the planning and zoning commission or city council to the original general development plan and original preliminary plat.

13.7.4	The city council shall review the final development plan and final plat. If the final development plan is approved by the city council, the zoning administrator shall issue a conditional use permit to the applicant.

13.8.	ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE

13.8.1	The construction and provisions of all of the common open spaces and public and recreational facilities which are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same phase of the construction of dwelling units. From time to time the zoning administrator may review all of the building permits issued for the planned development and examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If he shall find that the rate of construction of dwelling units is greater than the rate at which common open spaces and public and recreational facilities have been constructed and provided, he shall forward this information to the city council, which may modify or revoke the planned unit development permit.

13.9	CONVEYANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE

13.9.1	All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be conveyed to homeowners association or similar organization provided in an indenture establishing an association or similar organization for the maintenance of the planned development. The common open space must be conveyed to the homeowners association or similar organization subject to covenants to be approved by the city attorney which restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.

13.9.2	If a homeowners association is created, the applicant shall submit any required homeowner association documents at the time of the first final plat of development to the city attorney and city staff which explain:
 
(A)	Ownership and membership requirements.

(B)	Articles of incorporation and bylaws.

(C)	Time at which the developer turns the association over to the homeowners.

(D)	Approximate monthly or yearly association fees for homeowners.

(E)	Specific listing of items owned in common including such items as roads, recreation facilities, parking, common open space grounds, and utilities.

13.10	STANDARDS FOR COMMON OR OPEN SPACE

13.10.1	en area may be approved as common open space under the provisions of this article unless it meets the following standards:

(A)	The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space must be suitable for the planned development.

(B)	Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the planned development, considering its size, density, expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided.

(C)	Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use but common space containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the common open space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard to its topography and unimproved condition.

(D)	Outlots to be dedicated for park, ponding or other purposes shall be deeded to the city before the final plat is released for recording.

13.11	REVIEW AND AMENDMENT

13.11.1	om time to time the zoning administrator may review PUDs within the city and may make a report to the city council on the status of non-compliance for a particular PUD. If the zoning administrator finds that the development has not commenced within one (1) year after the original approval of the conditional use for the PUD, the zoning administrator may recommend that the city council extend the time or revoke the conditional use permit as set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance. Prior to cancellation or revocation of this permit, the city council shall hold a public hearing at which time all interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.

13.11.2	additional phases of the PUD, if within three (3) years the project has not progressed, the zoning administrator may recommend that the city council determine what action will be taken with the remainder of the project. Prior to determining the outcome of the PUD, the city council shall hold a public hearing at which time all interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.

13.11.3	Minor changes in the location, placement, and heights of the buildings or structures may be authorized by the zoning administrator if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved.

13.11.4	Approval of the planning commission and city council shall be required for other changes such as rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of the approved final development plan.

13.11.5	Any amendment to the PUD shall require the same procedures as for the application for a conditional use permit as set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 14 - GARDEN OVERLAY DISTRICT

Section 14.1 Findings and Purpose.

14.1.1	The City Council makes the following findings:

A)	The land-use plans of the City of Gem Lake historically have not assigned any land in the City for long-term agricultural use, as the City has developed and continues to develop as a primarily residential community surrounded by fully developed suburban neighborhoods. The City Council reaffirms the City’s intent to encourage development of the City in accordance with its adopted comprehensive plans.

B)	At the time this Ordinance is considered, large land parcels in the City have yet to develop any primary use and stand vacant. Additional large-lot property in the City is projected to subdivide and develop into smaller lots over the next 10 to 30 years. The City Council recognizes that economic conditions are not always favorable for real estate development, and that the costs to carry vacant land can create pressures that promote sub-optimal development. Permitting small-scale agriculture as a primary use will allow owners of large undeveloped parcels to qualify for agricultural tax classification, and thus lower tax payments, without affecting the long-term plans for the land. The Council finds that providing this means to temporarily ease this pressure will enhance the City’s ability to fully realize the goals of its comprehensive plans.

C)	Several cities and metropolitan areas are placing a greater emphasis on local food production as a means of improving public health. Allowing the use of available space in the City for “community gardens” or “market gardens” to grow food will promote local food production and improve public health in Gem Lake and the surrounding community.

D)	As an interim use of land, subject to the regulations proposed, community gardening and market gardening will be compatible with all allowed land uses in the City of Gem Lake, and with the goals of the City’s comprehensive plan.

14.1.2	The Council intends that the Garden Overlay District be available to overlay on parcels of land in any existing zoning district to add the uses described in the district regulations to the list of uses allowed upon that land. The Garden Overlay District may be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning Ordinance, as existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. Nothing in this Section is intended to affect the ability of landowners to maintain accessory uses that are allowed without the Overlay zone upon their property, whether or not the Overlay zone covers their property. This overlay district is intended to permit a temporary land use, and should no longer be needed on a parcel when it eventually develops in accordance with the regulations of the underlying zoning district.

Section 14.2 Requesting Garden Overlay. Applications to create a Garden Overlay District shall be made and considered as a re-zoning request in accordance with Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. In addition to the documents and materials generally required for a re-zoning application, the applicant shall supply copies of draft leases, contracts or use agreements to which the groups or individuals using the gardens will agree prior to using the garden space. Such agreements must provide the land owner or designated representative with the legal ability to evict a tenant and bar entry to any individual member of a group, if the tenant or individual violates the terms of this Ordinance, the terms of the Interim Use Permit for the property, any restrictive term of the lease or agreement, or any other applicable City Ordinance or state law.

Section 14.3 Termination of Garden Overlay. A Garden Overlay District shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:

14.3.1	City approval of a zoning application for a use or uses permitted in the underlying zone (e.g. development plan, conditional use permit, or building permit); the Garden Overlay status and any permits granted under the terms of this Section shall expire six months from the date of approval; or

14.3.2	The Interim Use Permit for the property expires, and no application is made to renew the permit within six months of the expiration; or

14.3.3	The Interim Use Permit for the property is revoked by the City Council for violations of this Ordinance, permit conditions, or any other applicable law or ordinance.
 
Section 14.4 Interim Uses.

14.4.1	Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to be Interim Uses in the Garden Overlay District:

A)	Community Gardens.

B)	Market Gardens.

14.4.2	Interim Use Permits granted under this Section expire on March 15th of each year. The permit may be renewed annually, at the discretion of the City Council. Application for and approval of an Interim Use Permit shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance. In addition to the requirements of that Section, the applicant shall provide a written summary of the proposed uses of fertilizers, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals in the maintenance of the gardens. In approving an Interim Use Permit, the City Council may attach such additional conditions as it deems necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding land uses, including conditions relating to the use of agricultural chemicals on the property.

Section 14.5 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are allowed accessory uses to any validly issued Interim Use Permit in any Garden Overlay District:

14.5.1	houses, coldframes and similar structures used to extend the growing season.

14.5.2	Benches, planting beds, compost bins, rain barrels and similar structures used to facilitate the growth of plants.

14.5.3	f-street parking and loading areas. Section 14.6 Prohibited Practices.
14.6.1	No motorized implements or machinery may be used in the cultivation and maintenance of any garden, except for plowing of the plots between the hours of 8:00 A.M and 5:00 P.M, Monday through Friday. Motor vehicles of less than 7,000 lbs gross vehicle weight may be used to deliver and carry away equipment, supplies and product.

14.6.2	Animal husbandry and aquaculture are not permitted activities within a Garden Overlay zone.

14.6.3	No fuel, fertilizer, pesticides or similar chemicals shall be stored on the property. Section 14.7 General Regulations.
14.7.1	The minimum land area for application of a Garden Overlay shall be ten acres.

14.7.2	All gardening activity and all structures and equipment shall be set back at least 20 feet from the property line of any property not included within a Garden Overlay Zone, and at least 150 feet from any dwelling.

14.7.3	All gardens shall be divided into garden plots, separated from other plots and from required setback areas by unpaved walkways of at least 6 feet in width. No single plot shall cover more than 10% of the total land area of the property on which the plot is located.

14.7.4	Off-street parking and loading areas shall be unpaved and shall not exceed 15% of the lot area covered by garden plots and required walkways.

14.7.5	The property owner is responsible for the collection and disposal of litter on the property.

14.7.6	The hours of operation for a permitted garden are ½ hour before sunrise until ½ hour after sunset.

14.7.7	The property owner is responsible for ensuring compliance with all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, including city ordinances and watershed district rules governing wetlands and stormwater control.
 
SECTION 15  - INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT

Section 15.1Purpose

15.1.1	The Institutional Overlay District is intended to provide a means of overlaying an existing Zoning district located in the City of Gem Lake, for facilities devoted to serving the public. This district is unique in that the primary objective of uses within this district is for the providing of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than for the sale of goods or services.  It is intended that all uses within such an overlay area will be compatible with all adjoining uses.

15.1.2	The Institutional Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning Ordinance, as existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. The Institutional Overlay District will remain in effect as long as the use and the user remains the same. If an overlay area is no longer used, uses are changed or terminated, the parcel will revert back to its original underlying zoning classification.

Section 15.2 Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in an Institutional Overlay District:

15.2.1	Religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, but with activities limited to worship and related social activities.

15.2.2	Private Child Care and Education facilities as defined in the definitions section of this Ordinance, but with activities limited to school/educational activities.

a)	an enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years:

b)	a total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);

c)	a maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) “full-day equivalent” students with a full-day* defined as ten (10) hours.

d)	The “full-day equivalent” shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during each hour of the “full-day” of school.  This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.

Section 15.3 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory uses in any Institutional Overlay District:

15.3.1	Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the uses permitted as a Permitted Use or Conditional or Interim Use (if a Conditional or Interim Use is allowed).

15.3.2	f-street parking and loading areas.

15.3.3	Accessory building as described in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.

Section 15.4 Conditional Or Interim Uses.  Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to be Conditional Uses in the Institutional Overlay District.

15.4.1	Living quarters (such as parsonage, rectory or care-takers house) that are supplied as an accessory use to a principal use provided that:

A)	The use shall not be used as rental property.

B)	The maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.

C)	There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility.

15.4.2	Governmental and public regulated buildings and essential service structures as defined in this Ordinance and necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, excluding public works facilities and uses provided that:
 
A)	Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setback and side yard setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in adjacent residential property.

B)	Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.

C)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this Ordinance.

15.4.3	lic recreational facilities provided that:

A)	The site is landscaped.

B)	The use is available to the “public”.

C)	The land area of the property containing such uses or activity meets the minimum established for the district.

D)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this ordinance.

15.4.4	Publicly owned or cultural buildings, such as libraries, city offices, auditoriums, public administration offices and historical developments, but excluding public works type facilities and uses, provided that:

A)	Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.



B)	Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.

C)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this ordinance.

15.4.5	Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship activities, as an accessory use within a religious building, provided that:

A)	Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent residential property.

B)	Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.

C)	Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections of this ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.

15.4.6	Accessory buildings with a cumulative total greater than one-thousand (1,000 s.f.)  square feet.

Section 15.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements.  The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an Institutional Overlay District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this ordinance:

15.5.1	The minimum land area for an Institutional Overlay shall be two and three quarter (2.75) acres of buildable area. For the purposes of this Ordinance, buildable area means two and three quarter (2.75) acres of land, not including wetlands and land seasonally flooded on an annual basis, land containing drainage ways or surface water or land containing aquatic vegetation, and land with slopes in excess of twelve (12%) percent.

15.5.2	Lot width:

A)	Two hundred (200) feet of frontage which must be located on a County or State maintained roadway.
 
15.5.3	etbacks                                                                                                              TABLE 15.5.3


FRONT YARD
50 foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
50 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back


A)	Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.

15.5.4	Accessory Structure(s) Setbacks.                                                                       TABLE 15.5.4


FRONT YARD
100 foot set-back	
SIDE YARD
50 foot set-back	
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back


A)	Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.

Section 15.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements. The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in the Institutional Overlay district.

15.6.1	The total lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent.

15.6.2	The minimum open space requirement for any proposed use shall be twenty-five (25%) percent, including green areas not covered by buildings, parking lots, access roads, storage areas or other areas covered by impervious surfaces.

15.6.3	uilding structure shall exceed thirty-five (35') feet in height.

15.6.4	No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25') feet in height, whatever is lesser and no accessory structure any part of which is within three-hundred (300') feet of an “R” district or a roadway bordering an “R” district shall exceed fifteen (15') feet in height.

Section 15.7 Landscaping and Screening

15.7.1 As most Institutional Overlays will occur in residential areas or closely adjacent to Residential areas, landscaping and screening shall be provided to isolate all light and noise from the Institutional Overlay use from entering the adjacent Residential areas.  This landscaping and screening must be done in accordance with the procedures in this Ordinance.

Section 15.8 Procedures for Requesting An Overlay

15.8.1	Application for re-zoning for an overlay.

A)	An Institutional Overlay shall be considered a rezoning for a specific parcel of land. This overlay may occur in any zoning district in the City of Gem Lake. The application for an Institutional Overlay shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk. The fee for an Institutional Overlay shall be the same as the rezoning fee, defined in the Zoning Ordinance. This application for rezoning will only be deemed to be complete when the following are received:

1)	A properly completed application and payment in full is received;

2)	A registered property surveyors report is provided properly identifying the parcel to be rezoned;

3)	All requirements of the Plan Review described in Section 14.1 of this Ordinance have been met. These plans must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and City Council before any overlay shall be granted. If this is a rezoning to initially define and overlay, the rezoning activities and the Plan Review shall occur at the same time;

4)	Proof of ownership or authorization shall be provided. The applicant shall supply proof of title and the legal description of the property for which the Institutional Overlay is requested consisting of and abstract of the title or registered property abstract currently certified together with unrecorded documents whereby the petitioners
 
acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested Institutional Overlay.

5)	A list of all the property owners within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the proposed site. This certified list shall be obtained from the County Assessor and supplied to the City Clerk.

15.8.2	cedures

A)	Pursuant to Minnesota Statues15.99 as may from time-to-time be amended, an application for an institutional Overlay shall be approved or denied within the time allowed for by law from it’s official and complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state and federal agencies may extend the review and decision making period by the additional time allowed by law unless this limitation is waived by the applicant. Additional City requirements are as follows:

1)	Applications for rezoning for an Overlay District shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form available for available from the City Clerk.  Such applications shall also be accompanied by five
(5) large scale copies and one (1) reduced scale copy of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the processed change, development, or use. The request for an institutional Overlay shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting after the date of submission of the completed application. The request shall only be considered officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied with.

2)	Upon receipt of such application, the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification as applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to this hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the property in question. The City Clerk shall have the right to provide additional property owners notification beyond the three hundred fifty (350') foot distance if it is judged that the request will have an impact upon additional properties. The records of the County Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to which the notice is sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding.

3)	Failure of a property owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth in this Ordinance provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this section.

4)	When reviewing the proposed institutional overlay, the following additional factors shall be included in the review:

a)	The proposed action in relation to specific policies and provisions of the Official City Comprehensive Plan
b)	the proposed use’s conformity with present and future land uses in the area.
c)	The proposed use’s conformity with all performance standards contained herein.
d)	The proposed use’s effect on the area in which it is proposed.
e)	The proposed use’s impact upon property value in the area in which it is proposed.
f)	Traffic generation by the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets and roads serving the property.
g)	The proposed use’s impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks, schools, streets and
utilities and the City’s service capacity.

5)	The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony at eh expense of the applicant, said information to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive information my be grounds for recommendation of denial of the request.

6)	The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer question concerning the proposed request.
 
7)	The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.

8)	The City Council shall not act upon such an Overlay request until they have received a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted upon the request after thirty (30) days from the first regular meeting at which the request was considered, the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action on the request.

9)	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered into and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council meeting.

10)	Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall have the option to hold another public hearing if deemed advisable.

11)	If, upon receiving such reports and recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City Council may before taking any final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. The City council shall provide a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral.  This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular request.

15.8.3	Approvals

A)	Approval of the Overlay request shall require passage by a four-fifths (4 of 5 votes) majority of the entire City Council.

B)	The Institutional Overlay zoning shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves the overlay and after said approval is published in the official newspaper.

C)	Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or structure, in the Institutional Overlay Zone, a plan review, in accordance with section 14.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be made.  No building permits shall be issued until this plan review is complete.

15.8.4	enials

A)	If the City Council finds that a proposed use contemplated for the parcel which is the subject of an application for rezoning to Institutional Overlay Classification is likely to have a material adverse effect on the public health, safety of general welfare after considering possible adverse effects which may include, but not be limited to, those delineated in Section 20.7.2D(1-7) above, then such application shall be denied.

15.8.5	Recording of actions taken

A)	If a request for an Institutional Overlay receives approval by the City Council, the applicant shall record such with the County Recorder within thirty (30) days of the approval date. The applicant, immediately upon recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible, furnish the City proof of recording, no building permits for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.

15.8.6	Actions if the overlay is denied

A)	Whenever an application for an overlay district has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for an overlay affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or the City Council for at least one (1) year from the date of its denial except as follows:

1)	Applications for an overlay are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter.

2)	If the City Council determines by a vote of not less than four-fifths (4 of 5 votes) majority that the circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
 
15.8.7	Time period (duration) of this Institutional Overlay approvals

A)	An Institutional Overlay shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:

1)	Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request, the rezoning for an Institutional Overlay shall become null and void twelve (12) months after the date of approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started construction of any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use requested for this overlay. The property owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section.

2)	If any one of the following occur the overlay shall expire:

a)	The use of the property is changed to not be in accordance with the uses outlined in this section of this Ordinance,

b)	The organization to which the permit for and Overlay District has been given is not longer the occupant of the building or facilities on the site. No leases or subletting of the building or facilities operating on an Institutional Overlay shall be permitted.

3)	If an Institutional Overlay is allowed to expire or is revoked for cause, the parcel of property shall revert back to the underlying zoning of the parcel.
 
SECTION 16 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 16.1 Application of this Ordinance

16.1.1	In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.

16.1.2	Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.

16.1.3	Except as in this Ordinance specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for any purpose, nor in any manner which is not conformity with this Ordinance.

16.1.4	When land is proposed to be annexed to the City of Gem Lake the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing upon the permanent zoning of said land. The results of the hearing, along with a recommendation, shall be presented to the City Council. In the event of annexation proceedings becoming final before the permanent zoning is determined, the annexed area shall be placed in the “R-1” District and such classification shall be considered as an interim step pending permanent classification.

16.1.5	Real Property Development. In accordance with Section 12.1.3 of the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan, when making application for development of real property in the City of Gem Lake, the developer shall submit twelve
(12)	sets of all plans, variance requirements, and permit requirements in forms acceptable to the Zoning Administrator or
City officials including, but not limited to, the following:
A)	a Site Plan; and
B)	a Grading And Filling Plan; and
C)	a Landscape Plan; and
D)	a Tree Preservation Plan; and
E)	a Sediment And Erosion Control Plan; and
F)	a Storm Water Management Plan; and
G)	a Description of the Project; and
H)	a Description of Future Expansion Plans; and
I)	All Variances, Conditional and Interim Use Permits, and Zoning Amendments required; and
J)	All other such plans or information as may be required for specific zoning districts.


16.1.6	Development Review Considerations. In accordance with the Section 12.1.4 of the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan, when making recommendations and decisions considering land use, variance applications, or rezoning applications, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review and measure the impact of such uses including, but not limited to, the following as criteria:
A)	the impact of the use on adjacent uses; and
B)	the impact of the use on air and water quality; and
C)	the impact of the use on traffic generation
D)	the impact of the use on public safety, health and welfare; and
E)	the impact of the use on the economy


Section 16.2 Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
 
Section 16.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures

16.3.1	Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified.

16.3.2	Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the City.

16.3.3	When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a confirming use it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.

16.3.4	Whenever a lawful non-conforming building or structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it be reconstructed within twelve (12) months after such calamity, unless the damage to the building or structure is fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair market value, in which case the reconstruction shall be for a use in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

16.3.5	Whenever a lawful, non-conforming use of a building or structure or land is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, any future use of said building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.

16.3.6	Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non- conforming use.

16.3.7	lawful non-conforming use may be changed only to a use of the same or more restricted classification.

16.3.8	Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing lawful non-conforming residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units.

16.3.9	Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts

A)	Whenever, in any Zoning District, a use is neither specifically allowed or denied, the use shall be considered as prohibited. In such cases, the City Council or the Planning Commission may, by their own initiative, or upon request of the property owner, conduct a study to determine if:

1)	the use can be deemed consistent with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan;

2)	the use is acceptable to and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners;

3)	the use is in the public interest and is not determined to be offensive;

4)	which defined Zoning District would be most appropriate for the use;

5)	what conditions and standards relating to development of the use should be imposed. Upon completion and consideration of the study, the City Council or Planning Commission or the real property owner may initiate a request for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under consideration in accordance with the definitions and provisions contained in this Ordinance.

Section 16.4 Lot Provisions

16.4.1	Land covered by Gem Lake, its contiguous bog area including islands (measured to the mean high water mark) and other DNR protected wetlands shown on applicable section maps covering the area shall not be included in any area calculations required by this Ordinance.

16.4.2	In all residential districts, a lot must include contiguous buildable area as shown in tables located elsewhere within the ordinance unless the lot is part of a cluster or planned unit development that has been reviewed and recommended for approval by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
 
Section 16.5 Accessory Buildings

16.5.1	No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.

16.5.2	No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory building exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.

16.5.3	An accessory building shall be considered to be an integral part of the principal building unless it is six (6) feet or more from the principal building.

16.5.4	No detached accessory building shall be less than sixty (60') feet from the public right-of-way except on a corner lot, unless it conforms to the side yard requirements of the principal building. Those accessory buildings located sixty (60') feet or more behind the right-of-way line shall have a side yard of two (2') feet or more and a rear yard of three (3') feet or more.

16.5.5	No combinations of accessory buildings shall be allowed to exceed one-thousand (1,000) square feet in size, except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit from the City Council.

Section 16.6 Required Yards, Open Space and Heights

16.6.1	yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this Ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.

16.6.2	No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for any other buildings.

16.6.3	The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on set-back and height requirements:

A)	In any yards: posts, off-street open parking spaces, open terraces, awnings, open canopies, steps, chimneys, and flag poles.

B)	In front yards: service stations pump islands and fences. Fences must be at least eighty (80%) percent open.

C)	In side and rear yards: fences or walls six (6') feet in height or less. However, in a corner lot no obstruction higher than three (3') feet above curb level shall be located within twenty (20') feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets, or within fifteen (15') feet of any street right-of-way. See Residential Zoning Districts for additional regulations for fences.

D)	In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breeze ways, porches, detached outdoor living rooms, barbecue facilities and portable seasonal living structures.

E)	Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public utility facilities; Accessory and Secondary Use antennas and parapet walls extending not more than four (4') feet above the limiting height of the building.

Section 16.7 Traffic Visibility

16.7.1 No fences, structures or planting exceeding thirty (30") inches in height above the center line grade of the street shall be permitted within the required front yard set-back on a corner lot.

Section 16.8 Farming Operations

16.8.1 All farms in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance and all farms which are brought into the City by annexation shall be a permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations contained herein and other City Ordinances as in effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will
 
cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character. See Residential Zoning Districts for additional regulations of agricultural buildings.

Section 16.9 Essential Services

16.9.1 Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the City of Gem Lake.

Section 16.10 (Deleted)

Section 16.11 (Deleted)

Section 16.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units

16.12.1	It shall be the stated policy of the City of Gem Lake to maintain a harmonious and high standard of residential development and to protect residential areas from deleterious effects through insuring that both new and relocated dwellings form other areas, both within the City of Gem Lake and from outside, shall meet specified requirements. Such relocation of dwellings as stated above must conform to all regulations of the Building Code and shall be permitted in the zoning district where all necessary specifications as to lot sizes, setbacks, type of use, height regulations and all other conditions as laid down in this Ordinance are met.

16.12.2	In addition, such relocations shall require a Conditional Use Permit from the City Council wherein the following procedures shall be followed and provisions shall be met:

A)	Application shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk.

B)	A fee for the Relocation of Dwelling Units shall be required in an amount established by resolution of the City Council at it’s first meeting in January of each year. Further, the City may impose additional fees including, but not limited to, engineering costs, attorneys fees, expert opinions and publishing costs payment of which may also be required of the applicant as part of the process. The building mover shall meet all requirements for licensing and insurance as required by Minnesota Statues 221.81 and as from time to time amended.

C)	The application shall be referred to the City Council, who shall set a time and place for a public hearing giving at least ten (10) days’ public notice of such hearing.

D)	At least ten (10) days before such hearing, the Council shall mail a notice of said hearing to property owners within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the relocation premises. Failure of the Council to mail the notice, or failure of the title holder to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.

E)	The Planning Commission shall make a report to the City Council on the matter before or at the public hearing.

F)	The City Council shall make a finding and declare whether or not the structure to be moved is architecturally compatible.

Section 16.13  Fences

16.13.1	eneral Provisions

A)	No fences shall be placed on or extend into a public or private right-of-way or utility easement.

B)	The side of the fence considered the “face’ (i.e. the side having no structural supports) shall face abutting property or the public or private right-of-way.

C)	Both sides of the fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance by it’s owner and shall not be allowed to become or remain in a condition of disrepair or danger or constitute a nuisance, public or private.
 
D)	No physical damage of any kind shall occur to abutting property during fence construction.

E)	All fences shall be constructed inside the property lines of a lot. If corner property stakes can not be readily identified, a certificate of survey and setting of corner property stakes is necessary before fence construction starts.

F)	All man-made fences shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: decorative masonry, wrought iron or wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use, or wood of proven durability such as cedar or redwood is used.

G)	Chain link fences shall only be used for dog confinement areas (six (6'0") foot maximum height), around swimming pools or spas four (4'0") foot maximum height) or for tennis courts (twelve (12'0") foot maximum height) in rear and side yards only. Chain link fences which need additional height or for other uses or placement shall require a Conditional Use Permit.

H)	Fences, utilized for the protection of gardens, crops and shrubs from deer and other wildlife which are setback a minimum of twenty-five (25'0") feet from any property line, are at least eighty (80%) percent open and not greater than six (6'0") feet in height and are limited to specified areas requiring protection, shall be exempt from any City review or processing requirements.

I) It is recommended that all fences be screened with trees or shrubs to buffer views, neighboring property or public right-of-way, or to generally ensure aesthetic quality and compatibility with the natural character of the community.

16.13.2	ecific Fence Standards. Fences may be allowed in the City of Gem Lake subject to the following standards:

A)	Split rail fences not exceeding forty-eight (48") inches in height are permitted anywhere within the property lines of a lot located within the City. Location of the fence in relation to the property line as described in 16.13.1 E) must be followed.

B)	Except as may be provided herein, fences up to six (6'0") feet in height and no more than eighty (80%) percent solid matter shall be permitted along the boundaries of the side and rear yard of a lot on a permanent basis. Location of the fence in relation to the property line as described in 16.13.1 E) must be followed.

C)	Fences not exceeding six (6'0") feet in height, in areas other than for residential areas of the City, may be permitted in front of the front building lines as established by the primary structure on the lot, where required for screening of adjacent property.

D)	On corner lots, no fence greater than thirty (30") inches high shall be located in the sight visibility triangle on the corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within fifteen (15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.

E)	All swimming pools must be completely enclosed with a safety fence at least four (4'0") feet in height which shall completely enclose the pool. This fence shall be as described in Section 16.14.3.  A temporary fence as described in
16.14.3. C) shall be installed and shall be in-place before the pool is filled.

F)	All outdoor spas shall have either a fence or a latchable cover, as described in 16.14.3 D)

G)	Freestanding stone, brick, stucco, concrete, wood or other walls, not required as retaining structures, are considered fences under this section of this Ordinance.

H)	There are no height restrictions on natural hedges or plantings utilized as fences in any residential zoning district except no plantings greater then thirty (30") inches high shall be located in the sight visibility triangle on the corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within fifteen (15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.

I)	Temporary snow fences can be erected for temporary site protection or for diverting snow. Snow fences shall not be used as permanent fencing. Snow fences shall not be located in the sight visibility triangle on the corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within fifteen (15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.
 
16.13.3	Fence standards allowed by Conditional Use Permits. The following fences may be approved by Conditional Use Permit only, in accordance with the standards as set forth by the City Council:

A)	Fences allowed by Conditional Use Permit are as follows:

1)	All chain link fences with a height greater than described in Section 16.13.1.G).

2)	Fences, such as sales lot security fences, which include a security gate at a point where access is provided to the property and/or principal building.

3)	Fences greater than six (6') feet in height around a garden, crops, and shrubs utilized for the protection of such from deer and other wildlife.

4)	Barbed wire and electrically charged fences. (All such fences must be marked with caution signs on all exposures).

16.13.4	Non-conforming fences. It is the intent of this section to allow the continuation of such non-conforming fences as may already exist until they are discontinued as provided herein. However, it is not the intent of this Section to encourage the survival of non-conforming fences and such fences are declared to be incompatible with permitted conforming fences and such fences are declared to be incompatible with permitted fences within the City. Such fences shall be regulated by the following provisions:

A)	An existing fence not permitted by this Ordinance, except when required to do so bylaw or ordinance, shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such fence is changed to one permitted. Maintenance of a non-conforming fence will be allowed, however, when this includes necessary repairs and incidental alterations which do not expand or intensify the non-conforming use.

Section 16.14 Outdoor Swimming Pools and Spas

16.14.1	Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupant of the subject property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall conform as follows:

A)	Permit Required - No outdoor swimming pool shall be constructed or established and no such pool construction shall be commenced in the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining building and plumbing and, as necessary mechanical permits approved by the City Building Official.

B)	Applications - Applications for a swimming pool related permits may be secured from and shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with a fee determined by the fee schedule for construction permits in effect at the time of application and based upon the estimated value of the construction. Applications for swimming pool permits shall include, without limitation the following information:

1)	Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool.
2)	A site plan showing the location of all structures on the lot including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, sewage systems and other significant improvements or natural features;

3)	The proposed locations of pumps, filters, electrical power source (if applicable), flushing and drainage outlets and other operational features;

a)	A plan showing where pool water will be discharged and the path such discharged water will follow. In no case shall any water discharged from a swimming pool or spa be allowed to flow directly into any lakes, ponds or wetlands.

4)	Location and specifications of protective fencing.

16.14.2	Construction setback requirements for pools. Private outdoor swimming pools shall be constructed as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall meet the following minimum requirements;
 
A)	Underground or overhead utilities shall be located in conformance with the National Electric Code;
B)	No pool shall be located within any private easement, public or private utility easement, ingress or egress easement, drainage way, marsh, or other location in which it will represent a threat to the natural environment;
C)	In areas zoned or used for single family residential purposes, pools are prohibited in the front yard and shall not be located within thirty (30'0") feet of any lot lines, nor within ten (10'0") feet of any principal structure or accessory buildings except accessory building without frost footings. No mechanical equipment shall be located closer than thirty (30'0") feet to any lot line;
D)	No portion of any swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be located less than ten (10'0") feet to any portion of a sewage disposal line or sewage treatment system, nor shall any water supply line for a swimming pool be less than fifteen(15'0") feet from any portion of the sewage treatment system.
16.14.3	Safety Fence Required. A safety fence of at least four (4'0") feet in height shall completely enclose the outdoor pool. All openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors. All gates and doors shall have a latch which is no less than four (4'0") feet above the ground level and which shall be so constructed and so placed as to be inaccessible to small children. All gates and doors shall be latched when the pool is not in use or is unattended by an adult with demonstrated swimming ability. Any opening between the bottom of the fence and the ground level shall not exceed three (3") inches.
A)	Safety fences shall be constructed of materials with minimum spaces between the materials and shall be constructed so as to inhibit the climbing thereof by any person. If a safety fence is located within an area subject to and covered by a homeowners association, and if such homeowners association has an architectural review committee, then the architectural review committee shall approve the location and style of the fence.
B)	Above ground pools of four (4') feet or more in wall height shall be exempt from complete closure by a type of fence resistant to being climbed, however, above ground pools shall be equipped with a fence and gate system at all point of entry to the pool. Said fence and gate system shall effectively control access to the pool and shall be constructed pursuant to the specifications herein contain for under ground pools.
C)	Temporary fence. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced any water to a depth of more than eighteen (18") inches into the shallowest portion of any swimming pool newly constructed or being constructed until such time as the Building Official authorizes the filling of such pool with water. Such authorization shall be withheld until, as a minimum, the permittee has caused such pool to be completely enclosed by a swimming pool construction fence. Said construction fence shall:
1)	Be of snow fence like of similar design and be securely anchored in place.
2)	Be constructed with its base flush to the ground.
3)	Be at least four (4'0") feet in height and have supportive posts placed no more than eight (8'0") feet apart.
4)	Remain in place until a permanent fence completely enclosing the swimming pool is installed.
D)	All outdoor Spas shall either have a fence as described in this section for outdoor swimming pools or a latchable cover. The cover should be constructed of a material impenetrable by toddlers and subject to inspection by the City building Official.
16.14.4	Miscellaneous requirements
A)	All back-flushing water or pool drainage water shall be directed to be on the property of the owner or on approved drainage ways. Drainage onto public or private streets or other public or private drainage ways shall require a permit from the City Building Official.
B)	Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to spill or shine upon adjacent properties.
C)	All electrical installations shall comply with the State Electrical Code.
D)	Precautions during construction:
1)	Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property..
2)	Assure that proper care shall be taken in stockpiling excavating materials to avoid erosion, dust or other infringements upon adjacent property..
3)	All access for construction shall be over the owner’s land and due care shall be taken to avoid damage to streets and adjacent private or public property.
16.14.5	Nuisance. The conduct of persons and the operation of pools shall be the responsibility of the owner and any tenants thereof and such conduct of persons and operation of the pool shall be done in a manner so as to avoid any nuisance or breach of the peace, and it shall be unlawful to allow loud noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the pool is located to adjacent property.
 
SECTION 17 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Section 17.1 Enforcing Officer

17.1.1 The Mayor shall appoint a Zoning Administrator, subject to the approval of the City Council, who shall have the duty and responsibility of enforcing and administering this Ordinance.

Section 17.2 Building Permit

17.2.1 No structure shall hereafter be erected, or structurally altered until a building permit shall have been issued indicating that the existing or proposed structure and the use of land, comply with this Ordinance and all Building Codes. All applications for building permits pertaining to the erection, or major alteration which will affect the outside dimensions of a structure shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a site plan to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot, lots or parcel to be built upon, the dimensions of the ground plan and the extensions beyond the outside wall of the proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their location on the site in relation to the outside boundary and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One copy of the site plan is to be approved and is to be made available on the site.

Section 17.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator

17.3.1	The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority he shall:

A)	Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;

B)	Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, all maps, amendments, and conditional and interim uses, variances, appeals and applications, thereto;

C)	Receive, file and forward all applications for zoning amendments, variances, conditional or interim uses or other matters to the Planning Commission and City Council;

D)	Institute in the name of the City of Gem Lake any appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as provided by law;

E)	Approve all building permits, submitted by the Building Inspector, after  determining that  the permit is  in compliance with this Ordinance.  This approval must be made before the permit is issued.

F)	Act as Chairman of the Gem Lake Plan Review Commission.

17.3.2	The City Council may, on prior recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, empower the Ramsey County Sheriff in specific instances to perform any of the acts which the Zoning Administrator is directed or authorized to perform by this Section.

Section 17.4 Variances

17.4.1	Purpose and Intent. The City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeal and Adjustment, may grant Variances from the strict applications of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and impose conditions and safeguards in the Variances so granted. These Variances shall be considered in cases where by reason of narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a lot or where by reason of exceptional topographic or water conditions or where other extraordinary and exceptional conditions of such lot exist, the strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance would result in practical difficulties upon the owner of such lot in complying with the regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located. “Practical difficulties,” as used in connection with the grant of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. A variance may not be granted to allow any use that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the property is located.
 
17.4.2	Application. An application for any Variance from the Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Variance is to be considered in association with any other Building Permits, Conditional or Interim Use Permits, or Subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Variance application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state full all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the Variance as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator.

A)	An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required period is extended or waived.

B)	When reviewing variance applications, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by the Planning Commission and City Council:

1)	Adjacent Uses; and
2)	Air and Water Quality; and
3)	Traffic Generations; and
4)	Public Safety and Health; and
5)	Area Aesthetics; and
6)	Economic Impact on the Entire Area; and
7)	Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.

17.4.3	Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the Variance or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application.

17.4.4	Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or the City Council to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application.

17.4.5	Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact and recommendation to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.

17.4.6	Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than the number of days allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of its receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, and convey its decision to approve or deny the application. The Council may impose conditions on the grant of a variance, provided that any condition imposed is directly related to a likely impact of the variance, and in rough proportionality to the scope of said impact. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.

17.4.7	Issuance of Variance. Following a decision by the City Council to approve or deny the application, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail.

17.4.8	Lapse of Variance. Any Variance issued shall lapse if not acted upon within one (1) year of the date of issuance.
 
Section 17.5 Conditional and Interim Use Permits

17.5.1	Purpose and Intent. The City Council may, by resolution, grant Conditional or Interim Use Permits for the uses and purposes described elsewhere in this Ordinance as Conditional or Interim Uses and may, in the granting of such Conditional or Interim Use Permits, impose conditions and safeguards which promote the guidelines set forth in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.

17.5.2	Application. An application for a Conditional or Interim Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Conditional or Interim Use Permit is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, or subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Conditional or Interim Use Permit application so as to represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the  date  the  application(s),  fee(s),  and  all  supplemental  materials  requested  have  been  received  by  the  Zoning
Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required period is extended or waived.

A)	When reviewing Conditional and Interim Use Permit applications, except those for residential building height, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by the Planning Commission and City Council:

1)	Adjacent Uses; and
2)	Air and Water Quality; and
3)	Traffic Generations; and
4)	Public Safety and Health; and
5)	Area Aesthetics; and
6)	Economic Impact On The Entire Area; and
7)	Consistency With The Comprehensive Municipal Plan; and
9) Anticipated Duration of  the Conditional or Interim Use.

B)	Residential Building Heights. When reviewing Conditional Use Permit applications which deal exclusively with residential building heights, the matter shall be forwarded to the Gem Lake Plan Review Commission who shall, in a timely manner, review all such applications in accordance with criteria established and, from time to time, modified, by the Plan Review Commission. Upon completion of the review, the Plan Review Commission shall forward the application along with it’s written recommendation to the City Council for consideration and approval or denial at it’s next regular meeting. No review by the Planning Commission as required in Section 17.5.3 or Public Hearing as required in Section 17.5.4 shall be required for this Conditional Use unless specifically ordered by the City Council. In all such matters, the City Council shall be considered the Board of Appeals.

17.5.3	Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Conditional or Interim Use on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District; conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which may affect the Conditional or Interim Use.

17.5.4	Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or the City Council to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350'0") feet of the Conditional or Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue.
 
17.5.5	Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section
12.1.5 C. of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.

17.5.6	Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than the number of days allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed Conditional or Interim Use: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance.  The City Council shall, in the form
of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.

17.5.7	Issuance of Conditional or Interim Use Permit. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals, a Conditional or Interim Use Permit shall apply only to the use stated on the permit and the application.

17.5.8	Lapse of Conditional or Interim Use Permit. If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and implemented within one (1) year of the date of issuance, such issued Conditional or Interim Use Permit shall lapse.

17.5.9	eneral Standards. All Conditional and Interim Uses shall comply with the following general standards.

A)	Existing Uses. Shall be in accordance with zoning and building standards in effect at the time of  initial construction and development and shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.

B)	New Uses. Shall conform as follows: 1) compliance with all zoning and other regulations as may otherwise be applicable; 2) the date or the event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty; 3) the existence of the Conditional or Interim Use will not impose additional costs on the public if it becomes necessary for the public to take the property in the future; 4) the user agrees to any conditions of approval associated with the approval of the Conditional or Interim Use Permit by the City Council.

C)	Existing and New Uses. Shall conform as follows:

1)	shall maintain harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development;

2)	shall meet or exceed all Performance Standards contain elsewhere in this Ordinance;

3)	shall not generate such additional traffic associated with the use that would overburden or exceed the capabilities of streets and other public services and facilities including, but not limited to, parks, schools, and utilities serving the area.
 
Section 17.6 Amendments

17.6.1	General. In accordance with provisions of Minnesota Statues, the City Council may, from time to time, adopt amendments to this Ordinance providing such amendments are consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.

17.6.2	Initiation. The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district boundaries and maps of this Ordinance. Any person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) who are the fee title owners of real property in the City or who have been designated in writing to represent the interest of the fee title owners of real property in the City may initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district boundaries and maps so as to affect the said real property or such real property adjacent thereto.

17.6.3	Application. An application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance is to be considered in association with any other Building Permits, Variances, Conditional or Interim Use Permits, or Subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the application so as to represent the full intent of the application. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date of the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, The City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required period is extended or waived.

17.6.4	Referral to Planning Commission. The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at it’s first regular meeting following receipt of complete application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed application on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the character and development of the affected neighborhood(s) and Zoning District(s); conformance with the Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions which my affect the amendment.

A)	Only applications for zoning amendment which meet one of the following conditions should be considered:

1)	A mistake has been made in the original zoning which was inconsistent with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan adopted by the City which should now be corrected; or

2)	Substantial changes have occurred within the City since the adoption of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan which changes should result in a amendment of both the zoning and the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; or

3)	There shall exist a clear public need for a benefit to be derived from the proposed zoning which shall be greater than any benefit or convenience of the property owners.

4)	Beyond a public need being evident, the application shall show that the public interest would be best served by rezoning the property in question and that the property in question is the best qualified to serve said public need; or

5)	In the case of “down zoning” which would diminish the intensity of the current use to a less intensive use, the proposed zoning shall allow the property owners a reasonable use of their property under the terms of this ordinance as well as serve the public interest.

B)	When reviewing a zoning amendment applications, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by the Planning Commission and City Council:

1)	Adjacent Uses; and
2)	Air and Water Quality; and
 
3)	Traffic Generations; and
4)	Public Safety and Health; and
5)	Area Aesthetics; and
6)	Economic Impact On Then Entire Area; and
7)	Consistency With the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.

17.6.5	Public Hearing. In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the application. If the amendment might affect the zoning or use of specific property, a similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the affected property based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within the same time frame.

17.6.6	Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section
12.1.5 A). of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.

17.6.7	Action by City Council. Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be within the time prescribed by law unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of it’s receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed amendment: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding a fact, convey it’s decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City Council.

17.6.8	Adoption of The Amendment and Incorporation of Amendments Into The Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals and unless otherwise specified by the City Council, the Amendment shall be considered in effect on a date specified by the City Council, but not later than thirty (30) days subsequent to the City Council’s decision.

Section 17.7 Appeals

17.7.1	All appeals from any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall be brought before the Planning Commission who shall act in the capacity of Board of Appeals in all matters related to this Ordinance.

17.7.2	All appeals shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by any substantiating information and list of experts who shall may testify on behalf of the appellant. Upon receipt, materials shall be forwarded to the Chairman of the Planning Commission who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next meeting or a special meeting, provided a notice of the special meeting is appropriately published in the City’s legal publication. Notice of all hearings for appeals shall be mailed to all appellants.

17.7.3	Upon review of the appeal and supplemental documentation and testimony related thereto, the Planning Commission shall decide the matter subject to judicial review or appeal to the City Council.

17.7.4	In the event the appeal is granted, it shall be published in the City’s legal publication and shall become effective the date of publication.
 
Section 17.8 Fees

17.8.1	Application Fees. The fees to be paid to the City for an application for amendment of this Ordinance, a Variance from this Ordinance, a Conditional or Interim Use Permit, or any construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other related permit shall be made payable to the City in an amount established, and from time to time, amended by resolution of the City Council.

17.8.2	Supplemental Costs. In addition to application fees, the City shall require payment of supplemental costs related to an action or application including, but not limited to: attorney’s fees, fees of outside experts; staff time; direct expenses exceptional to the effort and as identified by City staff. The applicant shall deposit funds with the City, to be held in escrow, for payment of these supplemental costs, as determined by the City Council in ordinances adopted from time to time setting forth fees and charges for City services. Any application fees shall be applied to the costs incurred by the City. All expenses and costs incurred by the City in connection with an application under this Ordinance shall be borne by the applicant, and paid prior to final action on the application. Any amounts remaining from a deposit posted by an applicant shall be refunded to the applicant within thirty (30) days after final action on the application.

17.8.3	Fees shall be payable at the time applications are first filed with the City and are not refundable unless the application is withdrawn prior to referral of the matter for consideration. There shall be no fee in the case of an application filed in the public interest by members of the Planning Commission or City Council.

Section 17.9 Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to the maximum penalties provided for by law and costs for every offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
 
SECTION 18 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Section 18.1 General. The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage high quality development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are also designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause urban and rural blight. The Zoning Administrator, assisted by the Building Inspector, shall be responsible for enforcing these standards and may require the submission of information showing compliance or non-compliance with the standards.

Section 18.2 Requirements for Consideration

18.2.1	Construction Plan Review

A)	Residential Construction

1)	Prior to the start of construction or remodeling that will create a new building or structure or will change the outside dimensions of any building or structure located in a residential zoning district, six (6) copies of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.

a)	Existing Improvements. Copies of a site plan drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') for the lot upon which the structures will be built or remodeled. Each site plan shall identify the location(s) and size(s) of all existing structures, proposed structures or additions, driveways,  sidewalks, parking spaces and Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS). The dimensions and area calculations of the lot and all building set-back lines shall also be shown.

b)	Wetlands And Water Bodies. All wetlands and other water bodies on the property shall be identified and set-back lines to all structures shall be indicated on the site plan.

c)	Trees And Landscape. If the proposed construction or remodeling will result in any loss of existing trees or vegetation, a tree inventory and, if necessary, reforestation plan as described in Ordinance No. 66 shall be provided. A landscape plan shall also be provided indicating existing and proposed vegetation improvements.

d)	Plans. Preliminary architectural plans including floor plans and exterior elevations for the proposed construction or remodeling.

e)	Sediment And Erosion Control. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed on the property to provide sediment and erosion control in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance.

f)	Additional Data. Any additional data requested by the Zoning Administrator or Plan Review Commission due to conditions peculiar to the property.

B)	Commercial Construction

1)	Prior to the start of construction or remodeling that will create a new building or structure or will change the outside dimensions of any building or structure located in a commercial or business zoning district, six (6) copies of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.

a)	Existing Improvements. Copies of a Registered Surveyors Report drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') for the lot upon which the structures will be built or remodeled. Each site plan shall identify the location(s) and size(s) of all existing structures, proposed structures or additions, driveways, sidewalks, parking spaces and Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS). The dimensions and area calculations of the lot and all building set-back lines shall also be shown.

b)	Wetlands And Water Bodies. All wetlands and other water bodies on the property shall be identified and set-back lines to all structures shall be indicated on the site plan.

c)	Topography. A topographical survey in two (2') foot increments and at a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') for the proposed construction site which includes existing topographical and natural
 
features, proposed changes to the topographical and natural features, existing structures and improvements and proposed structures and improvements.

d)	Trees And Landscape. If the proposed construction or remodeling will result in any loss of existing trees or vegetation, a tree inventory and, if necessary, reforestation plan as described in Ordinance No. 66 shall be provided. A landscape plan shall also be provided indicating existing and proposed vegetation improvements.

e)	Fences And Screening. Details and specifications for all fencing, walls and screening devices to be installed as part of the project.

f)	Storm Water Drainage Plans. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed on the property to provide storm water drainage sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulation within the proposed development site, said BMP’s to be in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance. These plans to be reviewed by the City Engineer and the appropriate Watershed Management Organization (WMO).

g)	Sediment And Erosion Control. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed on the property to provide sediment and erosion control in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance. These plans to be reviewed by the City Engineer and the appropriate Watershed Management Organization (WMO).

h)	Traffic And Parking. Detailed plans showing all entrances and exits accompanied by reviews by Ramsey County if development will access onto a county road or Mn/DOT if development will access onto a state highway. Plans shall also include all interior driveway and road details, parking requirements and emergency access routes.

I)	Lighting. Lighting plans shall include all proposed installation of exterior, parking lot, display and storage lot lighting.

j)	Signage. Proposed placement, description and quantity of all sign types and associated fixtures.

k)	Structure Plans. Preliminary architectural plans including floor plans, exterior elevations and description of exterior facades.

l)	Deviations. Plans should be accompanied by a list of all Variances, Conditional or Interim Use Permits, and Zoning Amendments required for the development.

18.2.2	Cost of data review

A)	All costs in excess of those already included in established permit fees incurred by the City in the review of the data supplied for commercial construction, such as City Engineer plan review costs, shall be paid by the person presenting the plans, prior to any approval. The final approval of these plans will not be voted on by the City Council until all costs have been paid.

B)	Whenever the proposal may involve a potential for significant environmental impact, or if an Environmental Impact Statement or an Environmental Assessment Worksheet may be needed by state law or applicable regulation, the City will require the applicant to prepare or pay for the professional assistance needed in the preparation of these statements or worksheets.

18.2.3	cedures for review

A)	Residential Construction

1)	No building permits will be issued for the proposed construction or remodeling until the data required has been reviewed and approved by the Plan Review Commission which shall be charged with completion of the review in a timely manner.

a)	If approved by the Plan Review Commission, one (1) copy of the data shall be filed with the application for
 
a building permit, one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans retained by the City for it’s records and one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans and made available for inspection at the construction site.

b)	In the event the applicant and Plan Review Commission disagree on any portion of the proposed plans which would preclude issuance of a building permit, the matter may be submitted to the City Council. In this case, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals and may order approval of the building permit application as presented, may order approval of the building permit application with such amendments as it may deem appropriate or may order denial of the building permit application.

B)	Commercial Construction

1)	No building permits will be issued for the proposed construction or remodeling until the data in required has been reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and submitted for review by the Planning Commission at it’s next regular meeting. The Planning Commission with assistance as requested by the Plan Review Commission, City Engineer, Building Official or other such professionals as it may deem necessary shall review the submittal and forward recommendations to the City Council for approval of the building permit application, approval of the building permit application with such amendments as may be appropriate or denial of the building permit application.

a)	If approved by the City Council, one (1) copy of the data shall be filed with the application for a building permit, one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans retained by the City for it’s records and one
(1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans and made available for inspection at the construction site.

b)	In the event the applicant and City Council disagree on any portion of the proposed plans, the matter may be resubmitted with amendments to the Planning Commission for reconsideration and the Planning Commission shall review the resubmittal and forward recommendations to the City Council for approval of the building permit application with amendments as resubmitted or denial of the building permit application.

Section 18.3 Exterior Storage

18.3.1	Residential Districts

A)	In Residential Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties or a street, except for the following; laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of passenger automobiles and pick-up trucks, except inoperative automobiles and trucks may be parked once for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days.

B)	The use of commercial storage equipment and/or semi-trailer type containers or other similar portable storage units is not allowed in any residential district except when used in conjunction with an Interim Use Permit, issuance of which is not subject to a public hearing, issued for a period of not more than one-hundred twenty (120) days in conjunction with a properly issued Building Permit for the property. Whenever possible, such containers should be restricted to a location in the side or rear yard.

18.3.2	Business Districts

A)	In business districts all materials, equipment and vehicles shall be stored in a building or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties or a street except for:

1)	Temporary storage of construction and landscaping materials currently being used on the premises.

2)	Open Storage Lots where screening but not a building shall be required.

3)	Open Sales or Rental Lots where merchandise for retail sales or rental may be displayed in areas designated by the required Site Plan or a Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
 
B)	The use of commercial storage equipment and/or semi-trailer type containers or other similar portable storage units is not allowed in any business district unless an Interim Use Permit for a period not to exceed one-hundred eighty (180) days is first secured in accordance with Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. Whenever possible, such containers should be restricted to a location in the side or rear yard.

Section 18.4 Refuse

18.4.1	In All Districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. Farms may be excluded from this requirement providing the waste material is that commonly associated and incidental to normal farm operations. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse, and weeds.

A)	In all non-residential districts, all commercial refuse containers shall be enclosed in a building or properly fenced or screened to prevent any refuse from spilling beyond the fenced or screened area and to prevent access by children or other unauthorized persons. Fences or screens shall also be subject to the provisions for same found elsewhere in this ordinance.

18.4.2	In All Districts, no person shall store, park or permit the parking or storage of any junked vehicle, machinery or equipment external to any structure, on any property within the city.

Section 18.5 Screening

18.5.1	creening shall be required in all zones where:

A)	any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces and is within thirty (30') feet of an adjoining residential use or zone; and

B)	where the driveway to a parking area of more than six (6) parking spaces is within fifteen (15') feet of an adjoining residential use or zone.

18.5.2	Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property zoned or developed for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a developed residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the Building Inspector).

18.5.3	In all districts all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:

A)	retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure;

B)	materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises;

C)	merchandise located on service station pump islands.

18.5.4	The screening in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than five (5') feet high, but shall not extend within fifteen (15') feet of any street, right-of-way or driveway. The screening shall be placed along property lines or in case of screening along a street, fifteen (15') feet from the street right-of-way with landscaping between the screening and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered “solid” if it blocks direct vision. Planting of a type approved by the Council may also be used as a screening.

A)	Screening shall also be subject to additional provisions of other sections of this Ordinance. Section 18.6 Landscaping
18.6.1	In All Districts, all exposed ground areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use including but not limited to street boulevards not devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios and the like shall be landscaped.
 
18.6.2	Landscaped yards shall be provided along all streets, both public and private. Landscaped yards shall not be used for parking of vehicles or equipment or for storage or display of household items, materials, supplies or merchandise advertised for sale. Landscaped yards shall be at least twenty (20') feet in depth along all streets measured from the right- of-way. Except for driveways, the yard shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot and, in the case of a corner lot, along both streets.

18.6.3	All property owners and their (sub-) contractors shall employ and maintain sediment and erosion control in accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance until landscaping is complete.

18.6.4	All landscaping shall be completed within one (1) growing season after completion of any development, grading and filling, construction, or other activity which shall result in exposed ground on the property.

Section 18.7 Maintenance

18.7.1 In All Districts, all structures, landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not be unsightly or present harmful health and safety or nuisance conditions to the adjoining areas.

Section 18.8 Lighting and Glare

18.8.1	In All Districts, any lighting shall be arranged as to deflect light from all adjoining property, and from the public streets and highways. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from lighting or from high temperature processes such as welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.

18.8.2	Glare or Heat - Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located.

18.8.3	Outdoor Lighting - All outdoor lighting shall be so designed and installed so that light will not be directed onto adjoining property or public streets and highways. Lighting units shall be properly shielded to give no upward component of light to create a sky-glow.

A)	Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be mounted at the lowest possible level above ground, but in no case shall any pole or structure for mounting such fixtures exceed the maximum principal structure height restrictions.

B)	Prior to installing or remodeling any outdoor lighting, a site plan showing type, location and configuration details and proposed area of direct illumination must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his approval.

C)	After completion of any outdoor lighting system the property owner may be required to submit an affidavit, by a registered lighting engineer, that the completed project does not exceed the requirements of this section.

18.8.4	Lighting used to illuminate sales lots - Lighting used to illuminate sales lots for new or used cars shall be arranged and designed so as to comply with the following limitations:

A)	Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the lot, measured 36 inches above grade, shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) foot candles.

B)	Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured thirty (30') feet out from the property line with the meter directed toward the lot, shall be five (5) foot candles.

C)	The maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point thirty (30') feet out from the property line, shall be no greater than six-hundred (600) foot Lamberts.

18.8.5	Lighting for outdoor storage areas - Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall comply with the following limitations:

A)	Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the area, measured thirty-six (36") inches above grade, shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles.
 
B)	Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured five (5') feet out from the property line with the meter directed toward the area in question, shall be two (2) foot-candles.

C)	Maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point five (5') feet out from the property line, shall be no greater than three-hundred (300) foot Lamberts.

18.8.6	Lighting for off street parking - Lighting for off street parking lots shall comply with the following limitations:

A)	Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the parking area, measured thirty-six (36") inches above grade, shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles.

B)	Limitations on the hours of lighting operation may be imposed by the City Council. Section 18.9 Vibration
18.9.1 Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge, shall be prohibited if such vibrations are perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. This standard shall not apply to vibrations created during the process of construction.

Section 18.10 Off-Street Loading

18.10.1	In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading space on the basis of adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used incidental to the operation of the use.

A)	No loading berth of vehicles over two-tons capacity shall be closer than one-hundred (100') feet to any residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls not less than eight (8') feet in height.

B)	Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audile in a residential district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

Section 18.11 Traffic Control

18.11.1	The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid:

A)	congestion on the public streets; and,
B)	traffic hazards; and
C)	additional truck traffic through residential areas.

18.11.2	Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe and orderly flow.

18.11.3	Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall avoid residential areas and in all cases be forward-moving with no backing into streets.

18.11.4	All entrances from private property onto city streets shall be subject to review and approval of the City Engineer and all entrances from private property onto county roads or state highways shall be subject to review and approval by Ramsey County Public Works or the Minnesota Department of Transportation.

Section 18.12 (Deleted)

Section 18.13 Architecture

18.13.1	It is hereby affirmed as public policy that the appearance of this community is a proper matter for public concern and that all developed open spaces, and all buildings, signs, plantings, surfaces and structures
which may be seen from the public ways are subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.

18.13.2	In All Districts, all principal buildings other than one-family dwellings must be designed or  approved by a
 
registered architect and certified in accordance with the appropriate Minnesota State statutes.

18.13.3	In All Business Districts, a building permit shall not be issued unless the proposed use is designed, sited, oriented and landscape-planned to produce a harmonious relationship of building and grounds with
adjacent buildings and grounds and with the environment of the neighborhood.

18.13.4	In All Residential Districts, a building permit shall not be issued if the proposed building is so similar or dissimilar to the other homes in the area as to result in depreciation of property values in the neighborhood.

Section 18.14 Explosives

18.14.1 No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products, such as TNT or dynamite, which could decompose by detonation shall be permitted except such as are licensed by the Council.

Section 18.15 Radiation and Electrical Emissions

18.15.1 No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radio-activity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

Section 18.16 Aircraft

18.16.1	Landing Area. Aircraft landing areas are hereby prohibited within the City of Gem Lake.

18.16.2	Operation. The landing and the taking off of aircraft within the City of Gem Lake is prohibited except for emergencies or by duly authorized law enforcement, military or medical transport aircraft.

Section 18.17 Other Nuisance Characteristics

18.17.1	No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, dangerous wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other such adverse influences shall be permitted in any district that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property.

18.17.2	All wastes shall be properly contained, fenced or screened and disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to public health and safety.

Section 18.18 Consistency with Plans and Policies

18.18.1 The proposed use shall preserve the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and shall be consistent with the goals, plans and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

Section 18.19 Clustering and Density Transfer

18.19.1	This clustering and density transfer system is to provide a means by which parcels of land in the City of Gem Lake, having unusual building characteristics due to subsoil conditions, elevation of the water table, water area, and/or relative location or shape of the parcel may be more efficiently utilized. Density zoning also provides a means to preserve and protect natural resource areas such as wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes, as well as good agricultural land and scenic views. Basically, this approach allows a developer to cluster housing or business units in buildable areas in return for leaving the natural resource areas or agricultural land open from development.

18.19.2	The City Council, in determining the reasonableness of the proposed clustering, shall consider the following factors:

A)	Location, amount and proposed use of open space;

B)	Location, design and type of dwellings or business provided,
 
C)	Physical characteristics of the site

D)	Relationship of the proposed dwelling or business units to nearby uses.

18.19.3	The owner or owners of any tract of land in the City of Gem Lake may submit to the Planning Commission, for review and recommendation to the City Council, a plan for use and development of such a tract of land as a cluster area by making an application for a Conditional Use Permit authorizing completion of the project according to an approved plan. The plan for the proposed project shall conform to the requirements of the Use District within which the land is located except as hereinafter modified:

A)	The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a Conditional Use Permit requested shall not be less than five
(5) acres in size; and

B)	The applicant shall state precisely what, in this opinion, are the unusual characteristics of this site for purposes of justifying the granting of a Conditional Use Permit for this project; and

C)	The plan shall be submitted in the form of a preliminary plan and be in complete conformance with what would be submitted as described in the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance for a preliminary plan, and,

D)	The number of dwelling or business units proposed for the entire subdivided area shall not exceed the total number permitted for the Use District within which the land is located, unless a bonus is given for unique uses of the area; and,

E)	The average lot density in the plan shall not be greater than the maximum for the area and the lot area of any one
(1) lot shall not be reduced more than one-half (½) by assigning additional dwelling or business units; and,

F)	That land which is set aside as unbuildable and on which the plan is justified shall be clearly indicated on the plan. This land shall be dedicated as a “conservation easement” naming both the City and the Minnesota Land Trust or similar as holders of that title for that land. Provisions for the continual maintenance of that “easement” area so dedicated and accepted by the City shall be required from the property owner(s).

18.19.4	When calculating the number of dwelling or business units per acre the size of site shall be determined by the total land area within the perimeter of the privately owned property. This will include any area of newly proposed public or private roads of road right-of-ways.

18.19.5	A density bonus of up to ten (10%) percent of the maximum allowable dwellings on a defined parcel may be allowed by the City Council

Section 18.20  Park Land Dedication Requirements

18.20.1	As a pre-requisite to plat or Planned Unit Development approval, all developers shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City of Gem Lake’s park fund as provided by this section of this Ordinance. The form of the contribution, cash or land (or any combination), shall be as determined by the City Council in an amount equal to ten (10.0%) percent of the total acreage in the development or ten (10.0%) percent of the pre-development land value.

18.20.2	Subdivision of land which has been previously platted and officially recorded and which contains less than one (1) acre shall be exempt from dedication requirements.

18.20.3	Land to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds and public open spaces shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location. The City Council, at it’s discretion, may reject proffered land and mandate monetary contribution.

18.20.4	The Gem Lake Planning Commission shall review all park land dedication proposals including the location of land and the amount of land to be conveyed or dedicated within a proposed development or subdivision. Upon review, the Gem Lake Planning Commission shall recommend the land dedication and cash contribution requirements for
 
proposed developments or subdivisions to the City Council. The exact amount of land or cash considerations to be dedicated shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

18.20.5	Land areas conveyed or dedicated to the City of Gem Lake, as a park or recreation area, shall not be used in calculating the density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the proposed development or subdivision, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for Planned Unit Developments.

18.20.6	Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided for in a proposed development, subdivision or Planned Unit Development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision or PUD , such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the City Council against the requirement for dedication for park and recreation purposes, providing the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so and that the following standards are met:

A)	The yards, court areas , setbacks and other open space required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open spaces, and

B)	That the public ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreements, and

C)	That the public open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be eliminated without the consent of the City Council, and

D)	That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreations purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, hydrological conditions, geology, access and location of private open space lands, and

E)	That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the comprehensive plan, and are approved by the City Council, and

F)	That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall not exceed forty (40.0%) percent of the park dedication requirements for the development.

18.20.7	The City of Gem Lake shall maintain a separate fund into which all cash contributions received in lieu of conveyance or dedication of land for park and playground, public open space or trail purposes shall be deposited and shall make, from time to time, appropriations from such fund for acquisition of land for park and playground purposes, for developing existing park and playground sites, for public open space and trails, or for debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired for parks and playgrounds which benefit the residents of the City.

18.20.8	If a developer or subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a commitment to the City of Gem Lake as to the type of buildings that will be constructed on lots in the proposed plat, then the land and cash requirement will be a reasonable amount as determined by the City Council.

18.20.9	Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City of Gem Lake shall not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the City.




SECTION 19 - SIGNS

Repealed by Ordinance No. 109, October 19, 2009.
 
SECTION 20 - OFF STREET PARKING AREAS

Section 20.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off- street parking in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and/or structures.

Section 20.2 Site Plans. When applying for a building permit in all Districts for a new structure, the enlarging of a structure or new enlarged use of a parcel of land, the application shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension indicating the location of off-street parking spaces in compliance with the following requirements.

Section 20.3  General Provisions.

20.3.1	Existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in number unless said number exceeds the requirement set forth herein for a similar new use.

20.3.2	Should a building, structure or use in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance be damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause, it may be re-established except that in doing so any off-street parking or loading which existed must be retain and should plans be effected for enlarging the floor area, seating capacity or other facilities which would affect the parking or loading requirements, the parking or loading spaces shall be enlarged accordingly.

20.3.3	Floor Area - The term “Floor Area” shall mean the sum of all floor areas in a building as calculated from the outside dimensions of the building. It shall not include areas used primarily for non-public purposes such as storage, incidental repair, office building management or maintenance, toilets, or rest rooms, utilities, or dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.

20.3.4	Parking Spaces - Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9') feet wide and twenty (20') feet in length exclusive of an adequately designed system of access drives.

20.3.5	Use of Parking Facilities - Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the parking or passenger automobiles and/or one truck not to exceed one and one-half (1 ½) ton capacity for each dwelling unit except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit. Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants or customers of business or manufacturing establishments except by Conditional  or  Interim  Use Permit. Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage or repair of commercial vehicles.

20.3.6	Required off-street parking space in the Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.

20.3.7	Joint Parking Facilities - Off street parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures or uses may be provided collectively in any “district” in which separate parking facilities for each separate building, structure or use would be required, provided that number of spaces provided shall equal te sum of the separate requirements of each use.

20.3.8	Use of Parking Area - Required off-street parking space in any District shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or rent.

Section 20.4 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas.

20.4.1	Parking Areas - shall be designed so as to provide adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such driveway access shall not exceed twenty-two (22') feet in width and shall be so located as to cause the least interference with traffic movement.

20.4.2	Calculating Space - When calculating the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (½) or more shall constitute another space. One parking space shall equal three-hundred (300 s.f.) square feet or parking and moving area.

20.4.3	Signs - No signs shall be located in any parking area except as necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.
 
20.4.4	Surfacing - All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage. Parking area for less than three (3) vehicle spaces shall be exempt. Plans for surfacing and drainage shall be subject to approval of the City Council.

20.4.5	Lighting - Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property, and shall comply with Section 18.8.

20.4.6	Curbing and Landscaping - All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a bumper curb not less than three (3') feet from the side property line or guard of normal bumper height no less than one (1') foot from the side property line. When said area is for six (6) spaces or more, a curb or fence not over six (6') feet in height shall be erected along the front yard set-back line with grass or planting occupying the space between the sidewalk and curb or fence.

20.4.7	When a required off-street parking space for six (6') feet in height nor less than three and one-half (3'6") feet in height shall be erected along the “R” District property line. Screen planting may also be required.

20.4.8	Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces - It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and owner of the principle use, uses and/or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space, access ways, landscaping and required fences.

Section 20.5 Required Off-Street Parking - Shall be as follows:

20.5.1	ingle Family Dwellings - At least one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional parking space for each two (2) roomers accommodated. A garage will fulfill this requirement. However a building permit shall not be granted to convert a garage to living space unless other acceptable provisions are made to provide the required parking space.

20.5.2	Two-Family Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit, but not more than two (2) per unit.

20.5.3	Boarding and Rooming Houses - At least two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) persons for which accommodations are provided for sleeping.

20.5.4	Multiple Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for each four (4) two-bedroom units and one (1) additional space for each two (2) three bedroom units.

20.5.5	Hotel or Apartment Hotel - At least one (1) parking space for each rental unit provided in the design of the building.

20.5.6	Motel, Tourist Home, Motor Hotel - At least one space for each dwelling unit or lodging room.

20.5.7	Church, Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each three and one-half (3.5) seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall.

20.5.8	Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Rest Home, Nursing Home or Institution - At least one (1) parking space for each six (6) beds for which accommodations are offered, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on maximum shift.

20.5.9	Medical or Dental Clinic - At least three (3) parking spaces for each staff doctor or dentist.

20.5.10	Drive-in Flood Establishments - At least one (1) parking space for each fifteen (15 s.f.) square feet of gross floor space in building allocated to drive-in operation

20.5.11	Bowling Alley -At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as a restaurant.

20.5.12	Motor Fuel Station - At least one (1) off-street parking space for each employee on maximum shift, plus two (2) off-street parking spaces for each service stall.
 
20.5.13	Retail Store - At least seven (7) off-street parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000 s.f.) square feet of gross floor space.

20.5.14	Restaurants, Cafes, Bars, Taverns, Night Clubs - At least one (1) space for each three (3) seats based on capacity design.

20.5.15	Banks, Offices and/or Public Office Building - At least four (4) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000 s.f.) square feet of gross floor space.

20.5.16	Undertaking Establishments - At least five (5) parking spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle maintained on premises. Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral procession.

20.5.17	Furniture Store, Wholesale, Auto Sales, Repair Shops At least three (3) parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. Open sales lots shall provide one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces for each employee on maximum shift, but not less than three (3) spaces.

20.5.18	Warehouse, Storage, Handling of Bulk Goods - At least one (1) space for each two (2) employees on maximum shift or one (1) for each two thousand (2,000 s.f.) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is the larger.
 
SECTION 21 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS

Section 21.1 General Provisions.

21.1.1	Shoreland District. The land use regulations in this Section shall apply to any land in the City of Gem Lake located within a floodplain, within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a public water or public waters wetland, including but not limited to the body of water known as Gem Lake and its attendant wetlands, or within 300 feet of a stream or river. The regulations of this Section shall apply in addition to the provisions of the zoning district applicable to the property, the Flood Hazard ordinance of the city (No. 114), and other ordinances of the City.

21.1.2	Wetland Conservation Act. The City of Gem Lake has delegated its authority under the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 and attendant rules to the Vadnais Lake Area Watershed Management Association (VLAWMO). All requests for permits, review or approval required by the Wetland Conservation Act must be submitted to VLAWMO as the acting Local Government Unit.

21.1.3	Applied in Concert with Other Law. These regulations and requirements shall be in addition to those imposed by Federal and State law, regional and local water management regulations, and city ordinances, all of which shall jointly apply. Under joint application, the most restrictive requirements shall apply.

21.2	Shoreland Use Controls.

21.2.1	Policy. Intact, vegetated and stable shorelines and streambanks provide valuable functions to Gem Lake and other water resources in the City including prevention of erosion, reinforcement of soils through root structure, trapping of nutrients and sediments, and provision of fish and wildlife habitat. Gem Lake is a Natural Environment lake under the criteria established by the Department of Natural Resources.

21.2.2	Minimum Lot Size and Setback Requirements. All lots created and structures erected in a shoreland district following the enactment of this Section must meet the criteria established in the underlying zoning district. No variance shall be granted, or other approval given, which allows the creation of a lot in a shoreland district that is less than 80,000 square feet in area (measured above the ordinary high water mark of the water body), or less than 200 feet in width. No structure, other than water-oriented accessory structures managed by this Section, shall be placed within 150 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the water body. The maximum lot coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces is 25%.

21.2.3	Accessory Structures and Facilities. All accessory structures and facilities, except those that are water- oriented, must meet or exceed structure setback standards. If allowed by local government controls, each residential lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure or facility located closer to public waters than the structure setback if all of the following standards are met:

a.	The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.

b.	The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least ten feet.

c.	The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.

d.	The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.

e.	The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.

f.	Any accessory structures or facilities not meeting the above criteria, or any additional accessory structures or facilities must meet or exceed structure setback standards.
 
21.2.4	Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:

a.	Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width.

b.	Landings for stairways and lifts must not exceed 32 square feet in area.

c.	Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings.

d.	Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.

e.	Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.

f.	Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for persons with physical disabilities are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of (a) to (e) are complied with.

21.2.5.	Decks. Except as provided in section 21.2.3, decks must meet the structure setback standards. Decks to be added to structures existing on the date the shoreland structure setbacks were established by ordinance may be allowed without a variance, if all of the following criteria and standards are met:

a.	thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;

b.	the deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing shoreline setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and

c.	the deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.

21.2.6	Driveways and parking areas. Driveways and parking areas must meet all applicable structure setbacks, and must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from the water body. Access ramps and approach roads are not allowed in the structure setback area surrounding Gem Lake.

21.2.7	Shoreline alteration. Alterations of vegetation and topography in a shoreland district is controlled to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutruents, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect wildlife habitat.

a.	Removal or alteration of vegetation is limited to the amount necessary to construct an approved structure, and to maintain the health of the vegetation, provided that no such removal or alteration shall substantially reduce the screening of structures, vehicles and other facilities as viewed from the water. This provision shall not restrict the removal of trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards, or the removal of buckthorn and similar invasive species identified by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.

b.	Any application for new construction in a shoreland district must include a Tree and Vegetation Preservation Plan which, in addition to the requirements of Ordinance No. 66, includes an inventory of all vegetation affected by the construction and a plan for preservation, relocation, or replacement of the vegetation.

b.	Use of fertilizer and pesticides in a shoreland district must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into the water body.
 
c.	No grading, filling, or other topographical alteration shall be allowed within 50 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the water body, with the exception that the Zoning Administrator may approve the installation of clean beach-type sand in this area, in accordance with DNR regulations, after review of an installation plan.

d.	Any grading or filling anywhere else in a shoreland area involving movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material requires a grading and filling permit. If the grading or filling is to take place in a wetland, VLAWMO review and approval must be obtained before the City can issue a permit. In addition to any other requirements, grading and filling activity in shoreland areas must also meet the following criteria:

1.	Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible.

2.	Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible.

3.	Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used.

4.	Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards. The use of bioengineering is encouraged as an alternative to engineered stabilization techniques. Retaining walls are to be used only when there is no adequate stabilization alternative.

5.	Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope.

6.	Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of the water body must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.

21.2.8	Nonconforming uses. In addition to the regulations of this ordinance applicable to nonconforming uses generally, in a Shoreland district the following shall apply:

a.	An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be permitted on the side of the structure or facility facing away from the water body.

b.	An improvement to an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be allowed to extend parallel to the shoreline when the improvement is otherwise in compliance with the dimensional and setback requirements of this Ordinance.

c.	Exterior decks attached to an existing lawful non-conforming structure which do not extend any roof or foundation may be permitted to extend parallel to the shoreline and shall be constructed to be visually inconspicuous when viewed from the water (under summer leaf-on conditions).

d.	Reconstruction of an existing historic structure, any appurtenances thereto, and the grounds shall be allowed to preserve its historic character if the structure or site is recognized as a historic site on the National Register of Historic Places.

21.3	Use of Gem Lake.

21.3.1	No Motorized Use. Gem Lake shall not be used by any motorized craft or traffic including, but not limited to, motorized boats, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) excluding equipment used for cleaning, plowing snow or other occasional maintenance uses.

21.3.2	No Wet Storage Of Boats. Boats shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of boats shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring properties and Gem Lake while not in use.
 
21.3.3	cks.

a.	Docks are seasonal and temporary in nature and, therefore, shall not be permanently affixed to the shore or lake bottom of Gem Lake.

b.	Docks shall not be greater than four (4'0") feet in width, two (2'0") feet in height above the water and twenty (20'0") feet in length from the lake shore.

c.	Docks shall not be covered with any roof structure, awnings or any other type of enclosure.

d.	Only one (1) dock shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the waterline.

21.3.4	Swimming Rafts.

a.	Swimming rafts are seasonal and temporary in nature and therefore shall not be permanently affixed to the lake bottom.

b.	Swimming rafts shall not exceed one hundred (100 s.f.) square feet in total area and shall not be more than two (2'0) feet higher than the water surface.

c.	Swimming rafts shall not be located more than fifty (50') feet from the lakeshore.

d.	Swimming rafts shall not be covered with a roof structure, awning or any other type of enclosure.

e.	Only one (1) raft shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the waterline.

f.	Swimming rafts shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of swimming rafts shall be on the shore, properly secured and stored out of view from the water and from neighboring properties.

21.3.5	Water Appropriation. No person shall appropriate water from Gem Lake without first obtaining an permit from VLAWMO.
 
SECTION 22 - SOIL EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT

Section 22.1 Erosion and Sediment Control.

22.1.1	Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City of Gem Lake to require the preparation and implementation of erosion and sediment control plans to control runoff and erosion, to retain or control sediment on land during land disturbing activities, and to prevent the degradation of resources and the loss or damage of property due to erosion and sedimentation.

22.1.2	Regulation. No person shall commence land disturbing activities, unless granted a variance, without first obtaining a permit from the City that incorporates and approves an erosion and sediment control plan for the activity, development or redevelopment. The proposed activity will not result in an increase in sediment off the site during construction and post-construction activities and be in conformance with the MPCA General Permit Construction for Activities, and as amended.

22.1.3	Criteria. Erosion and sediment control plans and the land disturbing activity shall comply with the following criteria:

a.	Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with BMPs, and shall be sufficient to retain sediment on-site.

b.	Erosion and sediment control measures shall meet the standard for the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated With Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program Permit MNR100001 (NPDES General Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August 1 2008, as amended; except where more specific requirements are provided in paragraphs 3(c) and 3(d) of this Section below.

c.	The permittee or applicant must ensure final stabilization of the site in accordance with the NPDES General Construction Permit requirements. The site will be considered as having achieved final stabilization following submission of Notice of Termination by the permittee or applicant, and inspection and approval by the City.

d.	All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 10-year frequency storm without erosion.

22.1.4	Exception. No permit or erosion control plan shall be required under this Section for the following land disturbing activities:

a.	Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens, repairs and maintenance work.

b.	Construction, installation and maintenance of individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS) other than those on steep slopes, on riparian lots within a Shoreland District or in a bluff impact zone.

c.	Installation of any fence, sign, telephone or electric poles, or other kinds of posts or poles.

d.	Emergency activity necessary to protect life or prevent substantial harm to persons or property.

e.	Minor wetland impacts that have received a “certificate of exemption or no loss” determination by the LGU (VLAWMO or RWMWD) administering the Wetland Conservation Act, as amended.

f.	All maintenance, repair, resurfacing and reconditioning activities of existing road, bridge, and highway systems which do not involve land disturbing activities outside of the existing surfaced roadway.

All land disturbing activities not required by this Section to obtain a permit or have an approved erosion and sediment control plan shall nevertheless be conducted in full compliance with this Section.
 
Section 22.2 Stormwater Management.

22.2.1	licy Statement. It is the policy of the City to:

a.	Manage new development and drainage alternations by requiring each development or land disturbing activity to manage its stormwater effectively, either on or off-site.

b.	Promote and encourage a reduction in runoff rates, encourage infiltration and promote groundwater recharge.

c.	Maximize groundwater recharge as a means of maintaining drinking water supplies, preserving base flows in streams, and limiting discharges of stormwater to downstream receiving waters.

d.	Assure that property owners control the rate and volume of stormwater runoff originating from their property so that surface water and groundwater quantity and quality is protected or improved, soil erosion is minimized, and flooding potential is reduced.

e.	Protect and improve natural resources within the watershed to prevent further degradation.

22.2.2	Regulation

a.	Rate Control. The proposed activity will not increase the peak stormwater runoff rate from the site, under pre-development conditions, for anything less than a 24-hour precipitation event with a return frequency of 1- or 2-, 10- and 100-years. The applicant must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General Permit for Construction Activities.

b.	Volume Control. Stormwater runoff volume retention shall be achieved onsite in the amount equivalent to the runoff generated from one-half inch of runoff over the impervious surfaces of the development or as specified under Section 8.0. Volume control credits can be used to control up to one-half (0.5) inch of runoff as described under Section 22.2.5.

c.	Water Quality
Stormwater management must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General Permit for Construction Activities and guidelines set forth in total maximum daily load studies and sustainable lake management plans. No direct (untreated) discharges of stormwater to natural or improved waterbodies are allowed.

d.	Waste Disposal to Waters
Stormwater management must not result in the discharge of any regulated substance, hazardous or biological waste, or petroleum product, whether treated or untreated, to best management practice devices that may have a deleterious effect upon water of the state (surface and groundwater), unless the discharge is in compliance with Federal, State and local regulations.

22.2.3	Criteria. Stormwater management plans shall comply with the following criteria:

a.	A hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory will be used to analyze runoff for the design or analysis of flows and water levels.

b.	Runoff rates for the proposed activities, development or redevelopment within the watershed shall:
1.	Not exceed existing runoff rates for the 1 or 2-year, 10-year and 100-year critical duration storm events;
2.	Not accelerate on or off-site water course erosion, downstream nuisance, flooding or damage as demonstrated by the applicant; and
3.	Runoff rates may be restricted to less than the existing rates when necessary for the  protection of
public health, safety and general welfare.
 
c.	Stormwater facilities must provide:
1.	An identified overflow spillway and downstream route sufficiently stabilized to convey a 100-year critical storm event;
2.	Pond outlets designed to prevent short circuiting of the flow from pond inputs to the outlet;
3.	A minimum depth for ponds of three (3) feet and conform to the design specifications of the Stormwater Manual, 2005.
4.	An outlet skimmer to prevent migration of floatables and oils for the 2-year event; and
5.	Access for future maintenance that is free of plantings and impediments.

d.	Regional ponds and practices can be used to provide for stormwater management based on the following criteria:
1.	Regional ponds are required to be designed based on ultimate conditions for the contributing subwatershed.
2.	Regional  ponds  are  required  to  be  constructed  and  operational  prior  to  constructing imperviousness within the contributing drainage area.

e.	Design of all Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be consistent with the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended and the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.

f.	When using infiltration for volume control, infiltration volumes and facility sizes shall be calculated using the appropriate hydrological soil group classification and infiltration rate, and shall be capable of infiltrating the required volume within 72 hours or as specified in the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities.

g.	In evaluating the infiltration capacity of a constructed BMP under post-development conditions, the infiltration rates in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual should be used. Select the design infiltration based on the least permeable soil horizon within the first five (5) feet below the bottom elevation of the proposed infiltration facility. Site-specific infiltration measurements completed by a licensed professional (as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, November 2005, and as amended) may be used in place of the values in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, and as approved by the City.

h.	All stormwater retention practices designed to meet the volume control regulation must provide pretreatment of stormwater runoff prior to infiltrating into the groundwater system or discharging downstream. Pretreatment methods must comply with the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, for the proposed practice. All highly recommended and recommended design criteria must be met, unless specifically waived by the Technical Commission of VLAWMO or RWMWD, as appropriate.

i.	To the maximum extent practicable, volume control shall be fully met onsite (Section 2, Subsection 2b). Site conditions may make infiltration undesirable or impossible. The applicant must make soil corrections and/or investigate other locations on the site for feasible infiltration locations. Infiltration practices are not allowed:
1.	For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas;
2.	Within hydrologic soil group D type soils;
3.	Within  some  Wellhead  Protection  Areas  (Review  Wellhead  Protection  Plans  for  additional guidance);
4.	Within 50 feet of a septic tank or drain field;
5.	On areas with less than three (3) feet vertical separation from the bottom of the infiltration system
to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or top of bedrock.
If the applicant claims that infiltration is not feasible or allowed onsite, the applicant must provide supporting documentation and follow Section 2, Subsection 4.

22.2.4	Alternative Compliance Sequencing. For sites where infiltration practices are determined infeasible as described in Section 22.2.3(i), the following Alternative Compliance Sequencing steps shall be taken in the order shown:

a.	Use of alternative volume control practices as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, sized according to Section 22.2.2(b).

b.	Use of on-site filtration practices and biofiltration using an impermeable liner and under drain, sized to filter a
 
volume of runoff according to Section 22.2.2(b).

c.	Use of off-site volume control practices sized according to Section 22.2.2(b). Off-site volume control practices can be used to provide for stormwater management based on the following criteria:
1.	Off-site practices shall be constructed within the same drainage area or subwatershed as the project site.
2.	Off-site practices are required to be constructed and operational prior to constructing imperviousness within
the contributing drainage area.

d.	Use of wet sediment basins sized per the standard described within the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.

22.2.5	Volume Control Credits.
a.	Volume control credits will be awarded as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended.

b.	Volume control credits must be determined based on the methods outlined within Chapter 11 of the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, for the Adjusted Water Quality Volume.
1.	The water quality volume (Vwq) shall be calculated by multiplying one (1) inch of runoff over the proposed impervious surface.
2.	Applied credits cannot exceed a Vwq greater than 1/2 inch of runoff over the proposed impervious area.
3.	All recommended and highly recommended conditions must be met, unless specifically waived by VLAWMO staff and the Technical Commission.
4.	For Drainage to Stream, Wetland, or Shoreland Buffer Credits, the credits will apply to areas outside of
the minimum buffer requirement as prescribed within these Policies.
5.	Grass Channel Credits can be applied to the roadway portion of the proposed site when grass channels have been designed with water quality adaptations such as water quality berms.

22.2.6	Maintenance and Easement.
a.	Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant for (1) access for facility inspections and
maintenance and (2) preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities, including the overflow route.

b.	Land used by stormwater management facilities shall be preserved by dedication and/or perpetual easement to the City, when required by the City. These easements shall cover those portions of the property which are adjacent to the facility and which lie below the 100-year flood elevation.

c.	A maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the County as part of the City development approval process. Minimum requirements for the maintenance agreement include:
1.	A list of the responsible party(s) (City and facility owner/manager);
2.	Contact information;
3.	A formalized maintenance schedule, with scheduled activities;
4.	A “Failure to Perform” provision laying out remedial actions if the responsible party does not perform as expected;
5.	Maintenance debris handling plans; and
6.	Emergency response (environmental, spill, safety).

d.	Maintenance is required for all stormwater practices constructed in compliance with these Policies. The City will conduct periodic inspection of stormwater practices. A minimum of 20% of all stormwater facilities shall be inspected annually by the City. The City shall provide to the VLAWMO annual inspection reports detailing inspection activities and proof of maintenance where required.

e.	When land used by stormwater management facilities is public land or public right-of-way, easements under this section will not be required, and a written agreement between the City and applicant may be executed in lieu of the recorded maintenance agreement.
 
SECTION 23 - BROADCAST/TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND ANTENNAS

Section 23.1 Purpose and Intent

23.1.1	The purpose of this section is to establish predictable standards for siting and installing of wireless telephone, radio broadcast, television broadcast and communications antenna towers or supporting structures within the City of Gem Lake. It is the intent of this section to accommodate the communications needed of the residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.

23.1.2	ecifically, the City Council finds the regulations set forth in this section necessary to:

A)	Facilitate the provisions for wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City.

B)	Restrict the location of towers and antennas to designated areas of the City and impose design standards to minimize adverse visual effects of towers and antennas.

C)	Require evidence of structural integrity and impose setback requirements to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure.

D)	Require applicants for towers and antenna to prove their need and to apply for permits for their construction.

E)	Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new antennas and reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.

Section 23.2 Zoning Districts For Construction

23.2.1	The following Zoning district preferences shall be followed when selecting potential commercial broadcast/ telecommunications tower sites in the City of Gem Lake:

A)	General Business (GB)

B)	General Business II (GBII)

C)	Retail Business (RB)

23.2.2	The following Zoning districts shall not be used for commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower/antenna sites in the City of Gem Lake:

A)	Any R1, R2, R3, R4 or LD-B district

B)	Any Overlay district Section 23.3 Performance Standards
23.3.1	All stand along towers or antennas and/or supporting structures for the same must meet the design and performance standards identified in this section.

23.3.2	A proposal for a new tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the Broadcast/ telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot e accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one (1) mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one of the following reasons:

A)	The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost.

B)	The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment  at  the  tower  or  building  as  documented by  a  qualified  and  licensed  professional  engineer  and  the
 
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

C)	Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.

D)	Other unforseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.

23.3.3	Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunications service tower shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred (100') feet in height or for at leaser one additional user if the tower is over sixty (60') feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.

23.3.4	ctural design, mounting, and installation of any tower or antenna shall be in compliance with the manufacturer’s specification and as may be necessary or as determined by the City Council. All such designs and installations shall be verified and approved by a qualified and licensed professional engineer employed by the applicant.

23.3.5	All towers and antennas and related structures shall be designed and built in compliance with all City of Gem Lake building codes and electrical code requirements, and as applicable shall require permits. Existing towers may continue in use but may not be structurally altered.

23.3.6	The height and style of the tower and antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as verified by a communications engineer or other appropriate professional. However, no towers erected for broadcast or Telecommunications service shall exceed 180 feet and no tower and accompanying antenna shall exceed two-hundred (200') feet.

23.3.7	All obsolete and unused towers and antennas shall be removed within six (6) months of cessation or operation at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. The City reserves the right to remove
any unused tower or antenna at it’s expense then back charge the property owner to recover costs.

23.3.8	Damaged existing towers and antennas my be rebuild to the same physical dimensions and at the same location. Repairs and rebuilding shall be complete within one (1) year after receiving the building permit from the City. However, if the tower is destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, so that repairs would be forty (40%) percent or more of a new tower, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this Ordinance.

23.3.9	advertising message shall be affixed to any tower and or antenna structure.

23.3.10	wer or antenna shall be illuminated by artificial means and must not display strobe lights, unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal or state authority for that particular tower. When incorporated into the approved design, the tower may support light fixtures used to illuminate parking lights, ball fields, or similar areas.

23.3.11	Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. Antenna support structures shall be painted light blue, gray, or silver or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact.

23.3.12	Towers located closer to a property line than the distance equal tot eh height of the tower shall be designed and engineered to collapse progressively within the distance between the tower and property line. The applicant for any tower shall submit written documentation explaining tower construction and possible failure and provide assurance that blowing or falling ice from tower/antenna can be contained on the subject property. At a minimum, the tower shall comply with the minimum setback requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located.

23.3.13	A tower shall be located on a parcel of land so as to have the least impact on adjoining properties and any negative impact of the tower shall be confined onto the property on which it is located, to the greatest extent possible.
 
23.3.14	The tower location shall provide the maximum amount of screening for off site views of the tower and/or antenna and related structure.  Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.

23.3.15	All utility buildings, structures, and equipment accessory to the tower or antenna must be architecturally designed to blend in with surrounding environment and must meet the minimum design requirements of the Zoning District in which they are located.

23.3.16	No change in the use or ownership of an approved tower or antenna may be made without the written consent of the City Council.

21.3.17 Co-location of antennas upon overhead power line poles or street light poles is encouraged provide the said antenna meets all applicable federal state spacing requirements and inference regulation.

Section 23.4 Proof of Non-Interference

23.4.1 Each application for construction of a commercial Broadcast or Wireless telecommunication facility shall include either a certified statement that the construction of the tower/antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the radio, television, or other service enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If interference is found after the facility has been built has been erected, the applicant has to solve any problems his equipment has caused, at his cost.

Section 23.5 Tower Setbacks

23.5.1 Where adjacent parcels are zoned for commercial or industrial uses, setbacks equivalent to those established for the principle structure shall be provided for any tower/antenna. Setbacks equal to the height of the tower shall be established on sites that are adjacent to parcels developed or able to be developed for residential use.

Section 23.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review

23.6.1	Conditional Use Permit. Applicants for a tower/antenna Conditional Use Permit must file a Conditional Use Permit application with the City of Gem lake and pay any and all associated fees.

23.6.2	Planning Commission/City Council review. All applications for a Broadcast/Telecommunications tower must first be sent to the Planning Commission which shall review the application and may recommend to the City Council approval or denial. Te City Council will hold the necessary Public hearing(s) on this matter and will then approve or deny the request. The applicant is responsible for supplying a certified list of the property owners within three-hundred (350') feet of the proposed tower/antenna site and pay all costs for notifying all such parties of the public hearing(s) needed.

Section 23.7 Exceptions

23.7.1	The following towers and/or antennas supporting structures and antennas are not subject to the restrictions of Section 21 of this Ordinance:

A)	Towers and/or antennas identified as “Accessory and Secondary Antennas” in this Ordinance are exempt. All Amateur Radio “Accessory and Secondary” antennas and/or towers must be installed in accordance with instructions furnished by the manufacturer of the tower/antenna.

B)	Towers and antennas that are located entirely with a structure that complies with the height, bulk and density and area requirements of the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance and are not visible from the exterior of the structure are also exempt.

C)	Towers/antennas for radio/telecommunications equipment owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake are also exempt.
 
SECTION 24 – WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS

24.1.	Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of residential wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be governed within the city.

24.2.	Zoning Allowance. A Residential WECS may be installed as an accessory use in all zoning districts, provided that the system complies with all terms and conditions of this Ordinance.

24.3.	License Required. A Residential WECS with a blade diameter under 6 feet and installed so that the total extended height does not exceed 10 feet over the tallest structure on a property shall not require a City license. For all other WECS, a license must be obtained from the City of Gem Lake prior to installation of the system. The City Council shall designate a member of City staff as the officer responsible for accepting and reviewing applications for Residential WECS licenses. The City Council shall establish fees by separate resolution for review of an initial application and for renewal applications.

24.3.1.	Initial Application. Any person wishing to install a Residential WECS requiring a license shall complete an application on a form provided by the City, pay the required application fee, and submit the application fee, and attach the following additional materials:

a)	A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the location of all WECS components on the property; the locations of property boundaries; the location of all structures and above-ground utilities located on the property, and the location of any public rights-of-way or utility easements on the property. The plan shall also indicate the height of the tallest structure, tree or object lying within 30 feet from the base of the tower.

b)	Documentation that a current insurance policy extends coverage to the proposed Residential WECS, whether under existing property insurance or a separate policy.

c)	A copy of the WECS manufacturer’s documentation stating rated generation capacity, standards certifications (such as Underwriters’ Laboratories certification) for each WECS component, installation instructions, standard drawings or schematics for the equipment, warranties, manufacturer’s warnings, and emergency procedures.

24.3.2.	Renewal Application. A person with a licensed WECS previously installed upon their property shall submit a renewal application on a form provided by the City, pay the required application fee, and provide the following:

a)	A revised site plan and elevations reflecting the current location and height of trees, structures and utilities on the property in which the tower is located; and

b)	If any of the documents required by Section 24.3.1 (b) or (c) have been replaced by new documents or revised, current copies of those documents.

24.3.3.	Review of Applications. The officer designated by the City Council shall review the license applications and attached supporting material for compliance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. If the reviewing officer believes the proposed or existing WECS complies, the officer shall issue the license.

24.3.4.	Term of license. A Residential WECS license shall remain in effect for five (5) years following issuance, unless the City Council shall earlier revoke the license for failure to comply with the terms of this Ordinance.

24.3.5.	Revocation. If the City learns of a violation of this Ordinance, it shall provide a notice to the property owner of the alleged violation and the date and time of a hearing before the City Council to consider the violation. The City Council shall hold a hearing, at which it will receive evidence of the violation and take testimony from any interested parties, including the property owner. Following the hearing, if the Council determines that the WECS is in violation of the standards in this Ordinance, it may revoke the WECS license immediately, give the owner a reasonable period of time in which to correct the violation without revocation, or choose to take no action on the WECS license. If a WECS license is revoked, the WECS and tower must be dismantled and removed from the property within 90 days of revocation.
 
24.4.	Code compliance. WECS installation is not exempt from the State Building Code and similar safety codes, and all permits required for the construction and/or installation of WECS components must be obtained from the City’s Building Official prior to commencing work to install the WECS.

24.4.1.	Compliance with state building code. Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the state building code. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a Minnesota licensed engineer.

24.4.2.	Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS electrical equipment and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.

24.5.	andards for Siting, Installation and Operation of WECS.

24.5.1.	Height. The height of a WECS must comply with FAA regulation part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space" and/or MNDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 "Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation".

24.5.2.	Setback. WECS towers shall be set back from the closest property line at least one foot for every one foot of the system’s total extended height. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback.

24.5.3.	Rotor clearance. At installation, the bottom of the WECS blade diameter shall have a minimum of 5 feet of clearance over any structure (including above-ground utilities) or tree within a 200-foot radius of the WECS tower. The property owner is responsible for ensuring that trees and other vegetation do not encroach on the minimum rotor clearance after the system is installed.

24.5.4.	Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with control equipment to prevent dangerous operation in high wind and to allow the turbine to be slowed or stopped in an emergency.

24.5.5.	Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with one of the following provisions:

a)	Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of the ground.

b)	A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.

c)	Towers capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least six feet high.

24.5.6.	Component certification. Each electrical component of the WECS must be certified by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. The overall WECS system must either be certified or pending certification by the Small Wind Certification Council as compliant with the American Wind Energy Association’s Small Wind Turbine Performance and Safety Standard.

24.5.7.	Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.

24.5.8.	Signs. Each WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two square feet, posted at the base of the tower and said sign shall contain the following information.

a)	High voltage warning, if a component of the WECS is “high voltage” under the National Electrical Code.

b)	Manufacturer's name.

c)	Emergency phone number.

d)	Emergency shutdown procedures.
 
No other signage is permitted on the tower or turbine components of the WECS. A manufacturer’s name or logo printed on a component is not considered “signage” for the purposes of this Ordinance.

24.5.9.	Lighting. WECS shall not be illuminated from the ground, or have affixed or attached any lights, reflectors, flasher or any other illumination, except for those required by FAA regulations part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space" and FAA Advisory circular 70/7460-1F, September 1978 "Obstruction Marking and Lighting".

24.5.10.	Noise emission. Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as amended.

24.5.11.	Utility company interconnection. If the WECS is interconnected with a local electrical utility company, the connection shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.

24.6.	Test Towers. A tower to support anemometers and other test equipment to determine the feasibility of installing a WECS on the property may be installed as an accessory use in all zoning districts. A license is not required to erect a test tower, but the City must be notified of the installation and provided with a site plan and elevations similar to that required in Section 24.3.1(a). The test tower must comply with all applicable siting, installation and operation requirements in Section 24.5, though a test tower may use guy wires for support. If required by the State Building Code, a building permit must be obtained before commencing work to erect the test tower. A test tower may stand on a property for a maximum of twenty- four months in any three-year period.

24.7.	Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any WECS license to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall take expeditious action to correct the situation.

24.8.	Abandonment. If any WECS or tower is not used for six successive months, the City shall give notice to the property owner that the WECS must be put back in service within six months from the date of notice. If the WECS is not put back into service within that time, the WECS and tower shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the expense of the property owner.

SECTION 25 - ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT

Section 25.1 The Ordinance changes contained herein will take affect immediately upon adoption by the City Council and publication of a summary of this document, but not later than thirty (30) days from the date below.

Section 25.2 The Legend of this Ordinance shall be updated to reflect the date and changes made.

Section 25.3 This Ordinance, previously identified as Ordinance No. 43I shall now be known as City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 43J which replaces and supersedes all previous versions of same.

Section 25.4 This Ordinance No. 43J was unanimously adopted with amendments defined in Ordinance No. 43I by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 16th day of January in the year 2007 and ordered for summary publication in the City’s official newspaper.

CITY OF GEM LAKE                                                             ATTEST:
Paul R. Emeott                                                                 Frederic C. Magnuson
Paul R. Emeott, Mayor                                                              Frederic C Magnuson, City Clerk
Updated:     1/16/2007                                                             Updated:    1/16/2007
 
APPENDIX

The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake was originally enacted by the City Council as City of Gem Lake Ordi- nance No.5 on 19 February 1963. Since that time, the Planning Commission has recommended and the City Council has adopted several changes in keeping with the changing times and needs and wishes of the community. The following table is added to Ordinance No.43 as an historic reference to those changes. All changes shown have been incorporated into Ordi- nance No. 43, the City Zoning Ordinance.
TABLE 23.1 a)

ORDINANCE
NO.	

TITLE & DESCRIPTION	

ENACTED
5	The City Zoning Ordinance	12/19/1963
14	An Ordinance Amending the Official Zoning Map of Gem Lake	07/18/1967
17B	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Zoning Ordinance	03/24/1970
21	An Ordinance Amending The Zoning Ordinance	09/15/1970
29	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As General Business	12/16/1974
30	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As General Business	04/18/1977
31	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing Minimum Area Of Certain
Property In An R-4 Residential District	06/20/1977
33	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Residential.	11/20/1978
34A	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Retail Business	11/30/1978
35	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Retail Business	12/27/1979
36	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance	01/21/1980
38	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance	05/18/1981
40	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5, The Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance	09/22/1981
41	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As Retail Business	10/19/1981
42	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 5 And Changing The Boundaries Of The
Zoning District Designated As LD-B Low Density Business District	10/19/1981
43	An Ordinance Restating The Zoning Ordinance Of Gem Lake With All Amend-
ments Thereto Enacted Through December 31, 1982	12/20/1982
49	An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43	09/19/1988
51	An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43, Including The Establish-
ment Of A New District Known As GB II, General Business II	02/20/1989
63	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43 And Replacing Ordinance No. 5	03/28/1994
72	An Ordinance Making Amendments To Ordinance No. 43 Including Changes, Addi-
tions Or Deletions To The Zoning Ordinance No. 43 Of The City of Gem Lake, MN Providing For An Institutional Overlay District Rezoning.	05/18/1998
74	An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Gem Lake, regarding: 1) the addition of Section 21 establishing Commercial Broad- cast/Telecommunication tower and antenna regulations and definitions and amend- ments attendant thereto; and, 2) the removal of all fee schedules from the Zoning
Ordinance; and 3) the revision of Section 4.10 Land Reclamation and Section 4.11 Land Mining of the Zoning Ordinance.	11/15/1999
 

75	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43, The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake,
regarding the rezoning of lands bordered on the West by Schueneman Road and the East by the City’s common boundary with White Bear Lake and on the South by State Highway 61 and on the North by lot identified as PIN number	02/02/2000
76	An Ordinance amending City of Gem Lake Ordinance No. 43, hereinafter the “Zoning Ordi-
nance”, regarding: 1) adding provisions for minimum “buildable area” as Section 4.4 (3), defini- tion for “buildable area” as Section 3.2 (4A), and amending Tables 7.5 (1), 8.5 (1), 9.5 (1), 10.5 (1) a), and 10.5 (1) b) to reflect said provisions; 2) amending definitions of and related to Variances
and Special Use Permits and adding definitions for Interim Use Permits; 3) Providing amended or additional provisions for the City’s consideration of applications for Variances, Special Use Per- mits, Interim Use Permits, Redistricting or other Amendments to Ordinance No. 43; 4) modifica- tion of the lakeshore restrictions on the water body identified as Gem Lake. Now known as Or- dinance No. 43EOI.	02/20/2001
79	An Ordinance providing for amendment of Ordinance Number 43, the “Zoning Ordinance” as
follows: 1) adding definitions to Section 3.2 and, 2) deleting Section 22, Regulation Of The Body Of Water Called Gem Lake, in it’s entirety; and, 3) adding new Section 11, Regulation of Bodies Of Water, Wetlands, and Shoreland Zones to establish local controls that consistently reflect the
purpose and intent stated in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan and it’s attendant Watershed Management Plan; and, 4) amending tables for all districts defining Area, Frontage and Yard Re- quirements to include the term “foot set back”; and, 5) adding provisions for Vegetation Removal And Alteration Permits; and, 6) adding Sections 4.1 (5) and 4.1 (6); and, 7) amending Sections 5.4
(5), 5.7 (6), 5.5 (5), 5.6 (5); and 8) deleting Section 17 in it’s entirety and copying the text of Sec- tion 17.1 to Section 12 as Section 12.6; and 9) amending the Legend of Ordinance No. 43 to re- cord the date of all changes contained herein.	12/15/2003
43G	An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43F, the Zoning Ordinance, including: 1) additional
definitions related to set-backs, building height, storm water and sedimentation controls and man- agement, and the LDB Zoning District; 2) amendment to Sections 7.4, 8.4, 9.4 and 10.4 regarding building height; 3) amendments to Section 14 providing for Building Density; 4) amendments to
Section 18 providing for changes in the LDB Zoning District; 5) amendment to Section 8.3 pro- viding for Two-family dwellings in the R2 Zoning District; 6) adding Section 17, Storm Water And Sedimentation Controls And Storm Water Management as part of Gem Lake’s NPDES pro- gram.
NOTE: The development of Hillary Farm shall be subject to the provisions of Ordinance No. 43G through 21 March 2008 pursuant to Gem Lake City Council Resolution No. 2006-23B dated 24 July 2006 and Gem Lake City Council Resolution No. 2005-07 dated 21 March 2005.	02/21/2006
43H	An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43G, the Zoning Ordinance, including recodification
and amendments to previously numbered Sections 3 adding definitions, 4 amending General Pro- visions, 5 amending Administration and Enforcement, 7 amending building height and fences, 8 amending building height and fences, 9 amending building height and fences, 10 amending build-
ing height and fences, 12 expanding retail uses and controls, 13 amending using and yard require- ments, 14 amending Performance Standards and 19 reducing open and green space requirements. See NOTE exception in Ordinance No. 43G.	07/24/2006
43I	An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43H, the Zoning Ordinance, by adding Section 12.3.1
K) adding provision for retail automobile renting as a permitted conditional use in the RB Retail Business District.	12/21/2006

43J	An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 43I, the Zoning Ordinance, by adding Section 13, Planned Unit Development	
1/16/2007

88	An Ordinance amending Section 17.8.2 of Ordinance 43J to require the payment of City zoning review costs and the deposit of an escrow for payment of said costs.	
10/21/2008

104	An Ordinance amending Section 10 of Ordinance 43J, making minor clarifications to the Permit-
ted Uses of the GBII zone, and adding Rental, Open Sales Lot and Open Storage Lot as Condi- tional Uses within the zone.	
10/21/2008
107	An Ordinance Revising the Zoning Ordinance By: Deleting Existing Sections 9, 10, 11 and 12;
Replacing Deleted Sections With a New Chapter 9, Gateway Zoning District, Amending the Of- ficial Zoning Map; Restating Zoning Ordinance as No. 43K	5/19/2009
 

109	An Ordinance Establishing Sign Regulations in the City of Gem Lake, and Repealing Prior
Versions of Sign Regulations	10/19/2009
121	An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 43K to Permit the Construction of Residential
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) Within the City of Gem Lake	12/21/2010
122	An Ordinance Amending the Zoning Ordinance of Gem Lake to Add a New Section Allow-
ing for a Garden Overlay Zone.	07/19/2011
123	An Ordinance Amending the Zoning Ordinance of Gem Lake Relating to the Consideration
and Allowances of Variances from the Zoning Ordinance.	07/19/2011
125	An Ordinance Amending the Zoning Ordinance of Gem Lake to Replace Sections 21 and 22
Relating to Gem Lake Waters, Wetlands, Shorelands, Erosion Control and Stormwater Man- agement.	07/17/2012
 
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY , MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 670

AN ORDINANCE TO THE CITY OF GEM LAKE MUNI CIPAL CODE REGARD ING
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.

The City Council of the City of Gem Lake approves the following addition to the Gem Lake Code
of Ordinances. This ordinance replaces Ordinance 67 C in its entirety.

Table of Contents
Section    I:        Lntroduction   ...............................................................................................................................      I
 
Section 2:   Title, Purpose and intent	2
Section 3:   Authority	3
Section 4:	Effective Date	3
Section 5:   Definitions	3
Section 6:   Scope	6
Section 7:   Jurisdiction	7
Section 8:   Adm inistration	7
Section 9:   Liability	7
Section  I 0:  Measurement  of Distances	7
Section  11: Interpretation of Certain Items	7
Section 12: Retroacti vity	7
Section  13: Upgrade, Repair, Replacement and Abandonment.	8
Section 14: SSTS rn Floodplains	8
Section IS: Class V Injection Wells	8
Section  16: SSTS Practitioner Licensing	9
Section 17: Prohibitions	9
Section  18:  Standards Adopted by Reference	9
Section 19:  Amendments to the Adopted Standards	9
Section 20:  Variance Reque sts	9
Section 21:  Penn it Required	11
Section  22:    Construct  ion   Pennit	1 1
Section 23:  Operating Perrnit.	13
Section 24:  Abandonment Certification	15
Section 25:  Management  Plan s	16
Section 26:  Compl iance Inspection Program	17
Section 27:  Violations	21
Section 28:  Prosecution	22
Section 29:  State Notification of Violation	22
Section 30:  Costs and Reimbur sement 	22
Section 3 1:  Recordkeeping 	22
Section 32:  Annual Report 	22
Section 33: Fees 	22
Section 34:  lnterpretation 	23
Section 35:  Severability 	23
Section 36:   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 	23
 


SECTION 1:  INTRODUCTION

This  is an  Ordinance  authorizing  and  providing  for  sewage  treatment  and  soil  dispersal  111
unsewered areas of the City . It establishes:

1.	Minimum standards for and regulation of Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS) and mid-sized Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems (MSTS) (collectively referred to as SSTS) in unsewered areas of the City of Gem Lake incorporating by reference minimum standards  established by Minnesota statutes and  administrative rules of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA),
2.	Requirements for issuing permits for installation , alteration, repair or expansion of SSTS,
3.	Requirements for all SSTS permitted under the revised Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 708 l to be operated under an approved management plan ,
4.	Standards for upgrade, repair, replacement, or abandonment of SSTS,
5.	Penalties for failure to comply with these provisions,
6.	Provisions for enforcement of these requirements, and
7.	Standards which promote the health, safety and welfare of the publ ic as reflected in Minnesota Statutes, Sections 115.55, 145A.05, the City Comprehensive Plan and the City Zoning Ordinance.

SECTION 2: TITLE, PU RPOSE AND INTENT

1.	Title:	The  City  ordains  the  City  Code  the  '·City of  Gem  Lake  Subsurface  Sewage
Treatment System (SSTS) Ord inance."
2.	Purpose: The purpo se of this Ordinance i s to establi sh minimum requirements for regulation of ISTS and MSTS for the treatment and dispersal of sewage within the applicable jurisdiction of the City to protect public health and safety, groundwater quality, and prevent or eliminate the development of public nuisances. It is intended to serve the best interests of the City's citizens by protecting its health , safety, general welfare, and natural resources.
3.	Intent:  It is intended by the City that this Ordinance will promote the following:
(a)	The protection of lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands, and groundwater in the City of
Gem Lake essential to the promotion of public health, safety, welfare, socioeconomic growth and development of the City.
(b)	The regulation of proper SSTS construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent the entry and migration of contaminants , thereby protecting against the degradation of surface water and groundwater quality.
 
(c)	The establishment of minim um standards for SSTS placement, design, construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent contamination and , if contamination is discovered, the identification and control of its consequences and the abatement of its source and migration .
(d)	The appropriate utilization of  privy  vaults  and  other  non-water  carried   sewage
collection and storage facilities.
(e)	The provision of technical assistance and education, plan review, inspections, SSTS surveys and complaint investi gations to prevent or control water-borne diseases, lake degradation, groundwater related hazards, and public nuisance conditions.

SECTION 3: AUTHORITY

This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 115.55; Minnesota Statutes, Section l 45A.05; or successor statutes, and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080, Chapter 7081, Chapter 7082, or successor rules.

SECTION 4: EFFECTIVE DATE

The provisions set forth in this Ordinance shall become effective on passage by the City Council.

SECTION 5:  DEFINITIONS

The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Ifnot specifically defined in this Section, terms used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning as provided in the standards adopted by reference. Words or phrases that are not defined here or in the standards adopted by reference shall have common usage meaning. For purposes of this Ordinance, the words "must" and "shall" are mandatory and the words "may" and "should" are permissive.

Authorized Representative:An employee or agent of the City of Gem Lake.

Class V Injection Well: A shallow well used to place a variety of fluids directly below the land surface, which includes a domestic SSTS serving more than twenty (20) people. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and delegated state groundwater programs permit these wells to inject wastes below the ground surface provided they meet certain requirements and do not endanger underground sources of drinking water. Class V motor vehicle waste disposal we ll s and
large-capacity cesspools are specifically prohibited (see 40 CFR Parts 144 & 146).

Cluster System: A SSTS under some form of common ownership that collects wastewater from two or more dwellings or buildings and conveys it to a treatment and dispersal system located on an acceptable site near the dwellings or buildings.

City: City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Minnesota.

City Council: The City of Gem Lake City Council.
 
Department: The City of Gem Lake Department designated by the City to administer SSTS.


Design Flow: The daily volume of wastewater for which a SSTS is designed to treat and discharge.


Flood Plain : The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, watercourse or lake which a regional flood may have or could hereafter cover. Floodplain areas within the City shall include all areas shown as zone A or zone AE on the flood insurance rate map. Refer to the City Floodplain Ordinance for further definitions.

Failure to Protect Groundwa ter: At a minimum, a SSTS that does not protect groundwater is considered to be a seepage pit, cesspool, drywell, leaching pit, or other pit; a SSTS with less than the required vertical separation distance, described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1500 Subd. 4 D and E; and a system not abandoned in accordance \Vith Chapter 7080.2500. The determination of the threat to groundwater for other conditions must be made by a Qualified Employee or an indiv idual licensed pursuant to Section 40-237 hereof.

Imminent Threa t to Public Health and Safety: At a minimum a SSTS with a discharge of sewage or sewage effluent to the ground surface, drainage systems, ditches, storm water drains, or directly to surface water; SSTS that cause a reoccurring sewage backup into a dwelling or other establishment; SSTS with electrical hazards; or sewage tanks with unsecured, damaged, or weak maintenance access covers. The determination of protectiveness for other conditions must be made by a Qualified Employee or a SSTS inspection business.

ISTS:An individual sewage treatment system having a design flow of no more than 5,000 gallons per day.

Industrial Waste : Sewage containing waste from act1v111es other than sanitary waste from industrial activities including, but not limited to, the following uses defined under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes established by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
 
SIC CODE(S)
753-7549
7231-7241
7211-7219
4011-4581
8062-8069
2000-3999
2000-2099
2100-2199
2400-2499
2500-2599
2600-2699
2700-2799
2800-2899
2900-2999
3000-3099
3100-3199
 
INDUSTRY CATEGORY
Automotive Repairs and Services Beauty Shops, Barber Shops
Laundry Cleaning and Garment Services
Transportation (Maintenance only) Hospitals
Manufacturing Food Products Tobacco Products
Lumber and Wood Products, except Furniture Furniture and Fixtures
Paper and Allied Products
Printing, Publishing, and Allied Industries Chemicals and Allied Products
Petroleum Refining and Related Industries
Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastics
Leather Tanning and Finishing
 
3000-3099
3100-3199
3200-3299
3300-3399
3400-3499


3500-3599

3700-3799
3800-3899



3900-3999
 
Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastics Leather Tanning and Finishing
Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete Products
Primary    Meta l    Industries
Fabricated Metal Products (except Machinery, and
Transportation Equipment
Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Computer Equipment
Transportation Equipment
Measuring , Analyzing, and Controlling Instruments ; Photographic , Medical and Optical	Goods; Watches and Clocks
Mi scellaneous Manufacturi ng Industries
 

Malfunction : The partial or complete loss of function of a SSTS component, which requires a corrective action to restore its intended function.

Management Plan: A plan that describes necessary and recommended routine operational and maintenance requirements, periodic examination, adjustment, and testing, and the frequency of each to ensure system performan ce meets the treatment expectations , including a planned course of action to prevent an illegal discharge.

MDH: Minnesota Department of Health

Minor Repair: The repair or replacement of an existing damaged or faulty component/part of a SSTS that will return the SSTS to its operable condition. The repair shall not alter the original area, dimensions, design , specifications or concept of the SSTS.

MSTS: A ''midsized subsurface sewage treatment system" under single ownership that receive s sewage from dwell i ngs or other establishments having a design flow of more than 5,000 gallons per day to a maximum of 10,000 gallons per day.

Notice of Noncompliance: A written document issued by the Department notifying a system owner that the owner's onsite/cluster treatment system has been observed to be noncompliant with the requirements of this Ordinance.

MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.

Qualified Employee : An employee of the state or a local unit of government, who perfonns site evaluations or designs, installs, maintai ns, pu mps, or inspects SSTS as part of the individual's employment duties and is registered on the SSTS professio nal regi ster verifying specialty area endorsements applicable to the work being conducted.

Record Drawings: A set of drawings which to the fullest extent possible document the final as built location, size, and type of all SSTS components including the results of any materials testing performed and a description of conditions during construction of the system.
 

Sewage: Waste from toilets, bathing, laundry, or culinary activities or operations or floor drains associated with these sources, including household cleaners and other constituents in amounts normally used for domestic purposes.

SSTS: Subsurface sewage treatment system Including an ISTS or MSTS.
State:The State of Minnesota.


Treatment  Level:  Treatment  system  performance  levels defined  in Minnesota  Rules,  Chapter
7083.4030, Table Ill for testing of proprietary treatment products , which incl ude the following: Level A: cBOD5 < 15 mg/L; TSS < 15 mg/L; fecal coliforms < 1,000/ I00 mL.
Level A-2: cBOD5 < 15 mg L; TSS < 15 mg/L; fecal coliforms NIA
Level B: cBOD5 < 25 mg/L; TSS < 30 mg/L; fecal coliforms < 10,000/100 mL.
Level B-2: cBOD5 < 25 mg/L; TSS < 30 mg/L; fecal coliforms NIA
Level C: cBOD5 < 125 mg!L; TSS < 80 mg!L; fecal colifonns NIA.

Type I System :An TSTS that follows a standard trench, bed, at-grade, mound , or graywater system
design in accordance with MPCA rules, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2200 through 7080.2240.

Type II System :An ISTS on a Jot located in a floodplain , a privy or a holding tank in accordance with MPCA rules, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2250 through 7080.2290.

Ty pe III System: An TSTS having acceptable flow restriction devices to allow its use on a lot that cannot accommodate a standard Type I soil treatment and dispersal system in accordance with MPCA rules, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2300.

Type IV System: An ISTS, having an approved pretreatment device and incorporating pressure distribution and dosing, that is capable of providing suitable treatment for use where the separation distance to a shallow saturated zone is less than the minimum allowed in accordance with MPCA rules, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2350.

Type V System: An ISTS, which is a custom engineered design to accommodate the site taking into accou nt pretreatment effluent quality , loading rates, loading methods, groundwater mounding, and other soil and other relevant soil, site, and wastewater characteristics such that groundwat er contamination by viable fecal organisms is prevented in accordance with MPCA rules, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2400.

Unsewered Area: Any area within the City not served by a municipa l sanitary sewer collection
system pem1itted by the MPCA.

SECTION 6: SCOPE

This Ordinance regulates the sitting, design , installation, alterations, operation, m aintenance, monitorin g, and management of all SSTS within the City's applicable jurisdiction including, but not necessarily limited to individual SSTS and cluster or community SSTS, privy vaults. and other non-water carried SSTS. All sewage generated in unsewered areas of the City shall be treated and
 
dispersed by an approved SSTS that is sited, designed , installed , operated, and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance or connected to municipal sanitary sewer when it is available in accordance with the City Sanitary Sewer Ordinance. The City Engineer, or his or her designee, shall determine if municipal sanitary sewer is available.

SECTION 7:  JURISDICTIO N
The jurisdiction of this Ordinance shall include all property within the City limits.


SECTION 8:  ADMINSTRATION

I. City Administration: The Department shall administer the SSTS program and all provisions of this Ordinance. At appropria te times, the City shall review or revise or update this Ordinance as necessary. The City shall employ or retain under contract qualified and appropriately licensed professionals to administer and operate the SSTS program.
2.	State of Minnesota:	Where a single SSTS or group of SSTS under single ownership
within one-half mile of each other, have a design flow greater than 10,000 gallons per day, the owner or owners shall make application for and obtain a State Disposal System permit from the MPCA. For any SSTS that has a measured daily flow for a consecutive seven-day period which equals or exceeds I 0,000 gallons per day, a State Disposal System permit is required. SSTS serving establishments or facilities licensed or otherwise regulated by the State shall conform to the requirem ents of this Ordinance.

SECTION 9:  LIABILITY

Any liability or responsibility shall not be imposed upon the City or any ofits officials, employees , or other contract agent, its employees, agents or servants thereof for damage resulting from the defective construction, operation, or abandonment of any SSTS regulated under this rule by reason of standards, requirements, or inspections authorized hereunder.

SECTION 10: MEASUREMEN T OF DISTANCES

Unless otherwise specified in this division, all distances shall be measured horizontally.

SECTION 11:  INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN ITEMS

For the purposes of this division, certain terms or words used shall be interpreted as follows: The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory ; the words "should" and "may" are permissive.

SECTION 12:  RETROACTIVITY

(a)	All SSTS. Except as explicitly set forth in Section (b), all provisions of this Ordinance
shall apply to any SSTS regardless of the date it was originally permitted.
(b)	Existing Permits. Unexpired permits which were issued prior to the effective date shall remain valid under the terms and conditions of the original permit until the original expiration date or until a change in system ownership whichever is earlier.
 
(c)	Two Soil Treatment and Dispersal Areas. All lots created after January 23, 1996, must have a minimum of two soil treatment and dispersal areas that can support trenches, seepage beds, mounds, and at-grade systems as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080.2200 throu gh 7080.2230 or site conditions described in Chapter 7081.0270, Subd. 3 through 7. If an additional soil treatment and dispersal area is available on lots created on or before January 23, 1996, it shall be identified in the site evaluation.
(d)	Existing SSTS without  Permits:  Existing  SSTS with  no permit s of record  shall
require a permit and be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance regardless of the date they were originally constructed.

SECTION 13: UPGRADE, REPAIR, REPLACEM ENT, ANO ABANDON MENT

(a)	SSTS Capacity Expansion s. Expansion of an existing SSTS must include any system upgrades that are necessary to bring the entire system into compliance with the prevailing provisions of this Ordinance at the time of the expansion.
(b)	Bedroom Additions . A compliance inspection is required prior to issuance of a permit
for a bedroom addition. If the system is found to be non-compliant, the owner shall upgrade, repair, or replace the existing system prior to issuance of the permit for the bedroom addition.
(c)	Failure to Protect Groundwater.  A SSTS that is determined not to be protective of
groundwater in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080. I500, Subd.4.B shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance within three (3) months of receipt of a Notice of Noncompliance. If the Department determines that extenuating circumstances exist, this timeframe may be extended to eighteen (18) months from recei pt of a Notice of Noncompliance.
(d)	Immin ent Threat to Public Health or Safety:  A SSTS that is determined  to be an
imminent threat to public health or safety in accordru1ce with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1500, Subd.4A shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the owner in accordance with the provi sions of this Ordinance within three (3) months of receipt of a Notice of Noncompliance. In the event of an imminent threat to Public Health or Safety, a mitigation plan will be submitted to the department immediately upon discovery. If the Departm ent determines that extenuating  circumstances  exist, this tim eframe may be extended to ten (10) months from receipt of a Notice of Noncompliance.
(e)	Abandonment. Any SSTS, or any component thereof, which is no longer intended to be used, must be abandoned in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2500.

SECTION 14: SSTS IN FLOODPLAI NS

SSTS shall not be located in a floodplain.

SECTION 15: CLASS V INJECTION WELLS
 
All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be Class V injection wells, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 40, Part 144, are required by the Federal Government to submit SSTS inventory information to the Environmental Protection Agency as described in CFR40, Part 144. Further, owners are required to identify all Class V injection wells in property transfer disclosures.

SECTION 16: SSTS PRACTITIONER LICENSING
No person shall engage in site evaluation, inspection, design, installation, conslruction, alteration,
extension, repair, maintenance, or pumping of SSTS without an appropriate and valid license issued by MPCA in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7083 except as exempted in 7083.0700.

SECTION 17: PROHIBITIONS

(a)	Occupancy or Use of a Building with out a Compliant SSTS. It is unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy, or use any building intended for habitation in an unsewered area that is not provided with a wastewater treatment system that disposes of wastewater in a manner that complies wilh the provisions of this Ordinance.
(b)	Sewage Discharge to Ground Surface or Surface Water.   It is unlawful  for any
person to construct, maintain, or use any SSTS system regulated under this Ordinance that results in raw or partially treated wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface water. Any surface discharging system must be permitted under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program by the MPCA.
(c)	Sewage Discha rge to a Well or Borin g. It is unlawful for any person to discharge raw or treated wastewater into any well or boring as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4725.2050, or any other excavation in the ground that is not in compliance with this Ordinance.
(d)	Discharge of Hazardou s or Deleteriou s Materials.  It is unlawful for any person to
discharge into any treatment system  regulated under this Ordinance any Industrial Waste, or hazardous or deleterious material that adversely affects the treatment or dispersal performance of the system or groundwater quality.

SECTION 18: STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE

The City hereby adopts by reference Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080, 7081, 7082 and 7083 in their entirety as now constituted and from time to time amended. This adoption does not supersede the City's right or ability to adopt local standards that are in compliance with Minnesota Statute 115.55.

SECTION 19: AMENDMENTS TO THE ADOPTED STANDARDS

(a)	Determinati on of Hydraulic Loadin g Rate and SSTS Sizing. Table IX from Minnesota Rules,  Chapter 7080.2150, Subd. 3(E) entitled '·Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area for Trenches and Seepage Beds for Effluent Treatment Level C and Absorption Ratios for Detennining Mound Absorption Areas Using  Detail  Soil  Descriptions"  and  Table  IXa  from  Minnesota  Rules,  Chapter
 
7080.2150 are herein adopted by reference shall be used to determine the hydraulic
loading rate and infiltrati on area for all SSTS permitted under this Ordinance.
(b)	Compliance Criteria for Existing SSTS. SSTS built after March 31, 1996 or existing SSTS located in a Shoreland area, existing wellhead Protection area, or serving a food, beverage , or lodging establishment as defined under Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1100, Subd. 84 shall have a three-foot vertical separation between the bottom soil infiltrative surface and the periodically saturated soil and/or bedrock. Existing systems that have no more than a fifteen (15) percent reduction in this separation distance (a separation distance no less than 30.6 inches) to accoun t for settling of sand or soil, normal variation of separation distance measurements and interpretation of limiting layer characteristics may be considered compliant under this Ordinance. The vertical separation measurement shall be made outside the area of system influence but in an area of similar soil. Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1500, Subd.4.
(c)	Holding Tanks. Sewage holding tanks may be considered for installation on previously developed sites, as a temporary method for periods of up to one ( 1) year, during which tim e measures are being taken to provide municipal sewer service or the installation of an approved system as provided in this Ordinance. Holding tanks may be considered on a permanent basis for nonresidential, low -water use establishments generating less  than one hundred fifty (150) gallons per day of waste, subject to approval by the department and the issuance of a certificate of compliance. Holding tanks may also be considered for floor drains for vehicle parking areas and existing facilities potentially generating hazardous waste.
(d)	Setbacks. The follow ing setback requirements are in addition to the setbacks required
in Table VII in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.2150.F:

Table VII: Minimum setback distances (feet)


Feature	Sewage tank, holding tank, or sealed privy	Absorption area or unsealed privy
Above-ground	10	10
swimming pools		
In-ground swimming
pools	10	20
Shoreland Bluff lines	20	20
(18% slope)		

The following setback requirements are in addition to the setbacks required in Table II
Minnesota Rules Chapter 7081.0270 Subpart 2:

	Table II: Minimum setback distances (feet)
Feature	Sewage tank, holding tank, or sealed privy	Absorption area or unsea led privy
Above-ground
swimming pools	10	10
 

In-ground swimming
pools	10	20
Shore land Bluff lines (18% slope)	20	20

Variances to building setbacks included in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 and 7081 may only be considered through the normal City variance process. Variances to shoreland setbacks may be considered through the Shoreland Ordinance. Variances to well and water line setbacks are governed by the MOH.
(e)	Licensed Professional Engin eer Required.  The design of SSTS regulated under
Minnesota   Rules,  Chapter  7081   shall   be   completed   by  a  licensed  Minnesota Professional Engineer, who is also licensed by the MPCA as an Advanced Designer .

SECTION 20: VA RIANCE REQUESTS

A property owner may request a variance from the standards as specified in this Ordinance pursuant to the requirements provided in Minnesota State Statutes. The City shall consider the requirements of Minnesota Rules Chapter 7082.0300 , subd. 2 and 3 when considering such variances. Variances that pertain to the standards and requirements of the State of Minnesota must be approved by the affected State Agency pursuant to the requirement s of the State Agency.

SECTION 21: PERMIT REQUIRED

It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, modify, replace, or operate a SSTS without the appropriate permit from the Department. The issuing of any permit , variance, or conditional use under the provisions of this Ordinance shall not absolve the applicant of responsibility to obtain any other required permit.

SECTION 22: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT

A construction permit shall be obtained by the property owner or an agent of the propert y owner from the Department prior to the installation , construction, replacement, modification, alteration , repair, or capacity expansion of a SSTS. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that the proposed construction activity is sited, designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance by appropriately certified and/or licensed practitioner(s).

(a)	Activities Requiring a Constru ction Permit. A construction permit is required for installation of a new SSTS, for replacement of an existing SSTS, or for any repair or replacem ent of components that will alter the original function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or function.
(b)	Activities Not Requiring a Permit. A construction permit is not required for minor repairs or replacements of system components that do not alter the original function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout , or function.
 
(c)	Construction Permit Required to Obtain Building Permit. For any property on which a SSTS permit is required , approval and issuance of a va lid SSTS Constructi on Permit mu st be obtained before a building or land use permit may be issued by the Department.
(d)	Conforman ce  to  Prevailing  Requirements.	Any  activity   involving  an  exi sting
system  that  requires  a Construction  Permit  shall require  that the entire system  be
brought into compliance with this Ordinance.
(e)	Permit Appli cation Requirements. Construction Perm it applications shall be made on forms provided by the Department and signed by the appl icant and an appropriately certified practitioner including the practitioner's certification number and date of expiration. The applications shall include the documents listed in items 1 through 8 below.
(1)	The correct address and legal dcscription of the property where the proposed work
is to take place.
(2)	The name and contact information (mailing address, telephone number , and e-mail
address) of the propert y owner.
(3)	The name , contact informati on, and MPCA Licen se Numbe r of the SSTS Designer responsible for the system design.
(4)	Site Evaluation Report as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1730 and on
the Departm ent 's permit application.
(5)	Design Report as described  in Mi1mesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2430 and on  the
Departm ent 's pcnnit application.
(6)	Site Plan s for the existing and proposed system.
(7)	Management Plan as described  in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0600.
(8)	Permit fee.
(f) Application R ev iew and Response. The Department shall review a permit application and supporting documents. Upon satisfaction that the proposed work will conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Department shall issue a written perm it authorizing construction of the SSTS as designed. In the event the applicant makes a significant change to the approved application, the applicant must contact the Department prior to initiating or continuing construction , modification , or operation to determin e whether an amended application will be necessary , as detennined by the Department. If determined necessary , the applicant shall file an amended application detailing the changed conditions for approval prior to initiating or continuing construction, modification , or operation for approval or denial. If the permit application is incomplete or does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance the Department shall deny the application. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant , which must state the reason for the denial.
(g) Permit Expiration. The Construction Permit is valid for a period of no more than one year from i ts date of issue. Satisfactory completion of construction shall be determined by recei pt of final record drawings and a signed certification that the construction or installati on of the system was completed in reasonable conformance with the approved design documents by a qualified employee of the Departm ent or a licensed inspection business, which is authorized by the Department and independent of the owner and the SSTS installer.
 
(h)	Extensions and Renewal s. The Department may grant an extension of the Construction Permit if the construction has commenced prior to the original expiration date of the permit. The permit may be extended for a period of no more than six (6) months.
(i)	Transferability . A Construction Permit shall not be transfe1Ted to a new owner. The
new owner must apply for a new Construction Permit in accordance with this section.
U) Suspension or Revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke a Construction Permit issued under this section for any false statements, misrepresentations of facts on which the Construction Permit was issued, or unauthorized changes to the  system design that alter the original function of the system as determined by the Department, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location  of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or function. A notice of suspension or revocation and the reasons for the suspension or revocation shall be conveyed in writing to the permit holder. If suspended or revoked, installation or modification of a treatment system may not commence or continue until a valid Construction Permit is obtained.
(k) Posting.   The Construction Pem1it shall be posted on the property in such a location
and manner so that the permit is visible and available for inspection until construction is completed and certified.

SECTION 23:  OPERATING PERMIT

(a)	SSTS Requiring an Operating Permit. An Operating Permit shall be required of all owners of new holding tanks, Type IV Systems, Type V Systems, MSTS, or any other system deemed by the Department to require operational oversight. Sewage shall not be  discharged  to these  systems until  the  Department  certifies that the  system  was installed in substantial conformance with the approved plans, receives the final record drawings of the system, and a valid Operating Permit is issued to the owner.
(b)	Permit Application  Requirem ents.
(1)	Application for an Operating Permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Department  including:
a.	Owner name, mailing address, telephone, and email address
b.	Construction Permit reference number and date of issue
c.	Final record drawings of the treatment system
d.	. Owners of holding tanks must submit a copy of a valid executed monitoring and
disposal contract with a licensed maintenance business
(2)	Owners of holding tanks shall provide to the Department a copy of a valid monitoring  and  disposal  contract  executed  between  the  owner  and  a  licensed maintenance  business, which guarantees the removal of the holding tank contents in a timely manner that prevents an illegal discharge in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0100, Subd. 30. This requirement is waived  if the owner is a farmer  who  is exempt  from  licensing  under  Minnesota  Statutes, section  115.56, subdivision 3, paragraph  (b), clause (3).
(3)	All  SSTS existing prior  to the effective date of this Ordinance  shall require an
operating  permit  upon  transfer  of  ownership,  replacement,  any  modification  or
expansion that requires a permit, or following any SSTS enforcement action.
 
(c)	Departm ent Response.  The Department shall review the record drawings, operation and maintenance manual, management plan, maintenance and servicing contract, and any other pertinent documents as appropriate for accuracy and completeness. If any deficiencies are identified, the operating permit shall be denied until the deficiencies are corrected to the satisfaction of the Department.
d.	Operating Permit Terms and Conditions.  The Operating Permit shall include the
following:
(1)	System performance requirements
(2)	System operating requirements
(3)	Monitoring locations, procedures and recording requirements
(4)	Maintenance requirements and schedules
(5)	Compliance limits and boundaries
(6)	Reporting requirements
(7)	Department notification requirements for non-compliant conditions
(8)	Valid contract between the owner and a licensed maintenance business
(9)	Disclosure, location and condition of acceptable soil treatment and dispersal system
site
(10)	Descriptions of acceptable and prohibited discharges
(e)	Permit Expirati on and Renewal
(1)	Operating Permits shall be valid for the specific term stated on the permit as
determined by the Department.
(2)	An Operating Permit must be renewed prior to its expiration. If not renewed, the
Department may require the system to be removed from service or operated as a holding tank until the permit is renewed . If not renewed within ninety (90) calendar days of the expiration date, the City may require that the system be abandoned.
(3)	Application shall be made on a form provided by the Department including:
a.	Applicant name, mailing address, telephone number , and e-mail address.
b.	Reference number of previous owner's operating permit.
c.	Any and all outstanding Compliance Monitoring Reports as required by the
Operating Permit.
d.	Certified treatment system inspection signed and/or sealed by a certified designer, maintenance contractor, or operator at the discretion of the City.
e.	Any revisions made to the operation and maintenance manual.
f.	Payment of application review fee as determined by the City.
(f) Amendments to Existing Permits not Allowed. The City may not amend an existing permit to reflect changes in this Ordinance until the permit term has expired and is renewed, unless an amendment is necessary to eliminate an imminent  threat to public health or safety.
(g) Transfers. The Operating Permit may not be transferred. A new owner shall apply for an Operating Permit. The Department shall not terminate the current permit until sixty (60) calendar days after the date of sale unless an imminent threat to public health and safety exists. To consider the new owner's application, the Department may require a performance inspection of the treatment system certified by a service provider or qualified employee.
(h)	Suspension or Revocation.
(1)	The Department may suspend or revoke any operating permit issued under this
 
section for any false statements or misrepresentations of facts on which the Operating Permit was issued.
(2)	Notice of suspension revocation and the reasons for revocation shall be conveyed
in writing to the owner.
(3)	Ifsuspended or revoked , the Department may require that the treatment system be removed from service, operated as a holding tank . or abandoned in accordance
with Section 40-276.
(4)	At the Department's discretion, the operating permit may be reinstated or renewed upon the owner taking appropriate corrective actions.
(i)	ComplianceMonitoring
(1)	Performance monitoring of a SSTS shall be performed by a licensed inspection business or licensed service provider hired by the holder of the operating permit in accordance with the monitoring frequency and parameters stipulated in the permit.
(2)	A monitoring report shall be prepared and certified by the licensed inspection business or licensed service provider. The report shall be submitted to the Department on a form provided by the Department on or before the compliance reporting date stipulated in the operating permit. The report shall contain a description of all maintenance and servicing activities performed since the last compliance monitoring report as described below:
a.	Owner name, mailing address, telephone number, and e-mail address.
b.	Operating Permit number
c.	Average dail y flow since last compliance monitoring report
d.	Description of type of maintenance and date performed
e.	Description of samples taken (if required), analytical laboratory used, and results
of analyses
f. Problems noted with the system and actions propo sed or taken to correct them
g. Name, signature, license and license number of the licensed professional who performed the work.

SECTION 24:  ABANDON MENT CERTIFICATION

(a)	Purpose
The purpose of the System Abandonment Certification is to ensure that a treatment system no longer in service is abandoned within a reasonable time following decommissioning and in a maimer that protects public health, safety and water quality. It also tenninates all permits associated with the system.
(b)	Aband onment Requirements
(1)	Whenever the use of a SSTS or any system component is discontinued as the result of a system repair, modification, replacement or decommissioning following connection to a municipal or private sanitary sewer, or condemnation or demolition of a building served by the system, further use of the system or any system component for any purpose under this Ordinance shall be prohibited.
(2)	Continued use of a treatment tank where the tank is to become an integral part of a replacement system or a sanitary sewer system requires the prior written approval of the Department.
 
(3)	An owner of a SSTS must retain a licensed installation business to abandon all components of the treatment system within sixty (60) calendar days of discontinued use. Abandonment shall be completed in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2500. No prior notification to the Department of an owner's intent to abandon a system is necessary.
(4)	A report of abandonment certified by the licensed  installation  business shall be
submitted to the Department. The report shall include:
a.	Owner's name, mailing address, telephone number, and e-mail address.
b.	Property address
c.	System construction permit and operating permit
d.	The reason(s) for abandonment
e.	A brief description of the abandonment methods used, description of the system components removed or abandoned in place, and disposition of any materials or residuals.
(c) Abandonment   Certificate.	Upon  receipt   of  an  abandonment   report   and  its
determination that the SSTS has been abandoned according to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Department shall issue an abandonment certificate. lf the abandonment is not completed according the requirem ents of this Ordinance the City shall notify the owner of the SSTS of the deficiencies, which shall be corrected within thirty (30) calendar days of the notice.

SECTION 25:  MANAGEMENT PLANS

(a)	Purpose: The purpose of management plans is to describe how a particular SSTS is intended to be operated and maintained to sustain the performance required. The plan is to be provided by the certified designer to the system owner when the treatment system is comm issioned.
(b)	Management Plan Requirement s: Management plans are required for all new or replacement SSTS. The management plan shall be submitted to the Department with the construction permit application for review and approval within 30 days of planned start of construction. The Department shall be notified of any system modific ations made during construction and the management plan revised and resubmitted at the time of final construction certification.
(c)	Required Contents of a Mana gement Plan:  Management plans shall include:
(1)	Operating requirements describing tasks that the owner can perform  and tasks that a
licensed service provider or maintainer must perform;
(2)	Monitoring requirements;
(3)	Maintenance requirements including maintenance procedures and a schedule for routine maintenance;
(4)	Statement that the owner is required to notify the Department when the management plan
requirements are not being met;
(5)	Disclosure of the location and condition of the additional soil treatment  and dispersal area on the owner's property or a property serving the owner's residence;
(6)	A description of the system and each component;
(7)	A description of how the system functions;
(8)	A site plan of the system;
(9)	Equipment specifications;
 
(10)	Emergency operating procedures in the event of a malfunction;
(11)	A troubleshooting guide
(d) Requirem ents for System s not operated Und er a Man agement Plan :  SSTS that are not
operated under a management plan or operating permit must have treatm ent tanks inspected and provide for the rem oval of solids if needed every three years. Solids must be removed when their accumulati on meets the limit described  in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2450. System owners shall be required to submit a MPCA Septic Tank Maintenance Reportin g Form to the Department every three (3) years.

SECTION 26: COMPLIANCE INSPECTION PROGRAM

(a)	Department R esponsibility. It is the responsibility of the Department, or its agent, to perform various SSTS compliance inspections periodi ca lly to assure that the req uirements of this Ordinance are met.
(1)	SSTS compliance inspections must be performed:
a.	To ensure compliance with applicable requirements ;
b.	To ensure system compliance before issuance of a permit for addit ion of a bedroom unless the permit application is made during the period of November 1 to April 30, provided a compliance inspection is performed before the following June 1 and the applicant submits a Certificate of Compliance by the following September 30;
c.	For all new SSTS construction or replacement;
d.	For an evaluation, i nvestigation, inspection, recomm endation, or other process used to prepare a disclosure statement if conducted by a party who is not the SSTS owner. Such an inspection constitutes a compliance inspect ion and shall be conducted in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0700 using the SSTS inspection repo11 forms provided by MPCA.
(2)	All  compliance  inspections mu st be perform ed and  signed  by the service provider  or
qualified employees.
(3)	The Department shall be given access to enter a property at any reasonable time to inspect and/or monitor the SSTS system. As used in this paragraph , "property" does not include a residence or private building . The Department shall notify the owner of the Department's intent to inspect the SSTS least two (2) days in advance of the intended inspection.
(4)	No person shall hinder or otherwise interfere with the Department 's employees  in the
performance of their duties and responsibilities  pursuant to this Ordinance. Refusal to allow reasonable access to the property by the Department shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(b)	N ew Construction or Replacem ent.
(1)	Compliance  inspections  must  be  performed  on  new  or  replacement  SSTS  to
determine compliance with Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 or 7081.
(2)	It is the responsibility  of  the  SSTS owner  or the owner's agent  to notify  the Department two (2) calendar days prior to any permitted work on the SSTS.
(3)	Installation inspections shall be made at each installation, prior to any work having
been covered by backfill. Work that is backfilled prior to the required inspection
may be ordered to be uncovered whenever necessary to determin e compliance.
 
(4)	The licensed installer shall be responsible for notifying the department a minimum of  twenty four (24) hours before the time the work is ready for inspection or reinspection.
(5)	When, upon inspection , any part of the system is determined not to be in compliance with this division, written notice shall be provided by the Department i ndicating the deficiency and the required corrections.
(6)	Noted deficiencies shall be properly  corrected and reinspected  before any other
work on the project is continued.
(7)	SSTS found not to be in compliance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.1500, Subd. 4A or Chapter 7081.0080, Subd. 3 must be repaired or replaced within ten (I 0) months.
(8)	No system shall be placed or replaced in service until final inspection and approval
of the installation.
(9)	The contractor, upon completion of the installation , shall file with the department
as -built drawings indicating the location of system components dimensioned from a permanent reference point.
(l 0) A minimum of three constructi on inspections are required for mound s m accordance with the following:
a.	When the original soil under the mound has been roughened, but prior to
placement of the sand fill. Enough of the proposed sand fill must be present to be viewed.
b.	After placement of rock and piping but prior to cover.
c.	Final inspection, when the job is completed.
(11)	SSTS that are determined to have operation or monitoring deficiencies must immediately be maintained , monitored or otherwise managed according to the operating permit.
(12)	A Certificate of Compliance for new SSTS construction or replacement shall be
issued by the Department if the Department has reasonable assurance that the system was built in accordance with the applicable requirements as specified in the construction permit.
(13)	The Certificate of Compliance must include a certified statement by the service provider or qualified employee who conducted the inspection that the SSTS is or is not in compliance with the Ordinance requirements. If the SSTS is determined not to be in compliance with the applicable requirements, a Notice of Noncompliance must be issued to the owner which includes a statement specifying those Ordinance provisions with which the SSTS does not comply.
(14)	The Certificate of Compliance or Notice of Noncompliance must be submitted to the Department no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the date the inspection was performed. The Department shall deliver the Certificate of Compliance or Notice of Noncomp liance to the owner or the owner's agent within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt from the service provider or qualified employee. No SSTS shall be placed into operation until a valid certificated of compliance has been issued.
(15)	Certificates of Compliance for new construction or replacement shall remain valid
for five (5) years from the date of issue un less the Department finds evidence of noncompliance.
 
(c)	Existin g System s
(1)	Compliance inspections shall be required when any of the following conditions occur:
a.	When a construction permit is required to repair , modify, or upgrade an existing
system;
b.	Any time there is an expansion of use of the building being served by an existing SSTS which may impact the performance of the system;
c.	Any time there is a change in use of the property being served by an existing SSTS which may impact the performance of the system;
d.	At any time as required by this Ordinance or the Department deems appropriate such as upon receipt of a complaint or other notice of a system malfunction.
(2)	Compliance inspections of existing SSTS shall be reported on the inspection report forms
provided by MPCA. The following conditions must be assessed or verified:
a.	Water-tightness assessment of all treatment tanks including a leakage report;
b.	Vertical separation distance between the bottom of the soil treatment and dispersal system and the periodically saturated soil or bedrock including a vertical separation verification report;
c.	Sewage  backup,  surface  seepage,  or  surface  discharge  including  a  hydraulic
function
report.
d.	Safety assessments of tanks and covers.
e.	Any other issues deemed to impact public health and safety or is non-protective of
the ground water.
(3)	The Certificate of Compliance must include a certified statement by a service provider or qualified employee, indicating whether the SSTS is in compliance with the Ordinance requirements. If the SSTS is determined not to be in compliance with the applicable requirements , a Notice of Noncompliance must include a statement specifying those Ordinance provisions with which the SSTS does not comply. A construction permit application must be submitted to the Department if the required corrective action is not a minor repair.
(4)	The Certificate of Compliance or Notice  of Noncompliance  must  be submitted  to the
Department  no  later than  fifteen  (15) calendar  days after the date the  inspection  was performed.  The  Department  shall  deliver  the  Certificate  of  Compliance  or  Notice  of oncompliance  to the owner or the owner's agent within  fifteen ( 15) calendar days of
receipt from the service provider or qualified employee.
(5)	Certificates of Compliance for existing SSTS shall remain valid for three (3) years from the date of issue unless the Depa11ment finds evidence of noncompliance.
(d)	Periodica lly Saturated Soil Disagreem ents: Disputes  involving documented  discrepancies on the depth of the periodically saturated soil for SSTS design or compIi ance purposes shall be resolved according to Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0700, subd. 5.
(e)	Cost of
(1)	The department shall conduct an annual maintenance inspection. The cost of Inspection of SSTS in the City shall be the sole responsibility of the Property Owner and shall be as established by the City of Gem Lake Counsel and from time to time amended by resolution. An  invoice for fees associated with Annual Inspection s will be provided at the time of inspection by the Qualified  Employee. Any  fees for Annual  Inspection  which  remain unpaid for more than sixty (60) days by the Property Owner to the City may, along with


19
 
related administrative fees, by certified to Ramsey County for assessment against the real
property upon which the SSTS is located.
 
(2)	On or before the first day of September (September 151
 
of each year the City Clerk shall
 
list the total unpaid charges for each Remedi al Action taken against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this Ordin ance. The City Counci l may then charge all or any portion of such charges plus an additional administrative fee of Fifty ($50.00) Dollar s against the real property involved as a special assessment under applicable Minnesota Statutes for certification to the County Auditor for collection in the following year with that year's current taxes payable.
(f)	Transfer of Properties
(1)	Whenever a conveyance ofland including a structure that is required to have a SSTS occurs,
which   includes   property   forecl osures   and   tax   forfeited   transfers,   the   following
requirem ents shall be met:
a.	A compliance inspection shall have been performed and a Certificate of Compliance shall have been submitted to the Department within three (3) years for SSTS older than five years or within five (5) years if the system is less than five years old, prior to the intended sale or transfer of the prope1ty, unless evidence is found identifying the SSTS as an Imminent Threat to Public Health and Safety or Failing to Protect Groundwater.
b.	The  compliance  inspection  must  have  been  performed  by  a service provider  or
qualified employee following procedures described in Section 26.
c.	The seller of the property must disclose in writing information about the statu s and location of all known SSTS on the property to the buyer on a form acceptable to the Department.
d.	If the seller fails to provide a Certificate of Compliance, the seller shall provide the
buyer sufficient security in the form of an escrow agreement to assure the install ation of a compliant SSTS. The security shall be placed in an escrow with a licensed real estate closer, licensed  attorney-at-law, or Federal or State chartered financial institution. The amount escrowed shall be equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of a written estimate to install a compliant SSTS as provided by a licensed SSTS installer, or the amount escrowed shall be equal to one hundred ten percent (1 10%) of the written contract price for the installation of a compliant SSTS provided by a licensed SSTS installer. After a compliant SSTS has been installed and a Certificate of Compliance issued, the Department shall provide the escrow agent a copy of the Certificate of Compliance. The escrow may also be used to connect to a municipal sanitary sewer collection system permitted by the MPCA if the Department determines that an extension of the municipal sanitary sewer collection system to serve the property is feasible.
(2)	A Certificate of Compliance is not required if the sale or transfer involves the following
circum stances:
a.	The affected tract of land is without buildings or contains no dwellings or other buildings with plumbing fixtures.
b.	The transfer does not require the filing of a Certificate of Real Estate Value, as described
in Minnesota Statutes, Section 272.115, Subdivision I.





20
 
c.	The sale or transfer completes a contract for deed or purchase agreement entered into prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. This subsection applies only to the original vendor and vendee on such a contract.
d.	All dwellings or other buildings are served by a municipal  sanitary sewer collection
system permitted by the MPCA.
(3)	All property conveyances subject to this ordinance occuning during the period between November 15thand April 15th, when SSTS compliance cannot be determined due to frozen soil conditions, shall require a winter agreement, which includes an application for a SSTS perm it and an agreement to compl ete a compliance inspection by the following June 1st by a licensed inspection business. If upon inspection the SSTS is found to be in compliance, the permit fee will be refunded. If upon inspection the system is found to be non-compliant, an escrow agreement must be established in accordance with paragraph (1) d. above, and a compliant SSTS installed within the timeframe outlined in the Notice of Noncomp l iance.
(4)	The responsibility for completing the compliance inspection under paragraph (1) a. above,
or for upgrading a system found to be non-compliant shall be determined by the buyer and seller. Buyer and seller shall provide the Department with a signed statement indicating responsibility for completion of the compliance inspection and for upgrading a system found to be non-compliant.
(5)	The issuance of permits, Certificates of Compliance, or Notices of Noncompliance shall not  be construed to represen t a guarantee or warranty  of  the  system's  operation  or effectiveness. Such permits or certificates only represent that the system has been designed and installed in compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of these standards and regulat ions.

SECTION 27: VIOLATIONS

(a)	Cause to Issue a Notice of Violation . Any person, firm, agent, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, including violations of conditions and safeguards, or who knowingly makes any material false statement or knowing omission in any document required to be submitted under the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as defined by Minnesota State Statutes. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(b)	N otice of Violation. The Department shall serve, in person or by mail, a notice of violation to  any person determined to be  violati ng provisions  of this Ordinance.  The notice  of violation shall contain:
(l)  A  statement  documenting  the  findings  of  fact  determined  through  observations,
inspections, or investigations;
(2)	A list of specific violation(s) of this Ordinance
(3)	Specific requirements for conection or removal of the specified violation(s);
(4)	A  mandatory  ti me  schedule  for  correction,  removal   and  compliance  with  this
Ordinance.
(c)	Cease and Desist Orders. Cease and desist orders may be issued when the Department has probable cause that an activity regulated by this or any other City Ordinance is being or has been condu cted without a perm it or in violat ion of a permit. When work has been stopped by a cease and desist order, the work shall not resume until the reason for the work
 
stoppage has been completely satisfied, any administrative  fees paid, and the cease and
desist order lifted.

SECTION 28:  PROSECUTION

In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this Ordinance , the City may, in addition to other remedies, initiate appropriate civil action or proceedings to prevent, prosecute, restrain, correct or abate such violat ions or threatened violations and the City Attorney shall have authority to commence such civil action. The Department and City Attorney may take such actions as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 29:  STATE NOTIFICATION  OF VIOLATION

In accordance with state law, the Department shall notify the MPCA of any inspection, installation, design, construction, alteration or repair of a SSTS by a licensed/certified person or any septage removal by a licensed pumper that is performed in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. If there is known contamination of groundwater , the City also may notify the MDH for a possible well advisory.

SECTION 30: COSTS AND REIMBURSEMENTS

If the Department is required to remove or abate an imminent tlll'eat to public health or safety, the Department may recover all costs incurred in remova l or abatement in a civil action, including legal fees; at the discretion of the City Council, the cost of an enforcement action under this Ordinance may be assessed against the real property on which the public health nuisance was located.

SECTION 31:  RECORD KEEPING

The City shall maintain  a current record of all permitted systems. The record shall contain all permit applications, issued permits, fees assessed, variance requests, certificates of compliance, notices of noncompliance, enforcement proceedings, site evaluat ion reports, design reports, record drawings, management plans, maintenance reports, an annual list of all sewage tanks installed in the City sorted by licensed installation businesses, and other records relevant to each system.

SECTION 32:  ANNUAL REPORT

The Department shall provide an annual report of SSTS permitting activities to MPCA no later than February 1 for the previous calendar year.

SECTION 33: FEES

From time to time, the City Council shall establish fees for activities undertaken by the Department pursuant to this Ordinance. Fees shall be due and payable at a time and in a manner to be determined by the Department.
 

SECTION 34:  INTERPRET ATION

In their interpretation and application,the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by Minnesota Statutes.

SECTION 35: SEVERABILITY

If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged  unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.

SECTION 36:  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS

It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any other existing City Ordinance, easements , covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail. All other Ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.




WHEREUPON, the above ordinance was adopted at the regular City Council Meeting for the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County Minnesota, made by Councilmember Lindner and seconded by Councilmember Artig-Swomley.



ATTEST
I, William Short, the duly qualified City Clerk of the City of Gem Lake, County of Ramsey, State
of Minnesota, do hereby certify that the foregoing ordinnce is a true and accurate representation of action taken by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the date first written.




. City Clerk	Date
 
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA ORDINANCE NO. 109

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING SIGN REGULATIONS IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, AND REPEALING PRIOR VERSIONS OF SIGN REGULATIONS.

THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS:

SECTION 1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of Gem Lake sign regulation is to promote the creation of an attractive visual environment in the City. The regulations are intended to promote a healthy economy by allowing businesses and individuals to effectively inform, identify, direct and communicate with the public using rights of way in Gem Lake. This aim is balanced with an equal intent to foster public safety and maintain an attractive built environment in the City by encouraging the  appropriate design, scale and placement of signs in the City. The regulations are intended to encourage the orderly placement of signs, to assure that the information displayed on any sign is  clearly visible for its intended purpose, and to allow the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations by the City of Gem Lake.

SECTION 2. Findings. The City Council concludes that  it is necessary to regulate signs in the City in order to promote and preserve public health, safety and welfare . That conclusion is based upon the following findings:

2.1.	Signs provide  an  important  medium  through  which  individuals  and
businesses may convey a variety of messages.


2.2.	Signs can create hazards to motorists and pedestrians,  particularly when inappropriately designed or placed signs interfere with necessary sight distances , divert the attention of drivers and pedestrians, or obscure directional guidance or traffic control devices.

2.3.	A positive sense of place and community image is important to the health and welfare of individuals and businesses  in  Gem  Lake.  Community image and aesthetic is also a key component of property values in the City. Permanent and temporary signs have a direct impact on and relationship  to the image and aesthetic of the community.

2.4.	Uncontrolled and unlimited signs result in roadside clutter and obstruction of views for motorists and pedestrians, and diminish the ability of any sign to effectively convey its intended message.

2.5.	Properly regulated signage can create an atmosphere of prosperity, stimulate positive commercial activity and consequently lead to increased employment, higher property values and a healthier tax base.
 
2.6.	Citizens have different expectations for the aesthetic environment of a residential area compared with that of a commercial area. Signs should be smaller in scale and their use generally more restricted in residential areas than in commercial areas where the public expects to see a variety of signs.

SECTION 3. Permit Required. No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the City without first securing a permit from the City. The speech content of the sign shall not be considered when approving or denying a sign permit; however, the content must be submitted to properly evaluate the signage area, design and placement. A proposed sign with a structure requiring a bui ldin g permit or electrical permit must obtain those permits in addition to a sign permit.

3.1	Exemptions. The fo llowing signs shall not require a permit,  but rernam subject to the standards of these regulations concerning erection, maintenance and removal, and the standards of any other applicable law or ordinance .

a)	A sign, of less than four (4) square feet in display area, indicating the address of a building.
b)	A sign on a residential property, of less than four (4) square feet in display area, stating the name of the owner or occupant in additio n to the address of the property.
c)	Trame control signs, related directional aids, and traffic control devices installed by a unit of government having authority over the adjacent right-of-way, or at the direction of such a government.
d)	Signs not visible from a public or private  right-of-way.
e)	Newspaper  boxes.
f) flags, up to a combined  total  of 35 square feet, with  no one nag larger than 15 square feet in size.
g)	Official  notices  posted  on a property  at the direction  of a court,
public body, or public safety official.
h)	A sandwich board , menu board, A-frame , T-frame or simi lar sign which does not exceed six (6) square feet in size, is  not  illuminated ,  is located within 15 feet of the primary building  entrance  of  the  owner  or tenant placing the sign, and is only displayed during hours of business operation. No more than two signs may be placed by any single owner or tenant at any given time. Signs of this type must be placed in a location where they will not impede foot traffic
i)	A temporary sign or signs , up to a total of ten (10) square feet of display space, erected by the owner or rental tenant of the property on which the sign is placed.
j)	A  temporary  sign  directing  people  to  an  event  or  occurrence
located on the property of the person erecting the sign. Such signs are limited to six (6) feet or less of display space and must be installed so that they are less than four (4) feet in height. If placed on property not owned or rented by the person erecting the sign, the property owner must give
 
express permission to erect a sign on the property. A maximum of five (5) such signs may be placed in the City for any given event or occurrence. Such signs may be erected up to two (2) days prior to the event or occurrence, and shall be removed within two (2) days following the event or occurrence. In no event shall such a sign remain in place for more than seven (7) days.
k)	A   change   in   the   message   content   (words,   logos,  or  similar
graphics) of an existing permanent sign, without change in any other characteristics of the sign.

3.2 Operation of Minnesota Election Law on Regulations. For the period beginning August 1 in a State general election year and ending ten ( 10) days following the general election, or thirteen ( 13) weeks preceding a special election until ten (10) days following the special election, these regulations shall have no effect upon the size or number of non-commercial signs within the City. Signs placed during this period shall be removed by the person responsible for erecting them within the I 0 days following the election. Signs may be placed upon private property with permission of the property owner, but may not be placed within the public right-of-way or within a sight triangle. The City retains the right to remove and destroy any such signs so placed.

3.3.	.            Permit Application.   Application  for a sign permit shall be  made upon the City's application form, and shall contain the following  information:

a)	Name, signature, address and phone number of the property owner.
b)	Name, signature, address and phone number of the applicant, if di!Tcrcnt from the property owner.
c)	The address or property identification number of the   property
where the sign is proposed to be erected.
d)	An inventory of existing signs on the site and combined  display
area.
e)	A complete set of plans showing elevations,  distances.  setbacks from lot lines, location of buildings and other signs, size of the proposed sign and structure, and other details to fully and clearly represent the construction and placement of the sign.
i)         Plans  and  specifications  relating  to  the  method  of  construction,
attachment to buildings, and /or placement upon the ground.
g) J\ to-scale drawing or illustration showing proposed height, width, shape, layout, colors, lighting and other relevant details of the sign, from all perspectives in which the sign is intended to be viewed.

Applicants  shall submit one application  and  supporting materials  for each sign,
unless submitting a Comprehensive Sign Plan as described in Section 3.7.
 
3.4.	Fee. Sign permit fees and any impoundment  fee shall be set by the City Council by ordinance, as amended from time to time. The required fee shall accompany any sign permit application

3.5.	.           Review.     The  Zoning  Administrator  shall  review   applications for compliance with these regulations. A decision to approve or deny  should be made within 30 days of receiving a complete application. Applicants  shall be informed of the decision in writing. Decisions to deny a permit shall be  accompanied by a statement of reasons for the denial.

3.6     Variance and Appeal.   An appeal from a sign permit denial  shall  be taken in the manner of zo ning appeals, using the procedure stated in Section 17.7 of the Zoning Ordinance. Requests for variance from these sign regulations shall be made and considered in the manner of requests for zoning variance. using the procedure stated in Section 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance.

3.7. Comprehensive Sign Plan . An applicant seeking approval for signs in connection with new building  construction, remodeling, or re-development may submit a comprehensive sign plan with the other required submittals in lieu of making individual applications for sign permits. All information required  in Section 3.3. (d) through (g), is required to be represented in the supporting documentation supporting the comprehensive sign request. In acting upon the comprehensive sign plan , the Planning Commission and City Council may permit consideration of unique conditions, flexibility and creativity in the design and placement of signs, to the extent such leeway promotes the purposes and goals of any design standards in the underlying zoning district. ff a comprehensive sign plan is approved. the Zoning Administrator may issue sign permits for individual signs in the plan without further review. upon payment of the applicable sign permit fee.

SECTION 4. Inspections and Enforcement. All signs shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator. or other official designated by the Zoning Administrator. The Administrator or designee must be all owed entry upon the property on which the sign is located to ascertain compliance with the terms of these regulations and the technical specifications provided with the permit application. Such entrance shall be made during business hours unless an emergency exists.

4.1	Signs in Disrepair. The Zoning Administrator or designee may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in  accordance  with  the requirements of these regulations. Upon failure to comply with such order within the time specified, the City Council may declare the sign a public nuisance and direct that  the nuisance  be abated under  the procedures set forth in Gem Lake Ordinance No. 86.

4.2	2           lmpoundment of Signs on Public Property.  The City may at any time.
and without notice, remove and impound signs which have been erected on public
 
property or within a public right-of-way or easement. The sign 's owner may retrieve the sign from the City upon payment of a $50 impoundment fee. If the same owner has a subsequent sign impounded within the same calendar year, the impoundmcnt fee is doubled. The City shall not be held liable for any damage to an impounded sign . If a sign is not retrieved within thirty (30) days, the City may dispose of it.

4.3	Sign Without a Permit or in Violation of Regulations. The Zoning Administrator or dcsignee may order the correction or removal of any sign which has been erected without a permit, or has been erected or altered such that the sign is in violation of these regulations .

a)	The person responsible for the sign may apply ror a sign permit "artcr the fact," paying double the applicable sign permit fee, if the only violation is lack of a permit.

b)	lf an order is not remedied or complied with in the time specified , the City Council may declare the sign a public nuisance and direct that the nuisance be abated under the procedures set forth in Gem Lake Ordinance No. 86.

c)	In addition to the above, the City Council may give written notice to the person responsible for the sign that the Council will consider civil penalties for the violation. The written notice shall contain a summary of all facts the Council intends to consider, and state the date and time at which the Council will consider a penalty. If the person receiving the notice appears at that date and time, the Council must give  the person reasonable time to present matters in defense or mitigation of the alleged offense. If, in the Council 's discretion, the alleged violation  is supported by the evidence presented to it, it may order the payment of a civil penalty using the following as guidelines:

 
I 51   offense:
2110 offense:
yt1 offense:
 

$	I  00.00
$   600.00
$1,500.00
 

A person with  outstanding unpaid civil penalties  shall not be eligible to receive permits or licenses , of any kind, from the City of Gem Lake until the penalty is paid.

d)	Violation of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor. Each day on which the condition giving rise to the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. None of the other enforcement options described above shall preclude the City from issuing a citation and prosecuting any violation of these regulations as a misdemeanor.
 
SECTION 5.  Applicable Standards.

5.1.	Measurement Standard s.

a)	Sign Area and Dimensions.


1)	For a wall sign which is framed , outlined , painted or otherwise prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area and dimensions shall include the entire portion within such background or frame.

2)	For a wall sign comprised of individual letters , figures or elements on a wall or similar surface of the building or structure, the area and dimensions of the sign shall encompass a regular geometric shape or a combination of regular geometric shapes which form , or approximate, the perimeter of all elements in the display , the frame, and any applied background that is not part of the architecture of the building. When separate elements are organi zed to form a single sign , but are separated by open space, the sign area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining th e geometric form, or combination of forms, which comprises all of the display areas, including the space between different areas. Minor appendages to a particular regular shape, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shal I not be included in the total area of a sign.

Figures (for illustration):  To be inserted later


3)	For a freestanding sign, the sign area shall include the frame, if any , but shall not include a pole or other structural support unless such pole or structural support is internally  illuminated  or otherwise so designed to constitute a display device, or part of a display device. Architectural features that are either part of the building or part of a freestanding structure, and not an integral part or the sign, and which may consist of landscaping, building or structural forms complimenting the landscaping in general.

4)	When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of one of the two faces. When the sign has more than two display surfaces , the area of the sign shall be the area or largest display surfaces that are visible from any single direction .

b)	Sign Height.
 
1)	The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the base of  the sign or supportive structure at its point of attachment to the ground, to the highest point of the sign. A freestanding sign on a man-made	base, including a graded  earth  mound ,  shall  be measured from the  grade of the nearest pavement or top of any pavement curb.

2)	Clearances for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the  sign, including any framework or other embellishments.

c)	Frontages and Frontage Lengths.


1)	The length of any primary or secondary building frontage shall be the   sum  of  all  wall  lengths  parallel,  or  nearly  parallel,  to  such frontage , excluding any such wall length determined by the Zoning Administrator to be clearly unrelated to the frontage presence of the  building.

2)	For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the wall and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each such building frontage.

3)	The building frontage  for  a  section  of  any  building  (e.g.  retail tenant spaces) shall be measured from the centerline of the party walls defining the building section.

5.2	Development  Standards.


a)	Wall Signs. Wall signs are permitted on buildings located in the Neighborhood General , Neighborhood Mixed-Use, and Neighborhood Center subzones of the Gateway District. Wall signs, other than those exempted from regulations as stated above, arc not permitted  in Residential zoning districts and the Neighborhood Edge subzone of the Gateway District.

1)	The basic allowance for wall signs shall be limited to 2 square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building or tenant frontage.

2)	Each owner or tenant may have multiple wall signs as long as the total wall sign area does not exceed the allowances established for wall signs. lf multiple signs are used on a building fayade, the display method (i.e. individual letters, box and panel, etc.) shall be the same for the entire fac;ade.
 
3)	Wall signs shall not be greater than eighty (80%) of the length or
the tenant space or the length of the building frontage.


4)	Each building frontage or frontage section may be evaluated separately or in combination, but primary and secondary frontages will not be combined for purposes of determining allowable sign
SIZC.


5)	In addition to wall signs otherwise permitted by these regulations, an additional sign may be permitted up to a maximum of 40% of the wall sign area allowed for the building for the purposes or identifying owners or tenants that occupy upper Ooors or do not have outside building frontage.

6)	An arcade or gallery may have sign space on it relating to the activities of owners or tenants whose entrances are under the arcade or gallery.  If the sign on the arcade or gallery is illuminated , I 00% of the sign space is deducted from the total available area for wall signs. If the sign space on the arcade or gallery is not illuminated. 50% is deducted from the area available for wall signs.

7)	Projecting signs are permitted in addition to any allowances for wall signs when the projecting signs are designed and placed for the purpose of identifying the owner or tenant for a  pedestrian walking along the same side of the street as the sign , or under a continuous arcade or gallery. Projecting signs shall have a maximum area of eight (8) square feet. The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum or eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. The sign may project a maximum of six (6) feet from the wall of the building, or be centered under any arcade, awning or canopy . Projecting signs shall not be closer than fifteen ( 15) feet from any other projecting sign.

8)	Wall  signs shall  not  be installed  on a roof  surface or otherwise
project above the top of a building fa9ade.


b)	Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs are permitted in all zoning districts. Such signs may only be erected by an owner or  a  tenant  of a building located on the property  for which the sign is proposed .

I) Residential Zones and Neighborhood Edge subzone. Freestanding signs in residential zoning areas may be erected up to a cumulative maximum of ten (10) square feet in display area , and up to six (6) fect in height.
 
2)	All Other Zones. rreestanding signs in the remaining zoning areas of the City may be erected up to fifty (50) square feet per owner or tenant entrance to a building. Permitted sign area may be aggregated into fewer and larger signs at the election of the property owner, provided that the size of any single sign does not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, and signs  over fifteen ( 15) feet in height shall be no closer than seventy-five feet to any other sign. Jnstructional or directional signs of up to six (6) square feet in area may be erected to satisfy a clear instructional or directional purpose without counting against the total freestanding sign area allowed for the property.

3)	Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
the right-of-way line.


4)	No  portion  of a sign shall  be  in , or project  over , a public  right-of­ way.

5)	Signs may be integrated into the design of a permanent canopy, if one is otherwise allowed on the property, with the sign area on any side of the canopy not exceeding one ( 1) square foot per Iineal foot of the side.

c)	Window signs. Permanent window signs are permitted in the Neighborhood General, Neighborhood Mixed-Use and  Neighborhood Center subzones of the Gateway District. Temporary window signs are permitted in all districts. Permanent window signs shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the window on which it is installed; the total of all permanent and temporary window signs may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total window area of any building frontage.

d)	Illumination; Electronic Message Center and Changeable Copy Signs. Illuminated signs (internal or external) and signs with changeable copy are not permitted in Residential zoning areas and the Neighborhood Edge subzone of the Gateway District. In districts where illuminated signs or electronic signs are permitted , the use of lighting , electronic  message center, or dynamic display as an element of a sign is a conditional use. Application for approval of lighting or electronic features shall be made in the manner of a conditional use permit , using the procedure stated at Section 17.5 of the Zoning Ordinance .

1)	Illumination. Internally illuminated signs are permitted in the Neighborhood	Mixed-Use and Neighborhood Center subzones only.	Externally  lit  signs  shall  use  lighting  that  is  directed
 
downward and away from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Lights used for external illumination shall be shielded or screened from any roadway , and shall not be visible from the roadway or sidewalk.

2)	Changeable Copy. Changeable copy by non-electronic means may be utilized on any permitted sign in areas where allowed. The changeable copy area shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total permitted area for any sign .

3)	Electronic  Message  Center  (EMC)  or  Dynamic  Display  signs.
EMC or dynamic display signs are permitted if erected within fifty
(50) feet of the right-of-way for Highway 61 or County Road E within the City of Gem Lake. Only one (1) such sign is permitted per property , regardless of the number of tenants. Motion is permitted for up to eight (8) seconds for any single set of changeable copy, but the changeable copy may  not change or be repeated by flashing more than once every sixteen ( 16) seconds. EMCs and dynamic displays must have an automatic dimming capability that adjusts the brightness to the ambient  light  at  all times of day or night.

4)	Any changeable copy area (manual, EMC or dynamic display) may not exceed 40% of the total freestanding sign area permitted to the owner or tenant.

e)	Features Prohibited on Signs. No sign permitted by  these regulations, with or without a permit , shall have: moving, rotating or revolving parts; Dashing, rotating or oscillating lights (except for EMCs and dynamic displays where permitted); neon lights; beacons or searchlights; attached materials such as pennants or streamers; exposed raceways , ballast boxes or transformers; or other clearly similar features.

1)	Signs Prohibited if Not Expressly Permitted. Any type of sign or method of sign construction or display that these regulations do not expressly permit , or expressly exempt, is hereby prohibited within the City of Gem Lake.

5.3	Construction Standards. The construction, erection, safety and maintenance of all signs shall comply with the  Minnesota  State Building Code and Electrical Code and all of the following:

a)	Signs  shall  be  structurally   sound  and  located   so  as  to  pose  no reasonable threat to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
 
b)	All permanent freestanding signs over four feet in height shall have self-supporting structures erected on or permanently attached  to concrete foundations. A freestanding sign shall not use guy wires for support.

c)	freestanding signs shall be designed for wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot.

d)	Signs should not obscure windows or other architectural features of the building with which they are associated.

e)	Signs shall not be placed  in locations that interfere with safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation or public  safety  signals and  signs.  Signs will not be placed in the sight triangles of intersections.

f)	No  sign  shall  be  erected  or  maintained  so  as  to  obstruct  and  fire
escape, required exit , egress window or door opening .


g)	Signs shall be structurally designed in compliance with ANSI  and ASCI standards. All signs using electricity shall be constructed according to the technical standards of a certified testing laboratory.

h)	Signs using electricity must directly connect to  wiring  that  is integrated into the building structure or buried underground ; no cables or extension cords should run over the ground or up the side of a structure to power a sign.

5.4	Maintenance  Standards.   All signs shall be maintained  in accordance with the following :

a)	The property owner or tenant shall maintain the sign in a condition appropriate to the intended use.

b)	Signs shall advertise or identify a legal business or other act1v1ty currently taking place, or which will take place in the  near  future, within the City of Gem Lake. Obsolete signs shall be removed by the property owner within a reasonable time, no longer than two months, after the sign becomes obso l ete. A property  owner  or tenant  may apply to the City Council for exemption if the sign remova l will be unduly difficult to achieve (example: the sign is part of the building structure).

c)	Signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times , including the replacement of defective parts, cleaning and other items required  for the upkeep of the sign.   There
 
shall   be  no   accumulation   of  rubbish   or  debris,  or   uncontrolled
vegetation, under or near any sign.


SECTION 6.   Definitions.   The following words and phrases used in these regulations
shall have the following meanings:

Arcade. Continuous, occupied cover (such as a balcony) over the entrance or entrances to a building.

Canopy.   !\. freestanding permanent  roof-like  shelter no attached  to or requiring
support from an adjacent structure.

Changeable Copy.  The letters, symbols , logos or other graphics which make up a sign's communicative message, if they are placed on the sign by electronic or electrical means (a message center or dynamic display) or which can be replaced manually through use of letters and symbols in a panel mount or track system.

Dynamic Display. Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components , whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of the design. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components , such as light-emitting diode (LED) displays, plasma displays, liquid-crystal displays (LCD) or other technology used in commercially available video monitors.

Freestanding.  Any sign affixed in or upon the ground , supported by one or more
structural members, with air space between the ground and the sign face.

Gallery.  Continuous, unoccupied  cover (such as an awning) over the entrance or entrances to a building.

Instructional or Directional. A sign clearly intended for instructional purpose s (example: signs identifying the different grades of gas at a gasoline pump), or intended to guide traffic entering , exiting, and traveling to particular locations on the property.

Mural. A picture on the exterior surface of a structure. A mural is only a sign for purposes of these regulations if it is related by language , logo or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business.

Projecting Sign. A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall , parapet, arcade or gallery of a building with the display surface of the sign perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the wall.
 

Sight Triangle. A triangle beginning at the corner of two intersecting street rights-of-way, shaped by two lines extending 30 feet along the edge of each right­ of-way and the line connecting the two resulting points .

Sign . Any name, figure, character, outline, display, announcement, or device, or structure supporting the same, or any other device of similar nature designed to attract attention outdoors, and shall include all parts, portions, units and materials composing the same, together with the frame, background, and supports or anchoring thereof. A sign shall not include any architectural or landscape features that may also attract attention.

Sign  Face .     An  exterior  display  surface  of  a  sign  including  non-structural  trim
exclusive of the supporting structure.


Temporary Sign.   A sign which  is installed  for a period  not to exceed sixty (60)
days. not illuminated, and not installed upon a foundation.


Wall Sign.  Any sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or structure
in a plane parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of said wall.


Window Sign. Any sign viewable through and/or/affixed in any manner to a window or exterior glass door such that it is intended to be viewable from the street, including signs located inside a building but primarily visible outside of the building.

SECTION 7. Repealer. This Ordinance is intended to replace prior sections of the Zoning Ordinance, Number 43K. which regulated signs, to wit: Section 19 in its entirety , all definitions within Section 3 defining the word "sign" in different forms, and any other definitions in Ordinance 43K contrary to the definitions contained herein .

SECTION  8.   Severability.   Should  any  section,  subdivision , clause  or other provision o[ this Ordinance be held to be invalid in any court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance  as a whole,  or of any part  hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.

SECTION 9. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.

                                        Clerk


Summary of Ordinance 109 approved by City Council and published in  the  White  Bear Press on	I G  .1 2'	, 2009.
 
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA ORDINANCE NO. 113

AN ORDINANCE TO ADMINISTER AND REGULATE THE  PUBLIC  RIGHT-OF-WAY  IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST AND TO PROVIDE FOR THE ISSUANCE AND REGULATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY  PERMITS

THE GEM LAKE CITY COUNCIL OF ORDAINS:

SECTION 1. Findings, Purpose, and Intent. To provide for the  health , safety  and  welfare  of  its citizens, and to ensure the  integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances . Accordingly, the City hereby enacts this new Section of this Code relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This Section imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this Section , persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work . Finally, this Section provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of- way.

This Section shall be interpreted consistently with Minnesota Statutes Sections 237. 16, 237.162, 237.163, 237 .79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and the other laws governing applicable rights of the City and users of the right-of-way . This Section shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 - 7819 .9950 where possible . To the extent any provision  of this Section cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This Section shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health , safety and welfare of the public.

1.1.	Election to Manage the Public Right-of-Way.  In accordance with the authority granted to the City under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects pursuant to this Section to manage rights-of- way within its jurisdiction.

1.2.	Definitions. The definitions included in Minnesota Statutes § 237 . 162, Minnesota Rules 7819.0100 Subparts I through 23, and Minnesota Rules 7560.0100 Subparts  I  through  12 are hereby adopted by reference and are incorporated into this Section as if set out in full.

SECTION 2.   Permit Requirement.

2.1.	Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the City .

(a)	Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required to excavate that  part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein .

(b)	Obstruction Permit . An obstruction permit is required to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by  placing  equipment  described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein . An obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
 
2.2.	Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond  the date or dates specified in the permit unless such person (i) makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted.

2.3.	Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule  7819 . 1000 Subpart 3, the City shall impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction , patching, or restoration . The permittee shall not be assessed a delay penalty of delays in project commencement or completion are due to circumstances beyond the control of the permittee. An application for permit extension is independent of delay, and does not preclude the assessment of a delay penalty even if the extension is granted .

2.4.	Permit Display. Permits issued under this Section shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the Zoning Administrator.

SECTION 3.	Permit  Applications.	Application  for a permit  shall contain,  and  will  be  considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:

3.1.	Submission of a completed permit application form, including all  required  attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed  facilities, and the following information:

(a)	Each permittee 's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number , address and email address, if applicable , and telephone and facsimile numbers.

(b)	The name, address and e-mail address , if applicable , and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of application.

(c)	A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:

(I)	Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the permittee by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the Zoning Administrator;

(2)	Verifying that the permittee is insured against claims for personal injury, including death , as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the permittee , its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including , but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground  facilities and collapse of property ;

(3)	Naming the City  as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such  coverages;

(4)	Requiring that the Zoning Administrator be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification  of a coverage term;
 
(5)	Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability  coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage in amounts established by the Zoning Administrator sufficient to protect the City and the public and to carry out  the purposes and policies of this Section .

(6)	The City may require a copy of the actual insurance  policies .

(7)	If the person is a corporation , a copy of the certificate required to be filed under Minnesota Statute § 300 .06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.

(8)	A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency , where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency.

3.2.	Payment of money due the City for

(a)	permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs,

(b)	prior obstructions or excavations ;

(c)	any undisputed  loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the City ;

(d)	franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.

SECTION 4.    Issuance of permit; conditions.

4.1.	Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this Section , the Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit.

4.2.	Conditions. The Zoning Administrator may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to  protect  the  health , safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use . In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of local , state and federal laws, including but not limited to  Minnesota Statutes §2160.01-.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules Section 7560.

4.3  Trench/ess  Excavation.  As  a  condition  of   all   applicable   permits ,  permittees employing trenchless excavation methods , including but not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 2160 and Minnesota Rules Section 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating , as determined by the City .

SECTION 5. Permit Fees. The City Council establishes, and shall  from  time to time examine and adjust as needed to conform to the City 's actual costs of regulation, fees for permits and applications governed by this Ordinance.

5.1.	Excavation Permit Fee. A fee shall be collected with an application for an excavation permit , and the amount of the fee is determined by the type of excavation proposed :

(a)	Hole  excavation :	$125.00
(b)	Emergency   Hole :	$55.00
 
(c)	Trench:	$125.00 + $70 per 100 lineal feet oftrench

5.2.	Obstruction Permit Fee. A fee of $50.00 plus $.05 per lineal foot of obstruction shall be collected with an application for a permit to obstruct a right-of-way .

5.3.	Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without payment of permit fees.

5.4.	Permit Extension Fee. A fee of $55.00 shall be collected with an application  for extension of an existing right-of-way permit.

5.5.	Delay Penalty. If the Zoning Administrator finds  that  a  delay  penalty  is warranted under Section 2 .3, the penalty shall be $60.00 for the first three days of delay, and $10.00 per day thereafter .

5.6.	Non refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the Zoning Administrator has revoked for a breach as stated in Section 14 are not refundable.

5.7.	Application tofranchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise .

SECTION 6.   Supplementary Applications.

6.1. Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater  than  that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area
(i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional  fees required thereby , and (ii)
be granted a new permit  or permit extension .

6.2. Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply or a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.

SECTION 7. Denial of permit. The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this Section or if the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use .

SECTIONS 8-9.          (RESERVED).

SECTION 10. Installation  Requirements.  The  excavation , backfilling , patching  and  restoration,  and all other work performed in the right-of-way  shall  be  done  in  conformance  with  Minnesota  Rules 7819. 1100 and other applicable local requirements , in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota  Statutes§ 237.162  and§ 237.163.
 
SECTION 11. Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration.

11.1.	Timing. The work to be done under an excavation permit, and the patching  and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit , increased by as many days as work could not be done because  of circumstances beyond the  control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as  unseasonable  or unreasonable under Section  14.

11.2.	Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The City may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way  itself.

(a)	City Restoration . If the City restores the right-of-way , permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If following such restoration , the  pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling , the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.

(b)	Permittee Restoration .  If  the  permittee  restores  the  right-of-way  itself,  it  shall  at  the time of application for an excavation permit  post  a  construction  performance  bond  in accordance   with   the   provisions   of  Minnesota    Rules   7819.3000 .

(c)	Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right­ of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,  the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish  these responsibilities.

11.3.	Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the City and shall comply with Minnesota  Rule 7819. 1100.

11.4.	Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects  in  patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee upon notification  from the Zoning Administrator , correct all restoration work to the extent necessary , using the method required by the Zoning Administrator. Said work shall be completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the Zoning Administrator , not including  days during  which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under Section 14.

11.5.	Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Zoning Administrator, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Zoning Administrator , the City at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of  billing,  the  cost  of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required , the City may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.

SECTION 12.  Inspection.

12.1.	Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed , the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minnesota Rules 7819 . 1300.

12.2.	Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to City personnel and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times  during the execution  of and upon completion of the work.
 
12.3.	Authority of Zoning Administrator.

(a)	At the time of inspection the Zoning Administrator may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health , safety or well being of the public .

(b)	The Zoning Administrator may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions , or codes . The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (I 0) days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Zoning Administrator that the violation has been corrected . If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the Zoning Administrator may revoke the permit pursuant to Section  14.

12.4. Supplementary Notification. If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit , permittee shall notify the Zoning Administrator of the accurate information as soon as this information  is known.

SECTION 13.  Work Done Without a Permit.

13.1. Emergency Situations . Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall immediately notify the City  of any event regarding its facilities that it considers being an emergency . Excavators ' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement.  The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the owner shall apply for the necessary permits , pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this Section for the actions it took in response to the emergency .

If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the City will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility owner affected , or potentially affected, by the emergency . In any event, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency , the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities occasioned the emergency .

13.2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an  emergency,  any  person  who,  without  first having obtained the necessary permit , obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the nonnal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by this code, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this Section .

SECTION 14.  Revocation of Permits.

14.l.	Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right , as provided herein , to revoke any right-of-way permit , without a fee refund , if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(a)	The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit ;

(b)	An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit , or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens;

(c)	Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right -of-way  permit ;
 
(d)	The failure to complete the work in a timely manner ; unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the pem1ittee's control; or

(e)	The failure to correct, in a timely manner , work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to Section 18.

14.2. Written Notice of Breach. If the City determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or  any condition of the permit the City shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation . The demand shall state that continued violations might be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City, at its discretion , to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.

14.3.	Response to Notice of Breach.  Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notification of the breach , permittee shall provide the City with a plan , acceptable to the City, which will cure the breach.

Permittee's failure to so contact the City, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan , shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit .

14.4.	Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation .

SECTION  15. Mapping Data.

15.1.	Information Required. Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100 . Within ninety (90) days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit , the permittee shall provide the Zoning Administrator accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all equipment installed, owned and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided in a format consistent with the city 's electronic mapping system , when practical or as a condition imposed by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall subject the permittee to the delay penalties established in accordance with Section 1.04 and may affect the grant of any future permits for right-of-way excavation or obstruction.

15.2.	Service Laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals , other than  minor  repairs  as defined  in  Minnesota  Rules  7560 .0150  Subpart  2, shall  require  the permittee 's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals, and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the City reasonably requires it.  Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the City evidence of the installed service lateral locations.  Compliance with this Section and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and  Minnesota  Rules  governing  service  laterals  shall  be  a condition  of any City approval necessary for : I) payments to contractors working on a public improvement project (including those  under  Minnesota  Statutes, Chapter 429) ; and 2) City approval  of performance  under development agreements , or other subdivision or site plan approval under the City 's official land use controls.	The City shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed
 
. IL







may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future  permits  to  the offending permittee or its subcontractors.

SECTION 16.  Location of Facilities; Undergrounding.

16.1.	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public and is intended to foster (i) safe travel over the right-of-way, (ii) non-travel related safety around homes and buildings where overhead feeds are connected and (iii) orderly development in the City. Location and relocation, installation and reinstallation of Facilities in the right-of-way must be made in accordance with this section. This section is intended  to  be enforced consistently with state and federal law regulating right-of-way users, specifically including  but  not  limited  to  Minnesota  Statutes,§§  161.45, 237.162,  237.163,  300.03,  222.37,
238.084 and 2168.36 and the Telecommunications  Act of 1996, Title 47, USC Section 253.

16.2.	Undergrounding of Facilities. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise between the applicable right-of-way user and the City, facilities placed in the  public right-of-way must be located, relocated and maintained underground pursuant to the terms and  conditions  of  this section and in accordance with applicable construction standards .

16.3.	Undergrounding of New Facilities. A new facility or a permanent extension of facilities must be installed and maintained underground when supplied to:

(a)	a new installation of buildings, signs, streetlights or other structures;

(b)	a new subdivision of land; or

(c)	a new development containing new commercial or industrial buildings.

16.4.	Undergrounding of Permanent Replacement, Relocated or Reconstructed Facilities . A permanent replacement, relocation or reconstruction of a facility of more than 300 feet must be located, and maintained underground, with due regard for seasonal working conditions. For purposes of this section, reconstruction means any substantial repair of or any improvement to existing facilities. Undergrounding is required  whether  a  replacement,  relocation  or reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or operating the facilities, or by the City in connection with (I) the present or future use by the City or other local government unit of the right-of-way for a public project, (2) the public health or safety, or (3) the safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.

16.5.	Corridors. The City may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will someday be located within the right-of-way . All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the City involving the installation  or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.

16.6.	Limitation of Space. The Zoning Administrator shall, to  the  extent  possible, accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way. In doing so, the Administrator shall be guided by consideration of the public interest, including the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect  to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans for public improvements and development projects.
 
SECTION 17. Retirement of Overhead Facilities. The City Council may determine whether it i s in the public interest that all facilities within the City, or within certain districts designated by the City, be permanently placed and maintained underground by a date certain or target date, independently of undergrounding required pursuant to Section 16 of this Ordinance. The decision to underground existing facilities must be preceded by a public hearing , after notice published for two consecutive weeks and written notice mailed to the utilities affected at least 30 days prior to the hearing . At the hearing the City Council must consider, at a minimum, all of the issues stated in 17.2 below and make findings . Undergrounding of existing facilities may not take place until the City Council has, after hearing and notice , adopted a plan in accordance with 17.3 below .

17.1.	Public Hearings. A hearing must be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each hearing any person interested must be given an opportunity to be heard. The subject of the public hearings shall be the issue of whether Facilities in the right-of-way in the City, or located within a certain district, shall all be located underground by a date certain . Hearings are not necessary for the undergrounding required under Section 16 of this Ordinance .

17.2.	Public Hearing Issues. The issues to be addressed at the public hearings include but are not limited to:

(a)	The costs and benefits to the public of requiring the undergrounding of all facilities in the right-of-way.

(b)	The feasibility and cost ofundergrounding all facilities by a date certain as determined by the City and the affected utilities .

(c)	The tariff requirements, procedure and rate design for recovery or intended recovery of incremental costs for undergrounding by the utilities from ratepayers within the City.

(d)	Alternative financing options available ifthe City deems it in the public interest to require  undergrounding by a date certain and deems it appropriate to participate in the cost otherwise borne by the ratepayers.

Upon completion of the hearing or hearings, the City Council must make written findings on whether it is in the public interest to establish a plan under which all facilities will be underground , either Citywide or within districts designated by the City .

17.3.	Undergrounding Plan. If the City finds that it is in the public interest to underground all or substantially all facilities in the public right of way, the City must establish a plan for such undergrounding. The plan for undergrounding must include at least the following elements:

(a)	Timetable for the undergrounding .

(b)	Designation   of   districts   for   the   undergrounding    unless,   undergrounding   plan   1s Citywide

(c)	Exceptions  to the undergrounding  requirement  and  procedure  for establishing such exceptions.

(d)	Procedures for the undergrounding process , including but not limited to coordination with City projects and provisions to ensure compliance with nondiscrimination requirements under the law.
 
(e)	A financing plan for funding of the incremental costs if the City determines that it will finance some of the undergrounding costs, and a determination and verification  of the claimed additional costs to underground  incurred by the utility .

(f)    Penalties or other remedies for failure to comply with the undergrounding .

SECTION 18. Damage to Other Facilities. When the City does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain , support, or move facilities to protect its workers or its project , the Zoning Administrator shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that facility owner and must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing . Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another caused during the City's response to an emergency occasioned by that owner 's facilities .

SECTION 19. Right-of-Way Vacation. If the City vacates a right-of-way that contains facilities, the facility owner's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819 .3200 .

SECTION 20. Indemnification and Liability. By  applying for and accepting a  permit under  this Section , a permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819 . 1250.

SECTION 21. Abandoned Facilities. Any person who has abandoned  facilities  in any right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair , excavation , or construction , unless the Zoning Administrator waives this requirement.  Failure to remove abandoned facilities may affect the grant of any future permits to the person responsible for  the abandoned facilities.

SECTION 22. Appeal. A right-of-way user that: ( 1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit ; (3) has had permit revoked ; (4) believes that the fees imposed are invalid ; or (5) disputes a determination of the City regarding Section 1 . 16 Subdivision 2 of this Ordinance, may have the denial, revocation , fee imposition , or decision reviewed , upon written request , by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial , revocation , or fee imposition will be writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.

SECTION 23. Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers. A permittee 's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health , safety and welfare of the pub I ic.
 
SECTION 24. Severability. If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction , such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in  this  chapter precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant , as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.

SECTION 25. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force  from and  after its passage and publication .

 
Dated :	°0AtJ 4;1.........-_y
 
, 2010
 





Clerk
 

Summary of Ordinance 113 approved by City Council and published in the White Bear Press on
l-Ji7 J()/{) , 2010.
 

CIT\' OF CEM LAKE, RAMSEY COl1i'ITY, MINNESOTA ORDINANCE NO. I1-t

AN ORDINANCE REGllLATll\IG TllE USE OF LAND WITlllN DESIGNATED FLOOD HAZARD AREAS IN TllE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNl(SOTA.
TllE CITY COUNCIL OF TllE CIT\' OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS: SECTION 1. PURPOSE.

I . I Statulor; J\uthori/.ation: The legislature ol" the State or Minnesota has .  in  Minncsot<1  Statutes Chapter I OJF and Chapter - 62 dclcg,1Led the responsibility Lo local gO\ernrnent  units  to  adopt regulatiuns  designed   to  minimi/.c   llood   losses .


 

. \ The llood ha/.ard meas or the City  or Ciem  I  .ake.  Minnesota.  arc  subject  Lo  periodic inundation \\ " hich results in potential loss  or lilc.  loss  or property.  health  and  sakt: ha/.arcls. disruption oJ" COllllllerce and gm ernrncntal scn·iccs. e:-;traordinar) public e:-.:penditures or llood prolcction crnd relic!'. and impairment or the ta .\ ba se. all ol. "hich c1ch1.:rscl:  affect  the  public  health . sakt\. and  general  ''cl rare.

I . \let hods l l scd to J\nalyze 1:1ood I la.Girds. !"hi s Ordinance is based uron a reaso1whlc method ol" analy/.ing llood hcu.a rd s which  is consistent  '' ith !he standards established by the \ innesota  Department or Natural  Resources .

C.	ation'il  Flood  Insurance  Program  Compliance .   This Ordinance  is adopted  to co111pl:
 
\\ith  the rules and  reL'.ulations  or the	ational 1:1ood Insurance ProL'.ram.
 
cod illed  as-+-+
 
C 'ode  or  1:ederal	Regulations   Part s   59   -78.  as   amended.   so   as   to   maintain   the
community's cligihilit)  in the National  l 'lood  Insurance  Progr<1m.

I. Stclternent  ur  Purpose :  It  is  the  purpOSl'  or this  Ordinance  lo  promote  the  public  health. sak ty. and general wcll"are and to minimi/.e those losses described in Section I .::'. by pru,·i sio11s contai11ed herein.

SECTION  2. GENERAL PROVISIONS

::'.   I     I  .ands  to  \\ ' hich  Ordin<111cc   !\pplies     Thi s  Ordinance  shall  apply  to  all   lands  \\·ithin  the
.1	urisdictio11 or the ('it: or ()cm I .ake sh0\\11 Oil  the Of"llcial /,oning Map and / nr the atlach111enh
therctu as being lorntcd  within the boundaries ol' thc CJcnernl  Flood  Plain  D i stricts.

::'..:.'. Additions to Oi"llcial  /.oning  Map  The Onleial  /oning  Map  is hereby  adopted  by rekrrnce and declared to be a part 01· thi s Ordi11ancc. The following material shall  be  attached  Lo  the Oi"llcial /.oning Map and he considered part nl· the 111ar: the 1:1ood Insurance  Rate  ap panels the1cin numbered 27 I 23C0035 CI. 27 l 23COO..+ I Cl <1ml :.'.71 :.'.3C0042C!. all dated June-+. 20 I 0 allll prepared b: the l·edcral  Lrnergcncy  \ anagerne11t  1\gcnc\.  The  Official  /.oning  !\lap shall  he on Ille i11  the Office ul.the Cit\  Clerk.
 


2.3 l cgul<1tor) Flood Protection Ue\ ·ation: The regulatory llood prulcction elc\ ·ation shall bl' an ekvation no lmver than one f()()t abu\'C the clc\ ·ation of' the regional llood plu s any increases in llood  clc\ ·ation  G1uscd  by  encroachments  on  the  lloocl  plain  that  result  frorn  designation  or  1
!lood\\.ll\.


2.-1-    Interpretation:


.\ .     111   their  interpretation  < ind  < 1pplication.  the  prn' i sions  or thi s Ordinance  shall  he  held  to be 111i11i111u111 requirc111cnt s. sh<lll  he  liberally  construed  in  !'avor or the Cit\' . and shall  not bl' deemed <1  limitation ur repeal of'<my other 1x1\\·er s g rant ed hv st.ate sl {llute s.

n	The boundarie s ol' the di strict s established in this  Ordinance  sh<tll  be  determined  b' scaling distance s on the Offic ial /oning Map . \\'here  interpr etation  i s needed  as to th e exact location or the boundarie s or the di strict as shown  on the Official /oning Map ( l(1r cx<l111plc. where there appears  lo he a conllict hct\'\'Ccn a mapped  bou11dan · and  actml lield   conditions)   and   there   i s   a   l(1r111al     appeal   ur   the   decision   tl l .  the   /tining
..\Jministralm. the  13oard  or /\djustmenl  shall  make  the  nece ssai·)  interpretation .  :\II dcci siuns "ill  be  based  on  cJc,·ations  on  the  regional  (  100-y car)  llood  prnlilc.  the gro und  Cic\ ·atiOllS  that  existed  Oil  the  site  on  the  date  o!' the  lirst  \icitional  l :lood In surance  Progrnm   111ap   showing  the  area  \\ ·ithin  the   I  00-ycar  lloodplain . and  o ther a' ailab l c technical data.  Per son s contesting the  location  or the di strict  hounciarics  shall he gi\'c n   a  rca so nahlc opportunity  to pre se nt  their case lo  the  l)oard  t)r /\cljustment  ;1nd  t o submit  technical  e\·idcnce

.:'\  :\hrngatillll  and  ()reater  Re striction s:   It   i s nut   111tcmlcd  h:  thi s Ordinance  to  repea l . '1hrngate. ur  i111pai1-  a 11:  existing  casements.  co,·e11<1nts.  Pr  deed  rc stri c tipn s.  I   [o\\c\·er.   \\here   thi s Ordinance i111p oscs grea t er restriction s. the pr0\ ·i s1ons or thi s Ordinance  shall  pre rn il.  /\II  oth er ordinance s   incon sistent   with   thi s   Ord inan ce   ire   hereb y   repeal ed   to   the   C:\ tClll   ur   the inctl11siste 11C)  on l )' .

.6	Warning and  i)i sc laimcr or l.iahilit\':   Thi s Ordinance docs llOl  imply  that  <1rc;1s  OlllSilk  the
!loud plain districts or land use s permitted "ithin such districts "ill be free !'mm lloodin g m
!loud damages Thi s O rdinan ce shall  nut  create  liabilit y  on  the  part  ol' the  Cit'  or (le111  l.:1kc  m 1n: o rlicer nr emp l oyee thcrcol · for an: lloml da111ages that  r es ult  !'rum  rL·li<111cL'  un  this Ordinance  or <Ill)   adrnini st rati \'C deci sion  la w!'ull)  mad e thereunder.

.7	7 Delinition s:  Unless specilicall y dcrined  below. words o r  phra ses u sed in this Ordinance  shall bl' interp reted so as to gi,·e thern the sa me rncanin g as they have in common u sage or as gi,cn  h: o th er applicable  City  Ordinance s. such  as the  /oning  Ordinance. so <lS  to  g i,·c this  Ordin mce it s 11wst re:1sonablc <1ppl i crnion

l .qu:tl De gree 01· l ·:ncro <1chment - a method 01· determining the lo cat ion 0 1· llomh\:l\ boundaries SO  that  !loud plain  lands Oil  both  sides or LI    stream arc capable o !·Ctln\ eying a proportionate  shar e or llood  !lows
 
1 :1ood  -  a  temporary   increa se  in  the  !low or  stage  or a  stream  or  1n  the  stage  01· a  wetland  or
lake that result s in the inundation of normall y dry areas.

1 :1noc.I 1-rcqucncy - the 1·rcquency for which it  i s  c:--:pec ted  that  <l  spcci fie  llood  sta gL'  or c.lischurge  Ill<!)   be equaled  or e:--:cce c.led .

1 :1 ood 1:ringc - that portion or the llood plain out side or the llooch\ av. J .' lood i'rin ge is synonymous \\ ·ith the ter!ll " llood\\a y  f'ringe"  u sed  in  the  1:1ood  In surance  Stlllh  I'm Ralll scy  County.  M inne sota.

1:1ood Plain  - the  bed s prop er a nd  the areas adjoining a wetland.  lake or \\atcrcoursc  "hich
ha \'e been or hereal'tcr  ma y he co\ ·ercd by th e re g ional  !loud .

1:1ood   Prnolin g   -   a   combinatiun   ur stru c tural   pro\'i sion s.  c han ges .  ur   adjustrne11ts   lo
properties <llld structure s subject to llooding. primaril y l(ir the reducti o n or eli!llination
or llood damages.

1:1ood\\'<I)'  -  the  bed  or a  wetland  or  lake  and  the  channel  or d   \\ atercou rsc and  th ose  porti ons
or the adjoining  llood  plain  vvhich  arc rea sonabl y  required  t o carry or st ore the re g ional
llllud di schar ge.

1 .o\\est   1 :1oor  -  the·  lowe st   lluor  o l · the  Ill\\ est  enclosed   area  (including   h <1se 111ent ) .	.-\n
unlini shed  or  llood  re si st a nt  enclosure.  u sed  so l e ly  ror  parking  or  \ 'Chicles.  building
<iccess . m stora ge  in  an  area  other  than  a b ase ment  area. i s not  considerc'd  a  huildin g·s
l o,\cst  lloor .


Manufocturcd   I  lo!llc  -  a  structure .  tran sport a ble  in  o ne  or  more  sec tion s.  \\hich   i s  built  o n  a
p l'r lllallCn(  chassis  and  is  designed   itH U SC  \\'ith  or  \\'itiWUl  <l  perm a nent  i'oundation
\\hen  attached  to the requir ed utilitie s   The term "manul icturcd  hon11.:--  due 11ut
include  thL'  tcr111  ··recreational   \chicle.--


Obst ru ction - <ll1) dam. wa ll. whari', embankrnent. le\'ec. dike . pile. ahutrncnt. projecti o n. c:--:cuvation. ch a nnel modif'icution. cuh·crt, building, vvire. knee. stockpile. refu se. till, structure . or  matter  in.  along.  acro ss. or  projecting  into  any  channel.  \rntcrcoursc.  \H
re gulator y !lood plain which ma y impede . retard. or change the direction or the !ln\\ o r
\\atcr. either in it scll ' or hy catching or cullccting debri s carried by such \\'atcr.


l e:1ch - a h:draulic en g in ee rin g term t o describe a longitudinal segment Pi' a strca111 o r ri\ ·e r inlluenced h) a natural or nian -m ad...: obstruction. In  an  urh :in  area.  the  scgrnent  ol- a str...:am  or  ri\ ·er  belvvc en  t\\ ·o  ul11secuti\ ·e   hr1dgc   cro ssin gs   \\ ·ould   mo st   typi G1 1l: con ·titute a reach .

R...:cr...:ation a l     Vehi c le  -  a   \chicl e  that   i s  built   on  a  si n g l e  chassis.  i s  ·-J.00  square  kcl  or   less
\\hen mea sured al the largest hori /.ontal projecti on . is desi gned to be se lf-propelled m permanentl y to\\'ablc h y a li g ht dut ) truck . and i s desi gn...:d primaril y n ot for use as a perrnanenl  d\\Cllin g hut  as t e rnporar y  li\ ·in g qu a rter s  1·or  rec rc<1tional.  carnpin g .  tr:l\cl.
 

or seasonal  use.   1 :or the purposes ul· this Ordinance. the term  r1..'crcalional  \chick shall
be S) nonyrnous \\·ith the term  tra\cl  trailer/ tra,·cl ,·chicle.

Regional 1:1ood - a llood \\hi ch is rcprcscnlativc or large lloods Kl10\\ 11 lo ha\T occurred generally in Minneso t a and  reasonably  charac teri stic or what can be c;.;pectcd  to occur on an average CrequcnC) in the  111agnitudc  or  the  I 00-ycar  recurrence  in ten al. l\cgional lloocl is synonymous '' ith the  term  "base  llnod".   I-percent  annual  chance llood or  100-ycar  llood elevation.

l\egulator: 1 :1ood Protection !·:le, at ion - The regulatory  flood  protection  elc,·ation  shall  be  < Ill Cle\ ation 110 Jo\\'er than OllC l"oot :1bo\·c the cJC\ ·atiOll or the regional llood plus  <Ill\ increases in flood clc,·ation caused b) cncrn:1ch111c 11t s 011  the  llnnd  plain  that  result rro111  designation  ora  flood\\<!)".

Substantial l)amagc - 111cans damage or any origin sustained b: a structure'' here the cost lll . restoring the structure to its hc!'orc da111aged condition \\Ould equal or e;.;cccd 50 111..·1·ccnt ol.thc market ,aJuc ol"thc structure before the d:1mage occurred.

Substantial lrnpnn-emcnt - \\ithin  <Ill)  consccuti\c  3()5-d a:  period.  an:  reconstruction. rchahiliL<1tion   (including  normal  maintenance  and  repair).  repair  alt.er  damage.  addition. llr other impro n:mcnt or a  structure,  the  cost  or \\hich  equals  or  c;.;cccds  50  percent  ul ' the  market  \ '<:tiuc  or the  structu re  hcrorc  the "sta rt  or constructio n " or the  improvement.
!"his term  includes structures th<ll  hmc  incurred  "substantial  damage." regardless oi"thc actual rep<1ir ,,·mk performed.  The term docs not. howc\'l::r. include either:

( l) .1\Jl) project i"nr imrJl"l)\ " elllellt ul· a struc tur e to correct c;.;isti n g \ ioJations or S t <l tl' or local health. sanitar). \lr  sakt\  code  specilie<1tiuns  which  ha\'c  been  ickntili1..·d  h) the local cude cnl(11-ce111L'.nt ol'licial and  '' hich  arc the  minimu111  nccc ssan  tu  assure sak  Ji, ing  cunditions.

(b) :\ny alteration or an "historic structure." provided that the alteration \\'ill nut preclude  the structure's continued  designation  as an "historic structure ...  1:t1r  the
purpose  or thi s  Ordinance.  "historic  structure"  shall   be  as  clclined   in  .f.f  Cude  or
1:cderal  Regulations.  Part  5()   1 .


8.   1\11ne:-.:  1tions:  The  1 :1ood In surance  Rate  f\ lap panel s adopted  by  rckrcncc  into the 01.licial
/.lming     ap h)  Sect i on  ::'..2  above may  include  lloodplain  meas  that  lie outside or the corpornte
boundaries ol. thc City 01· Clem 1 .akc at the time or adoption or this ordinance. II" any  nf  these llumlplain land meas arc annc;-;ed into the City  ul" C cm  1 .akc  alkr  the  date  or adoption  ur this ordina nce . the  ne,,·J y annc;.;cd ll oodp l ain lands sha ll be subject to the pro, ·i sions or th i s ordinance immediately  upon  thc date oranne;.;ation  into the C 'i ty ol . Cicm  1 .akc.
 

SECTION  3. ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICTS.

>.I l)istricts. /\II real property \\'hich lies  within  the  districts  created  by  this  Ordinance  shall  be subject  to the  use  and  alteration  restrictions  stated  herein.  The  restrictions  ol' this Ordinarn:e sh;ill he in <1ddition to tho se impo sed b:· 1 :edernl and Stale 1£1\\s and re gulation s. and other Cit: mdi11a11ces go\'Crning land USC , all or\\ hich shall .iointly arply. In the  e\'ent that more than one regulation  may  arply, the  more  restrieti\'e  rcquir c 111ent  shall  be  put  into effect.

1\	Floodway District:  The Flood\\'ay District shall include tho se areas designated as hrne
!\ on the 1 :1oocl Insurance Rate Map panels adopted in Section :?..:2  that  me  belcl\\  the ordinary hi g h \\'atn lc\ ·c! as  ck lined  in  f\ linnesota  Statutes_  Section  1 O>(i 005. suhdi\'ision    1-J..

I		I    lcll1d   l  ' ringe  District:  The  1 :1ood  1 :ringc  District  sha ll  include  those  areas designated  as l.lrne !\ 011  the  1 :1oml  Insurance  Rate  \lap panel s adopted  in  Section  2.2  that  arc belc)\\ thl·  I  <    o  annual  chance  !1ood elcvatio11 (I 00-)'C<lr  llood ele\ ·ation) but  abm ·c the ordinan high  v.ater  lc\·cl  as de lined  in  Minnesota  Statutes,  Section   10:1(1 005.  suhdi\ i sion  1-J.. Sec Section  6.0  f'or  procedures  tu det c r111inc  the  1°1, a1111ual  clwncc elc\ ·ation (I 00-: e<1r llood  elc\·ation ).

.2 Co111pli<1ncc: No nC\\ structure nr land  shall  hcrcal'ter  be  u sed  and  110  st ructure  shall  he constructed_   located,  e>:tcnded,  con\ ·ertcd,  or  structurally   altered   vvithout    l'ull   compliance   \\ith   the
ter111s   or this   Ordinance   ancl   other   applicahk   reguiLltion s   \\ hich   apply   to   u ses  \\ithin   the
_jurisdiction  01· this  Ordinance.    Within  the  1:1oml\\a)  and  1 :1ood  1 :ringe  Districts_  all  use s  not li sted as permitted use s or conditional uses in Section s -J. <md 5 that i'ollc)\\, re spec ti,·ely. shall he prnhibited.    In  addition,  a caution  is pw\'ided  her e that :

. \.	Modilirntions,    additions,   structural    alterations,   nor111al    mainternrnce    and   repair	or
repair alkr damage to c\isting nonconl(mning structures and nonconl'or111ing u ses ul structures  or   land  arc  regulated   h:   the  general   provi sions  ur this  Ordinance  and
specilically   Section  9 .

I		1\ s-built cle' at ions l(H elC\ ·ated or !loud prc1oll:d structures must he certilicd b\ gr(1uml suneys <1nd llood prnolin g technique s 111ust he designed and certilied h: 1 registered prnll:ssional engineer or architect as spec i lied in  the  general  pro' isions  ul ' thi Ordinance and spccilicc1ll) as st;1tcd in Section<) ol' this Ordin;111ce

SECTIO  -L   FLOODWA Y  DISTRICT (FW)

I 11l' pcnnitted and conditional uses listed belo\\ arc allo\\·ed in the llooch\«l)  if  nut  nther\\ isc prohibited   by  the  underlying  zo nin g district  classilication  applicable  to  the  property .

-J.   I    1>ern1ittcd  l l ses:

.'\ .	Clencr 1I   l'ar111ing.  pasture_  grai'.ing.  outdoor  plant  nur serie s. horticulture.  and  "ild  crop
han ·esti ng.
 


13.	13oat   launching   ramps.   S\\'i111llli11g   ctreas.   park s.   "·iJdlik   and   n<tture   prcsencs.   and
lishing areas


C.	Residential   l awns. ga rden s and  play  areas.

-L2 Standa rd s !'or 1:1ood" ay  Permitted  llscs:

. \ .	The  use  shall  ha\'L  a  l o"  llood  d;m1agc  pute1llial.


13.	The  use shall  not  obstruct  llood  Jlm,·s or  i11crc ,1s'-·  llood  elcn1tio11s  ;111d  shall  not  i1n oh'-'
structures.  Iii!.  obstructions.  e:--.:cm ·ations  or  storage  o l . lllaterials  or  equipment.

4.3	(\rnditional   l l  scs


:\. J·:xtraction and storage  or  sane.I_  gra\ ·el_  'llld  other  materials  (sec  /oning  OrdinanCl' Section  I (J. I  I   and Section 2 1. generally).

13.	\\ atcr control  st rncturc:-..


C	Railroads. streets. bridge s. utility tran smission lines. and pipelines.

J)	Placement  or Iii! (sec /.oning Ordinance Section 21 ).

4.4	Standards  J 'o r  1:1ood\'va\' ( 'onditio11al   l lses:


:\.   ,\JI  l l ses.   No  Jill  (includi11g  !ill  l cll roads a11d  lc\\. cs). deposit. obstructiun. or other use Illa.' be <1 ll o\\cd as a co11c.litiona l use that ''ill cause am· increase  111  the  stage  or the 100-:ear  or   regional  llood  or  cause  an  increa se  in  llood  dalllages  i n  the  re ac h   nr reache s al"!'ected.

13.  /\II   tlood\\'a)   cond ition a l   u ses   shall   he   subject   t')   the   procedure s   and   st,111dards contained   in  Section   I  0.4  01· thi s Ordinance .

C	The cond ition al use shall be perlllissiblc in the underlyin g /Oiling district if one c:-;ists.


J) .    1-'ill   1\n y permitted  Iii! placement  shall  comp!:  "ith the  I .and  Reclamation  swndard s nl· /.oning Ordinance Scctio11 16. 10. and erosion co11trnl requirements  in  /oning Ordinance  Section  22.

I ·:. Storage or \ilateria l s and 1-:quiprncnt. Stma gc ol' uther lllalerials or equipment rnay be allowed ii. n::adil) rcrn o\'abl c from the area "ithin the  time  a\'ailnblc  af'ter  <I  llood warnin g and  in  accordance  \\ith  a  plan  apprmcd  by  the  City  Council.  Th e st orage or
processing   or materials   that   <ire.   in   tilllc   nl· lloodin g.   llarnmablc.   explosi,c.  ur
potentially   injurious  t o  human.  animal.  or  plant  lifC  is  prohibited.
 

1 :.	Comrnunity-v\ idc  structural  works  rm  flood  control  intended  lo  remO\"C  MC<IS   rnllll  the
regulatory  llood plain shall no! be allO\ved in the floodway.


SECTION  5.  FLOOD FRINCE DISTRICT (FF)

) . I i>errnilted l J ses: Permitted uses sh,111 he those uses or land or structures listed as permitted or accessor;· uses in the underlying /.Oning use district, provided that the use  or  structu r e  can  he eJc,·ated  on  Iii! such  that  the  lo\\'cst  lloor i s al or ahO\ ·e the regulatory  llood  protection  cJc,·ation .

.'\. The linished Iii! elc,·ation l(ir structures shall be no Jo,ver than one (I) root bclo" the regulator) flood prnlcction ele,ation and the Iii! shall extend al such elc,·ation at least lilken (I)) kct beyond the outside limit s of"the structure erected thereon .

13.	i\n accessor; st ructure or use not <.k signed for human habitation. \\hich constitutes cl minimal investment. ctnd \\hich docs not exceed 500 square kc! at its lar gest projection m<l\ be llond prookd in accordance with the FP-1 or  FP- 2  lloml  prunling classilications in the State 13uildin g Code. /\.s an alternati,e. the u se or structure may be llood prookd to the FP -3 or FP-..+ classification in the State Building Code ( if a detached garage. the garage must he used solely !'or parking vehicles ;md limiLCd slornge). 1 :1oud prookd acccssor\' structure s must meet the follu"·ing additional swndards

(I)	!'he structure must he adequate!; anchored to pre v ent llotation. collapse tll.  l<1tnal mm ·emcnt of the structure and shall he designed t o  cquali;-,c  hydrostati c  llood l(nces  on  exterior  "'ill s:

(2)	.'\11)   rnechanical  and  utility equipment  in a structure  must  be ele,·rned  tom abo,·c
the regulatory llood protcctio11 cle\'ation or properly ll0l1cl proo!Cd : and

n)  To  allo"  for  the  cquali/;1tio11  or hydro static  pre ssure.  there  mu st  be   1  111111111rn111 ur t\\() -- lUtornalic·· ope11i11gs in  the  outside  \\'C!llS  or the  Stl"llcture  ha,·ing  a  tOl<li net  area  01· not   less  tha11  one  square  inch   1·or   c\·ery  square  foot  or enclosed  a re cl
subject to flooding.  There must be openin gs Oil  at least two side s or the structure
and the bottom or all openings lllUS[ he no higher than one root  dbOVL'  li1L'  IO\\C S[ adjacent grade to the structure.  Us ing  human  i11ten ·ention  to  open  a  garage  door prior  tu  lloodi11g "ill 11ot satisf'> ' thi s requirement  rt1r automatic upenings

l'	,1\ll  permitted  u ses shall comply ,., ith the "Stanc.larc.ls l"or all  1:1oml  1 :rin gL' l l ses" li stcc.I  i11
Section  5.3.

5 2 Conc.litio11al L l scs  :\n  structure  "ithin  the  di strict  that  is  not  elc\'atcd  on  fill  or  eligible u11dcr  Section  5.1 (I )  shall  only  be  al lmrnble  a s  a  conditional  use .  1\n  applicatio11  fnr  a conditional u se  shall  he  suh_jcct  to  the  standard s and  criteria  specified  below  and  in  Section  5.J. 1"11c procedure s 01· the /.uning  Ordinance  applicable  to  conditional  use  permit  applications  shall apply  to  applications  under  this  Scctio11.
 
:\.		1\ltcrnati\ 'C   clc\ ·ation  mcth\lds  other  than  the  use  or 1111   111m    he  utilized  to clc\<llc  <l structure's   IO\\Cst	lloor   above   the   regu l atory   llood   protection   elevation.	The se alternative  methods  may  include the  use or stilts, pi l ings. parallel  walls. etc .. or  1b0\e­ gradc. enc l osed  areas such as crawl  spaces or tuck  under  garages .    The b<Jsc   llr lloor ul · an  enclosed  area  shall  be  considered  abo\·c-gradc  and  not  a  structure 's  ba seme nt   ur
IO\\ "CSl  lloor  i r  I)  the enclosed area  i s above-grade  on al  least  one side or the st ructure :
2) it i s  designed  to  i nternall y  llood  and  is  constructed  \\ith  llood  re si stant  rnatcrd s: and:\) it is used sole l y lcff  p<lrk  i ng  or \chicles.  bu i ld i ng  access  or  storage.  The alx1\ ·e­ notcd  < iltcrnati\'c  cle\'ation  rnc!htid s arc  subject  to  the  l"ol l m\·ing  additional  standards:

(I)   i)esign  and  ('crtilication  -  1 ·hc structure 's design and as-built condit i on must  he ccrli lied  b y  a  registered  prokssional  engineer   or   architect   as   being   in compl i ance \\ith the ge ne r al design stamLtrds 01· the State l ·h1i l ding Code a11d. spccilicall}.	that all electrical. heating. ventilation. plumbin g  and  <llr conditioning  equipment  <Jnd  other  scn ·ice  l  1cilitics  must  be  at  or  abo\e  the re g ulator} flood protection d..'.\ 'ation ur he designed to prevent !loud ,,.,Her 1·rom entering or accumulating  \\ ·ith i n  the se components during Limes or llomlin g.

(:2)  Spccilic  Standards  f'or  !\bO\·e-grndc.   Lncloscd   1\reas   -   ,o\b(1\T-grmk .   !'ull:­ cnclosed areas such as crn,,·J spaces or tuck under garages mu st he designed lo intcrnall:-  llood and the desi gn pl<t n s mu st stipu l ate:

a .	1\ minimU!ll al"l'(l  or Openings in the \\aJJs \\hl'rC internal  llooding i s t\\  hL'  U Cd
as <1   llood  prnoling  technique .      !"here sh al l   be a minimum  or t\\ ·o openings on at
least t\\O s ides or the structure and the bottom or all openings shall he nu hi gher
than one-1(101 abo,·c grndc. The au t omatic opening s sha ll ha\'l'  a  minimum  net an..'.<t ol· not less than one square inch rur C\ ' Cr)' square  root  or enclosed  area subject  to  floodin g  unle ss  a  re g i stered  pro!C ssional  engineer  or   architect ccrtilies that u smaller net area \\ ·mild sui"licc. The a utomatic ope ning s ma: he equipped \\'ith screen s. lou,·crs.  ,·,1h'l's.  or  nthcr  C\l\ erings  or  de\·iccs  pm' idcd that the: permit the automatic entry and exit 01· lluoc.I waters '' ithout an: l(1r111 oi"hurnan   inten·cntion:  <ind

b.		l"h<1t the enclosed <trca \\ill be desi gned or flood re si sta nt m a terial s  in 1ccordance vvith the 1 :p_:; or FJl-4 c l a ssifications i 11 the St a t e 13uilding Code <tnd shall  be used  so l ely  for buildin g access. parking or\·ehiclcs or storage.

I	Re side ntial  ba sement  constructinn  shall  not  he  allowed  bcl(m   the  rcgul<1tor)   lh\\ld
prntL'C linn cle\ ·ation.

('  1\ll  treas  or  non  residential  structure s  p l aced  helO\•\  the   regulator: ·   flood   protection clc,ation.  including  ba sements .  shall  he  flood  prool cd  in   acrnrdancc   \\'ith   the structurally  dry   llood   proolin g  classilications   in  the  State  Building  Code.   Structural!: dry  llood  prnoJing  must  me et  t h e FJl- 1    o r  1 :11-2  llood  proolin g classiricatiun  i n  the Stale l ·h1ilding Code and this sha ll 1n1uirc makin g the structure watertight \\ith tl1l' \\'< tll s substantial!)    impermeable   Lo    the   pa ssage   ol· \\ater   and   \Yith   structur a l      cnmponenls
 
hm in g th e capabilit) or re si stin g h: drostat i c and h ydro d yna mic load s a nd the effec t s ol· buoyancy Structures llood  prookd  to  the  1 :p _:;  or  1 :p _..f  class i  firntion  sha l  I  1llit  hL' pl'rn1ittcd

:=; _   :;  St rndards  for  /\II  1:1oocl  1 :rin ge  l l ses:

1\.	Storage of' Materials and Lquipment.  The stora ge or proces sin g or material s that a rc. in
tim e  of'  flooding.  lbrnrn ablc.  C.'\p l osivc.  o r  poten tiall y  injurious  t o  human ,  animal.  m
plant  life  i s prohibited.    Storage  or other  lllat c ri a l s o r  equiprncnt  i s al l o\\-ccl  ii' rcadil :
rerno' a ble i·rorn the mea '' ithin the time  <.1, ·ailablc ai'ter  a  llood  \\llrn1ng  :rnd  in accordance  "·ith  a  pl 111  appro,·ed  h:  th e C it:  Counc il .

I  .  1\ 11  11c,,· 1xincipal  structur es  Jllu st  li<.1,·e  'chicular  access  at  or  aho' c an  cJC\ ·atitin  not more than l\\O (2)  ket  hclU\\  the rcgul <.1tory  llood  protecti on clc,·ation.  lf'a variance  to thi s requirClllCllt i s gra nted. the 13oa rd o!' /\djustrncn t mu st spcci f\  JirnitatiOllS  Oil  the period of USC or occupancy ol·  the  Structure  f'or  time s  oJ'  llooding  and  on ly  alh::r dclL'rrni nin g  that  <tdcquate  llnnd  "a rnin g  tim e  and  local   llood   clllcrgency   rcspn n se pro ced ure s C.'\is t.

( ·	( '0111rnc rcial  L l scs - aeccssnr:  l and uses. such as ya rd s. mi lrnad  trnds a nd  parking  lt1ts
111a:  he a t  e l e,·a ti ons l ower than the regula tor y  llo od protection  c J c,·ation .   I  lo'' c\ ·c r. a
permit   !'or such  l'ac iliti cs  t o  be  u sed  h y  the  e mpl oyees  nr  the  ge n eral  public  shall  not  he
granted  in  the  absence  or a  llood  \\arning  system  that  provides  adequate  tim e  rur
c\ ·acuation  if  the  a rea  \\ ou ld   be  inundated  t o  a  depth  and  ,·e l ocit:  such  th at  ''hen
multiplyin g the dep th ( in  kct) tim es ,·elocit)  (i n  ket  per second )  the pn1duct  nurnh c r
e.-.:eee d s l (iur ( ..+)  upon occurrence ur the rc g i unal  llood .

I)        \l:1nu! 1cturi11g and  In dustrial  l l scs -  measures  shLill   he  taken  to  1111n1m 1 1e inter kre n cc '' ith  normal  pla nt  oper:1tio11s   especia ll y   along   stream s   ha \' in g   prntractcd   llood durati o n s. Certain accessory J ami u ses such <l s ya rd s <llld parking l o t s 111a) he at Ju" er elC\alio11s subject to requir e ment s set o ut in  ((')  aho,·c.  In  cons iderin g  permit applications. due co n siderati on shall he g i,·cn t o  n eed s 01· an  induslr)  \V ho sc  business requir es that  it  he  loc1tcd in  !lou d plain  < irea s.

I  .		1 ·i11 shall he prnperl)   compacted  and the sl ope:-. sha ll  be prnpc rl:,,. protec t ed by th e u se of  riprap .  \ 'Cgcta ti\ 'e   CO\Tr   or  oth e r  acceptable   1nethod	1'11c l :eder l i   1-:rn cr gL' n C) anagernent  A ge ncy  (l·Tl\l/\)  ha s establis h ed  criteria  l ()r  relllO\'in g  the  special  llood
h <.ua rd  area  desi gnation  l()r  certain  stru c tures prop e rl y  elevated  on  fill  above  the  I  00-
yea r  llood  elc\'C1ti o11  -  1 :LM 1\' s rcquire!llent s incorporate  spec ific  lill  co !ll1x1ctio11 rn1d

sid e   s lope   prot ect ion   standard s   1·or   multi -structure   or   multi-Jut   cle,·eloprncnts .    Tlic sL' sta ndard s sh ould  l1l'  i1l\' cs ti gated  prior  lo  tl1e  initiation  nl "  site  preparatinn  ii' a  change  or
specia l  llond ha1arcl mca designation'' ill  h e r cqucstccl

I ·.  l ' lond   p lain   de,·clopm c nt s   shall   not   ad,·crsel:   a ffect   the   hyd rauli c   capaci l )   ur  the chann e l     a nd   adjoinin g   !lone!  plain   o i'  <Ill)      tributar y   \\<lt e r co ur sc   m   drainage   S\Slelll
 

\\ ·hcrc <l  llomh\'<.l)' or other encroachment  limit  h as nnt  bccn  spccilicd  Oil  the Onici t!
/.oning IVlap.

(i.   1\ll   nrnnul 1cturcd   homes   must   be   securely   anchored   tt1   <111   adequately    anchored lcrnndation systcm that  re si st s  llotation.  collapse  and  lateral  movement.  Methods  111" anchoring ma:- in c lude. but arc not tn be limited  to.  use  nl· o ,·er-thc-top  or  i'r<lllh.' tic s to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state m loca l anchuring requirc111c11t s for res i stin g "·ind  l(ircc s.

SECTIOI\ 6.  100 \'E/\R  FLOOD ELEVATION PROCEDURES.

(i. I Upon receipt 01· an application !'or a permit  llr other approval  "ithin a  /one 1\. thL' /.oning 1\drnini strator will use the  I  t i,'(>  annual  ch<rnce  flood  clcn1tion  l(ir  that  basin  that  has  pre\ inusl) been  determined  in  accordance  "·ith  appro,·cd  JT:JVJ ;\  mctlrnd s,  if  <1vailable.  II" the   1°1\1  annual cha nc e llood clC\ ·ation ha s not been prc, ·iou sly determined. the  applicant  shall  be  required  to l·urriish a ll nCCCSS<lr) inl tl l'll1lltion LIS deemed necessary h:> the /o nin g 1\dmini stra t O r J'or the determination for  the  I  0 o  annual  chance  llnod  cle,·ation  in  accordance  \Vi th  approved  IT.!\!:\ methods.

(1:2	The  applicant   shall   be   re spon sible   to  submit   one  copy  01·  the   aho,·e   information   tn   ;r Lksig 11;1tcd   en g ineer  or  other  expert   per so n    or  agc rKy   lt)r   technical   assistance   in   cktcrrninin g "hether  the  proposed  u se  i s  in  the  1:1omlwa)  or  1 :1ood  1 :ringe  J)i strict  and  to  determine  the  I  0 o rnn u ;tl   chance  flood  clc,·ation  (  100-y car  flood  ele\<ttion).    Procedure s co nsistent  with   Minnesota l cg ulation s   I  98 .  Parts  6120.5000  -   (1 I  20.Ci200  and  -+-+   Cock  or  Fcderal   Re gul <1tions   Part  h) shall   he   i'ollowcd   in   thi s  expert   c,·aluation.	I   he   designated   cnginccr   or  cxpcrt   is  str \1ng l ) cncou ragcd    to   discu ss   the    prop osed    techni ca l      c\'aluation    methodolog y     \\ ·ith   the   rc spccti\c
l)cpartmcnt  nr Na tural   Re source s'  J\rca   I   lydrnl ogist   prior  to  comnH.:ncing   thc  analysis.

(iJ  Once  the  1°0  annual   chance   llood   c Jc,ation   (100-year   llood   ele,·a ti on )   ha s  bcc11 Lktcr rnincd. the /,oning ;\drnini str;llor shall procc ss th e permit application consistent "·ith the applicable pro vis ion s or Section-+ and  5 oi' thi s Ordinance.

SECTION  7. RVSTRICTION ON SUBDIVIDINC LAND IN FLOOD llAZARD DISTRICTS.

7 .1       .1\ll lots "·hich include ;1m  l <111d   "ithin the llood ha/<lrd di stri cts sh a ll  he able to rnntain ;1
/\lll in g-co mpli a nt   building  site  cntirel)   uutside  or the   1 :1oodwa y   Di strict   and  a t   or  abO\c  the
rL' g ul < ttOr )   llood  protection   e levati on.    /\II   subdivi s i o n s  includin g  property   in  a  llood  h<.u.ard
district shall ha' c \\ ·atcr ;111d se\Yage treatment f "acilities th at comply with thc provi sion s 01· thi s Ordin<111cc and have road access  buth  to the  subdivision  and  to the  individual  building  sites no l(l\\ er than t\\ o kct be low the regulatory fl ood protection  elc,-ation.  The  regulator)  !loud pmtcctiun elc \'l1tio11 and the required  elevation 01· all access roads shall he cle;1rl y l ;1hclcd on < ti! required  subdi\ ·ision  drawings and  platting document s t o "hich thi s Section applies.
 

SECTION  8.  PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES

8.1.	J>ublic lltilitics. /\II public utilities anJ li.1cilitics such  as  gas. electrical.  SC\\Cr. and  \\°<lier supply systems to be  located  in  the  llood  plain  sh<ill  be  llood  prookd  in  accordance  \\'ith  the Swtc  !)uilc.ling Code or elevated  to  '1hnvc  the  regulatory   llood  protection  e!cYation.

8.2.	Public Transportation h1cilitics. Railroad tracks. roaJs. and bridges proposed to be  located
\\ithin the llood plain shall comp!:--  ''ith  Sections  and  5  of' this  Ordinance.  Uc\atinn  to  the regulatory iloocJ protection elc\·ation shall be pr<wided where rai!ure or interruption of these tra11sportatio11 frlci l itics \\Ould result i11 danger to the public health or  saf°ct>  or  where  such focilitic·s <ire L'Sscntial tn the mdcrl) runctioni11g of' the <1rca. :vJinor or au.'\ilian · roads or railrnads 111(1\    be  constructed  al  a  IO\\Cr  elevation  where  [  1ilure m  interruplio11  or lrn11sportation  sel\ ·ices
\\lHiid not enda11gcr the public health or sakt).


8 - On-site Sewage l"rt.:atmc111 and Water Supply  Systems:  On  any  lot  conwini11g  property included   in  a  llood  ha/.ard  district.  ''here  public  utilities  arc  not  pnl\'idcd:

.1\	On-site  \Valer  supply systems must  he  designed  to  minimi.l'.e  or eli111i11atc  infiltration  or
flond \\ ·aters into the sy stems: and

n		NC\\ or replacement on-site sewage trealmt.:111 systems must he designed to mini111i1e llr elirni11ate infiltration or· flood \Vater s i11to  the  systems  and  discharges  from  the  system s into llood \\"Cllcrs a11c.I they sh al I not  he subject to  impairment  or contami11ation  duri11g times  or lloodi11g

:\11\  SC\\Ll gl'  treatment  system  dcsig11cd  in  accmd <111cc  \\ ith  the  Swtc's   current   sl <Ill'\\ idc SlL!ndards rm on-site sewage treatment systems shall he dctennined lO he in l'llll1plic111cc  \\ith  thi s Sectio11.

SECTION   9.  ADMINISTRATION.

l) I .  /oning  Ordinance  Prncedures  ;\pp!) .  ·1  his  Ordi11ance  is adopted  as an  ni'llci<ll  L1ml  use control or the City or (jem  Lake.  and  should  he  applied  in  harmony  \\ith  the  /011ing  Ordi11ance and  Subdi\ ision  Ordinance  or the  Cit·.  l ·'. :-;cept  as  modi rice.I  herein.  the  procedmc s and  standards
<1pplie<1blc     lo   permits   and   applications   sought    under   the   (!cm    I  ,ake   /.oning   Ordinance   shall
go\·ern any application  1·or permit. \ ·ariancc or other permission  under this Ordinance.


t) 2          Fill  and  1-:lc\alion  Ccrtirication     The applicant  shall  be  required  to  submit ccrtilication  by a  registered  prnkssional  engineer.  registered  architect.  or  regi stered  land   sun·eyor   that   the ll11ishcd Iii! and building cle\ ations \\Cre <lCCOl1lplishcd in compliance with the prm isions or thi s Ordin<1ncc 1 :1oud prnolln g 111c< 1surcs sh;1ll he certified b) ;1 registered prnks sional en g ineer  m registered    architect.

l) .3.   Recore.I ol' l ' irst 1:1oor 1-:lcvation .   The /oning ;\drninistratur  shall 111<1intain  a record ul . thc clc\ ·ation of the lowest lloor (including basemen!) o!'  all  l1C\\  Structures  ancl  alterations  Or additions to ce<isting structures  in  the  flood  plain .    The /oning /\dministratnr  shall  also maintain
 

<l   record  ol. th c clc,ation  to  which  structure s nr a lterati ons a nd  additions lo structure s arc lloocl
prno kd.

l) -L Notilication to ITfVI/\ 'v\/hen Ph ys ical  Changes Increa se or Decrea se the I 00-year l ' lood Llc,·ation. 1\ s soon as i s practic able. but  not  later  than  six  (6)  months  al'tcr  the  tl<t tc  such suppo rting  inf'orrnatiun  becollles  mailable.  the  /.oning  /\dministrat o r  shall  notif y  the  Chic<1go Re g ional Oi'llce 01· 1 :1-:rvl/\ or the c han ges by submitting a copy or sa id  technical  or scientilic dat<l.

9.5	Additional Standards /\pplicable t o l ' l ood I la/.a rd Di strict  Variances.  No  \'mianec  sldl ha,·e the effect 01· permitting a lo\\°l:r d egree 0 1· llood protection than the regulaton llood prntcclio11 cJc,·ation for the p<1rti c ul <1 r < irea. or permit sw n dmd s lcl\\ er than tho se required h: state 1<1\\. 1 ·hc l(lll\l\\ing additional \'<lriancc c rit cri,1 of' th e 1 :ede ral l ·:rncr ge nc: l\tlan agemc n t 1\gc11c; must be sa ti s l'ied bcl'or e a 'a rian ce rn a; be g ranted :

1\.	\ ';11·ian ccs  sh al I     not   be   i ssu ed   b y   a   co mrnunit ; within   an;   des i g n ated   re g ulat or)
!loml\\ ay  i 1· an;  increa se in  ll ood  lc,·c l s during the  base  ll ood  discharge  \\'lH ild  r e-.11!1.


13.  Vari<1nccs  sh<1ll   only   be   i ssued   by  a  co mmunit y   upon   (i)  a  sh c)\\ in g  or  good  a nd sul'li c ient cause. ( ii ) a deterlllin,1tion th<J t fo ilure t o g rant the \'ariancc \\'o uld resu l t i11 e.'\ccptinnal hard ship t o th e <lppli e<111t. a nd ( iii ) a  dctcrlllination  that  the  gra ntin g  of  <l 'ariance  will  not  re sult  in  increa sed  ll ood  he i ght s. additional  thre a t s  to  puhlic  sa!Cty.
c.'\t raordinar y  public   expense . cre a t e  nuisances.  ca u se  fraud  t1n  or  ,·ictirni/atic.1n   or the
public. ur conllicl  \Vith  c.'\ i stin g local  la \\s or ordinances.

( '. \ 'a ri a n ces sha ll o nl y he issued upon a dcterlllinatic.H1 th at the \'ilriance is the minimum necessary.  cu n siderin g th e  llt1od  ha /.ard. to afford  relier.

l) (1        ,\dditi ona l   St ;111dard s 1\ppli e<1hlc  l o  I   lund  I  l <l/Llrd  J)istricl  Conditio n a l    l ' se Permits .


.-\.     In ;iddition to ot her r equirem e nt s. site plans sh a ll sho w the elcrn tion or the l ot. L·xi-.ting nr proposed stru c ture s. fill. stora ge or materi a l s.  llood  prnoling  111e;1sures.  and  lhl' relatmn ship o J · the abO\'e t o the loca ti o n o!' the stre<\111 c h a nnel, ancJ speci licati ons for building  cunstruction   and  mat e rial s.  llnud  proofin g,  fillin g.  dredging.  gra din g.  c hannel
impro,·cment. st o ra ge or m ate rial s. \\<Iler supp l ; and s111ilary  l 1cilities.

I . The City shall translllil one copy 01· the inform at ion described in sub sect ion  !\ tn  a designated engineer or o ther e.'\pert person  Ur  age n cy  ror  tec hni ca l  assistance.  \\ h er e nece ssary. in e\'aluating th e proposed project in relation t o Jl ood hei ght s an d ,·elocit ies. the seriou sne ss of llood damage  t o the  u se. th e adequ;icy  ol· the  pL111 -.  !'or protectiun. and oth er te c hni ca l  111<\tter s.

( ·. f3ased upon th e technical C\ 'alualion o r the d esi gna ted engineer ur e.'\pert. the Planning Commission a nd City Counc il shall det crn1in e the spcci li c !loud h aza rd a l the site <md e\·alualc th e su il<lhilit y o!' the prnpn sed USC  i11 relati o n Ill  the !loud ha /.Md.
 

I)  In  passing  upon  a  conditiona l   use   app li cation,   the   Planning   Commission   and   Cit) Council shall consider the !'ollowing in ;1ddition to the standard foctors required ror ll conditional    use:
( l)	The danger to Ii IC and propcrt)  due tu  increased  lloml height s or' clocitics caused
l)\' enc roach men ts.
(2)	The danger that  materials may be swept onto other lands or do" n st r·cam tu the inju r y of' others \)r they may block br id ges. cuh·crts or othe r hydraulic structu res.
n)	Tlw proposed  \\aler supply ancl sa nitation systems and the ability urthcsc S)SlC111S
to  prevent  disease.  conl<1mination.  and  un sanitary  conditions .
(4)	The susceptibi lit y 01· the proposed  ! 1cility and  it s contents to llood da111agc and
the elTcct  or such  damage O il  the  individual  O\\ncr
(5)	The   importance   or  the   sen ices   prO\ ·ided	by	the   propo sed	laci lit \	to  the
CO!ll m LI ll it\ °.
\(J)	The  requirements  oi'thc  l   1cility  1·or  a  \\alerlront  l ocation.
(7)	I .he  Ll\ ';lilahility  or altcrn<lli\e   l oc1tions   not   subject   tO   !looding  lor  lhe  prop osed
USC.
(8)	The	compat ihilit )	or   the	prnposL'd	use	with	existing	dcwlop111C11t	;rnd
deve l opment  antic i pated   in  the  foreseeable  ruture.
(<))	The  relationship  or the  proposed  u se  to  the  comprehensive  plan  and  llood  plain
management  program  for the area.
( l 0)   ThL' sal.cty or access lo the properly  in time s 01· !lood l<.lr  ordin<1r\  and e111crgcnc) 'chicks.
( 11)   The  C.\pectcd   height s,  ,·elocit).  dmalion,  1·atc  or  rise.  and  sed iment  lr lllSj)llrl  \ll
the  !lood waters c:--.:pcclcd  ;1t  the site .
( l :2)   Such other !'actors" hi ch arc relc, ·ant to the purposes nr th i s Ordinance.


9.7.	Notice to DNR Commissioner. The City sha ll submit t o  the  Comm i ssioner  or  Na tural Resources  a  copy  or an  application   for  proposed   conditional   u se  permit   or  ,·mia11cc   in  a    flood h   va rd  district  in  sufficient  time  to  g i ve  the  Commissioner  ten  (I 0)  days'  notice  or the  hearing .
\ cnp) nr :ill decisions re ga rdin g conditional  use  permit s and  variances  in  Jlood  ha1arcl  districts slwll he l(H\\ clrded  h:  lll<iil  to  the  ('l)lllllliss1oner  or 'laturn l  I ZcsOUl'CCS  \\ ·ithin  ten  (  l  0) da)S  ol such  decision.

l) 8. 1 :1ood In surance :-Jot i ce and Record Keepin g. The /.oning /\dminisl r ator shall notil': :rn: applicant l'or a variance  that.  1) The  issu<mce  01· a variance  lo construct  a st ructure  be l o\\  the base llood lc\'CI wi ll  result in increa sed premium  r <1tcs !or llood insurance up to anrnunts as hi gh as S25 for$ I 00 of' insurance CC)\'cragc: and 2) cons tru ction bclO\\ the l  00-year or reg i onal !hltlll le\ cl  increases risks  to  li te and  property.   Such notil'ication  sha ll  be  maintained  "·ith a  record  or
:ill  'mi:rncc  act ions.    !\  community  shall  maintain  :1  record  of' all  ,·m i <1nce   actions,  includin g
.iuslilic;1lion  rm their  issuance, ;ind  report  such  \ <iriances  issued  in  its :1nnual  \)r  biennial  report
submi tted  to the /\dminist r :1lnr or the  Na t in1wl  l :l ood  In surance  l )rogrnm.


t)  <)                  /\dditiunal  IZ equircrncnls  /\pplicahlc  to  Nrn 1conl(lrrnitics  in  1:1ood  l  l<11.:1rd   District s


/ \. /\ny  st ructural  alterat i on  \lr  add iti on  to  a  110nconi'orming  stn.1cturL'  or  nonconl(lrrning USC  \\ ·hich  \VOUld   re sult  in  increasin g the  !lood damage  potential  or that  StruclurC or USC
 

shall he protected  t o  the  Regulatory  !'loud  Jlrntection  Llcvatiun  in  accordance  \\ ith  an: ol' the elevation on Iii! or llood prooling techniques (i e. FP- l thru 1 :p_4 llondprooling classilications)  allow<1hlc  in  the  State  Building  Code. e\'.ccpt  as  l'urthcr  restricted  helm, .

13.	The cost  01·all  structural  alterations  or additions to any  nonconkirming  structure  ll\L'1·
the lik or the structure shall not C\'.CCCd )()percent of' the lllarkct \ ·a iue oJ" the structure
unles s the conditions or thi s Section arc satisfied. The cost ur all structural alterations and additions must  include all costs such as construction  materials and a rea so nable
cost  placed   Oil    al I     manpO\\'Cr   or  lahor .     Ir  the  cost   or all   previou s  and   proposed
altcratinns  and  additions  exceeds  50  percent  or the  market   \-..due  ur  the  structure.  then the  structure  must   meet   the  standards  or  Section  -t   or  5  ol' this  Ordinance   for  llL'\\ structures  depending  upon   \\ ·hcthcr  the  structure   i s  in  the   Flood\,·ay  ur  Flood   hing'-· Di strict.  respccti\  cl:.

C.		II'  ;111;  nonconli.rnning  u se  or  structure  is  substantially  dama ged.  as  defined   in   this Ordinance.  it  shall  not  he  reconstructed  except  in  conformity  with  the  pm\  ision s or this Ordinance.	The  applicable   provision s  l()r  establishing   nC\\   use s  or  ne\\ structure s in Sections 4 .0 and 5.0 \\ill < lppl; depending upon \\ ·hcthcr  the  u se  or  structure  is  in  the 1 :1ood\\a: or 1:ltiod  1 :ringe Di strict. rc spccti\ ·ely .

!).  Ir  ;1  sub stantial   impnl\'cment   occurs.   as   de lined   in   this   Ordinance.   fi·o111   a n : combination  or· a  building  addition  to  the  outside  dimensions  or the  existing  building  or a   rehabilitation.   reconstruction.   alteration.   or   other    irnpnl\'cmcnt    tl1    the    inside dimen s ions or an existing  nonconformin g  buildin g.  then  the  building  addition  and  the exi sting nonconforming building must meet Lhe requirement s 01· ScctiPn -t m 5 nl' thi s Ordinance  li.n llC\\  structure s. depe11di11g  uplln  \\ hethcr the structure i s in the 1 :1ood\''1)
01  l ·lllOd  hingL'  Di strict.  rl·specti\ ·el:.

SECTION  12.  VIOLATIONS  AND PI· NA LTI ES.

12. 1 Violation or the [XO\·isions or this Ordinance nr l'ailure ttl co111pl; \\ ith an: ()r its requirements (including \ ·iolations or conditi()ns ;111d sal'eguards established  in connection  \\ ·ith gra nts ol.\arianccs or conditional use s) shall constitute a 11lisdc!1leanor and shall be puni shable ;1s de lined h\  l  l\\.

12.2   1   llthing  herein  co nwined   shall  p1ne11t   the  Cit)   ol  Cic111   Lake   fro111   taking  such  other la\\ l'til  action  as  i s nece ssary  to  pre\ ·ent  or  reined)' any  violation.   Such  action s may  include  hut arc not lil1lited t\l:

1\.   In  responding  to  a  suspected  Ordinance  \ ·iolatiun.  the  /oning  J\dlllinistrator  and   l.llc;il CO\ ·crnlllent Ill<IY utili1.c the !'ull arm:· or en!'orcemcnt  action s <.1\·ailablc  tn  it  including hut  not  lilllited  to  prosecution  and  line s.  injunction s. al'tcr-thc-l i1ct  permits.  orders  l(>r
cnrrecti\-C  Jlleasures or a request  to the  National  1:1ood  Insurance  Program  rnr denial or
llood insurance availahilit; to the guilt)  pmt y.  The Cornlllunity mu st act in good foith to enforce the se ol'licial cnntrols and to correct Ordinance \ ·iolation s to th e ntent possible so a s not to jeopardi ze its eligibi l ity in the National 1:1oocl In surance Program.
 


J).	\\ ' hen an Ordinance  ,·iolation  is either discO\ ·ered  hy ()I'  brought  to the attention  or thL·
/.oning   /\drninistrator.   the  /oning   .1\d111i11istr<ilor   shall   immediately   ill\cstigatc   the
situation and document the nature and extent of the violation or the official control.  /\s
soon as is reasonably  possible . thi s information  will  be submitted  to the appropriate
J)eparlment    or   Natural    !Zesources'    and    Federal    I·:mergcncy    Mana gement    ,1\ gL'llC'.' Reg ional  Ol'fice  along  \\'ith   the  C'ornrnunity's   pl<rn   or action   to  correct   the   violation   to the   degree   pos sible.

C	The  /.oning  /\dministrator  shall  no ti 1·y  the  suspected  part:  or the  requirements  or thi s
Ordinance  and  al I other  orlicial  controls  :ind  the  nature  and  extent  or the  su spected
violation   ol'  these   controls.      II'  the   structure   and /or   u se   i s   under   construction   111·
de' eloprncnt.   the   /.oning  1\dlllinistrator   may   order  the   construction   or  dc,·clop!llent illlrnediatel:  halted  unti I a proper  perlllil or <ippro, ·al  i s granted  b:· th e Communit: .  I!' th e  cn nslruction  or  de,cloprnent   i s  already  completed.  then  the  Inning  ..\dmini stra lm rna:  either   (I) issue  an  order  idcntil'ying  the  correcti' e  actions  that  lllust  be  !llaclc "ithin  a  speci lied  time  period  lo  bring  the  u se or structure  into cn1npli<lllcc  ,,·ith  the ollic1al  controls:  or  (:2)  notif 'y  the  responsible  part y  to  apply  for  an  a!l.cr-the-Licl pcrmit ldevc loplllent aprml\'al within a speci!ied period or time not to c:-:cced 30-d<1:s

D .	11· the   re sponsible   party   docs  not   appropri<llci)    respond   to   the   /oning  1\dn1ini strator
,,·ithin the specilicd period or time. each additional da: that lapses shall constitute an additional  ,·iolation ol . thi s Ordin:rnce <i11d  shall  he prosecuted  according!:.  The Inning
:\dn1ini strator skill al so upon the lapse 01· the spccilicd respon se period notir: the landowner lo re store the land lo the condition \\ 'hich e:-:i stcd prior lo the \'iolatinn nr thi s Ordinance.

SECTION  13.  AMl  '.\'DMENT.   The  llood  plain  de signati on  on  the  Onicial  /.nning  f\lap  sh all not be  1-cmo,·ed  rrom  llood  plain  areas unle ss it can  be  shl)\\'11 that  the designation  i s in error llr th <tl the urea ha s been  lilied  to or ahm ·c the clc' at inn  or the  regulator:  llood  prntection  elc' atio11 ind is contiguous to  land s  outside  the  llood  plain .  Speci a l  e:-:ceptions  to  thi s  rule  ma y  he perrniltL·d   h:-   the   Commissioner   ur   Na tural   Resource s   ii'  he   determines   that.   through   ll thcr rnc 1surc s. lands arc adequately  protected   !'or the  intend ed  u se.

:\II 11llc11dmcnts to this Ordinance. includin g amendment s lo the O!'licial /.oning Map. mu st  he submitted  to  und  appro\ ·ed  b:  the  Commissioner  01·  Na tural  Re sources  prior  to  idL1ption . Ch;lllges  in  the  Orlicial   llrning  Map  mu st  meet   the  1 :cdcral   l    mcr ge ncy   Management   /\ gl'!lc :'s ( 1 : 1   i'vl 1\)   Technical   Condition s  and   Criteria   and   rnu sl   receive   prior   lTfV11\   apprll\ al   hc!'orc
:1doption . The Commissioner ot' Natural Resources mu st be gi\'en  I 0-days  '' rittcn  notice  ol' all hearings  to consickr  <111  amendment  lo  this Ordin ince  <111d   said  notice  shall  include  a drnll  or th e
Ordinance amendment or lL'chnic<1l st llll\' under consideration.

SECTION 1-t. SEVERABILITY. Should any section. subdi, ·i s ion . clause or other pnl\'ision or thi s Ordinam:c be held to be invalid in any court of' cumpctent jurisdiction. such decision shall not affect the ,·alidity or the Ordinanc e as a whnlc. or l11. an: p<irt hcrcol'. other than the part held t11 he ill\ ·alid .
 


SECTION 15.  EFFECTIVI( DATE.  This Ordinance shall take effect and be in l(ircc  l'rulll   111d artcr its passage and pub I ication .

. 20 10



lcrk

Sunrnwry 01· Ordinance  114  q1pro\ ed h:-  Cit\  Cllllncil <till! published  in the White lkar Press on
-)' t,1 "e	+ h. . 2 0 I 0
 
ACCEPTANCE  OF ORDINANCE  NO. 118


CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA ACCEPTANCE  OF GAS FRANCHISE:
WHEREAS , th e City Coun cil of th e Ci ty of Gem La k e, Ramsey County, Minnesota , on the  15th day o f Jun e, 2010, passed and adopt ed  Ordin a nce No . 118, entitled :

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION, D/ B/A XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO ERECT A GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR THE PURPOSES OF CONSTRUCTING, OPERATING, REPAIRING AND MAINTAINING IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, THE NECESSARY GAS PIPES, MAINS AND APPURTENANCES FOR THE TRANSMISSION OR DISTRIBUTION OF GAS TO THE CITY AND ITS INHABITANTS AND OTHERS AND TRANSMITTING GAS INTO AND THROUGH THE CITY AND TO USE THE PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES .


whi ch Ordina nce wa s duly  publi sh ed according to la\v on th e 23rd  day o f June, 2010, in the
\'V'hite Bear Press, a new spaper circulated in and setYing a s the legal new spaper  for th e City o f G em La ke, County of Ra m sey , a nd  Sta te o f Minne sota, and  which Ordinance  is not cffccti\T unle ss accept ed in writin g b y No rth ern Sta tes Pow er Comp an y , a Minn eso ta corporation .

NOW THEREFORE , N orthern  Sta tes PO\\Tr Compa n y, a Minnesota corp ora tion , for itself and its su ccessors and a ssigns, does her eby accept all the term s a nd condition s of said Ordinance.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , N orthern  Sta te s Power Compan y , a  l\Iinnesota  corporati on h as cau sed this d ocument to be executed in its corporate name b y its duly auth oriz ed per son s and its corp orate sea l to be h ereto affr-;:ed this 23rd d ay of July, 2010 .




A t test:	Northern  States Power Compa n y, a l\Iinn esota corpora tion


 



Assistant Secretary
 
By:
 


La ura  McCa rten , Authoriz ed Agent Region al Vice Pre sident, N SP - Minn esota
 
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY   COUNTY, MINNESOTA ORDINANCE NO. 118

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION, D/B/A XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS  AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO ERECT A GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR  THE PURPOSES OF ONSTRUCTING, OPERATING, REPAIRING AND  MAINTAINING  IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, THE NECESSARY GAS PIPES, MAINS AND APPURTENANCES FOR THE TRANSMISSION OR DISTRIBUTION OF GAS TO THE CITY AND ITS INHABITANTS AND OTHERS AND TRANSMITTING GAS INTO AND THROUGH THE CITY AND TO USE THE PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES.

THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS: SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following capitalized tem1s listed in alphabetical order shall have the following meanings:

1.1	City.  The City of Gem Lake, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota.


1.2	City Utility System. Facilities used for providing non-energy related public utility service owned or operated by City or agency thereof, including sewer and water service, but excluding facilities for providing heating, lighting or other forms of energy.

1.3	Commission. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any successor agency or agencies, including an agency of the federal government, which  preempts al , or part of the authority to regulate Gas retail rates now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.

1.4	Company. Northern States Power Company, a Mirn1esota corporation, d/b/a Xcel Energy, its successors and assigns.

1.5	Gas. "Gas" as used herein shall be held to include natural gas, manufactured gas, or other form of gaseous energy.

1.6	Gas Facilities. Pipes, mains, regulators, and other facilities owned or operated by Company for the purpose of providing gas service for public use.

1.7 Notice. A written notice served by one party on the other party referencing one or more provisions of this Ordinance. Notice to Company shall be mailed to the General Counsel, 414 Nicollet Mall, 5th Floor, Minneapolis, MN 55401. Notice to the City shall be mailed to the City Administrator, 4200 Otter Lake Road, Gem Lake, Minnesota 55110-3763Either party may change its respective address for the purpose of this Ordinance by vvritten notice to the other party.
 
1.8	Public Ground.  Land owned by the City for park, open space or similar purpose,
which is held for use in common by the public.

 


City.
 
1.9	Public  Way.	Any  street, alley, walkway  or other public  right-of-way  within the
 

SECTION 2. ADOPTION OF FRANCIIlSE.

2.1	Grant of Franchise. City hereby grants Company, for a period of 20 years from the date passed and approved by the City, the right to transmit and furnish Gas energy for light, heat, power and other purposes for public and private use within and through the limits of the City as its boundaries now exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these purposes, Company may construct, operate, repair and maintain Gas Facilities in, on, over, under and  across the Public Grounds and Public Ways of City, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. Company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes, subject, however, to such reasonable regulations as may be imposed by  the City pursuant to ordinance and to the further provisions of this franchise agreement.

2.2	Effective Date; Written Acceptance. This franchise agreement shall be in force and effect from and after passage of this Ordinance, its acceptance by Company, and its publication as required by law. The City by Council resolution may revoke this franchise agreement if Company does not file a written acceptance with the City within 90 days after publication.

2.3	Service  and  Rates.	The  service  to  be  provided  and  the  rates  to be  charged  by Company
for Gas service in City are subject to the jurisdiction  of the Commission.

2.4	Publication Expense. The expense of publication of this Ordinance will be paid by City and reimbursed to City by Company.

2.5	Dispute Resolution.	If either party asserts that the other party is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The notification shall be written. Representatives of the parties must promptly meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute. Ifthe dispute is not resolved within 30 days of the written notice, the parties may jointly select a mediator to facilitate further discussion.  The parties will equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is not used or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within 30 days after first meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action in District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity for breach of contract, or either party may take any other action permitted by law.


SECTION 3.  LOCATION,  OTHER REGULATIONS.

3.1	Location of Facilities. Gas Facilities shall be located, constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over Public Ways and so as not to disrupt normal  operation of any City Utility System previously  installed therein.
 
Gas Facilities shall be located on Public Grounds as determined by the City. Company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance and location of Gas Facilities shall be subject to permits if required by separate ordinance and to other reasonable regulations of the City to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of this franchise agreement. Company may abandon underground gas facilities in place, provided, at City's request, Company will remove abandoned metal pipe interfering with a City improvement project, but only to the extent such metal pipe is uncovered by excavation as part of the City's improvement project.

3.2	Field  Locations.	Company shall provide field locations for its underground Gas Facilities within City consistent with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D.

3.3	Street Openings. Company shall not open or disturb any Public Ground or Public Way for any purpose without first having obtained a permit from the City, if required by a separate ordinance, for which the City may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions  imposed  on Company shall not be more burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for similar facilities or work. Company may, however, open and disturb any Public Ground or Public Way without permission from the City where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of Gas Facilities. In such event Company shall notify the City by telephone to the office designated by the City as soon as practicable. Not later than the second working day thereafter, Company shall obtain any required permits and pay any required fees.

3.4	Restoration.	After  undertaking  any  work  requiring  the  opening  of  any  Public   , Ground or Public Way, Company shall restore the same, including paving and its foundation, to as good a condition as formerly existed, and shall maintain any paved  surface in good condition for two years thereafter.  The work shall be completed as promptly as weather permits, and if Company shall  not  promptly  perform  and  complete  the  work,  remove  all  dirt,  rubbish,  equipment  and material, and put the Public Ground or Public Way in the said condition, the City shall have, after demand to Company to cure and the passage of a reasonable period of tin1e following the demand,
but not to exceed five days, the right to make the restoration at the expense of Company. Company shall pay to the City the cost of such work done for or performed by the City. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the City for noncompliance with this Section 3.4, but the City hereby waives any requirement for Company to post a construction performance bond, certificate of insurance, letter of credit or any other form of security or assurance that may be required, under a separate existing or future ordinance of the City, of a person or entity obtaining the City's permission  to install, replace or maintain  facilities in a Public Way.

3.5	Avoid Damage to Gas Facilities . Nothing in this  Ordinance relieves  any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging Gas Facilities while performing any activity.

3.6	Notice of Improvements. The City must give Company reasonable  notice of plans for improvements to Public Grounds or Public Ways where the City has reason to believe that Gas Facilities may affect or be affected by the improvement. The notice must contain: (i) the nature and character of the improvements, (ii) the Public Grounds and Public Ways upon which the improvements are to be made, (iii) the extent of the improvements, (iv) the time when the City will start the work, and  (v) if more than one Public Ground  or Public Way is involved, the order in
 
which the work is to proceed . The notice must be given to Company a sufficient length of time in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit Company to make any necessary additions, alterations or repairs to its Gas Facilities.

SECTION 4.   RELOCATIONS.

4.1	Relocation   of  Gas  Facilities  in  Public  Ways.	If the City determines to vacate a Public Way for a City improvement project, or at City's cost to grade, regrade, or change the line of any Public Way, or construct or reconstruct any City Utility System in any Public Way, it may order Company to relocate its Gas Facilities located therein if relocation is reasonably necessary to accomplish the City's proposed public  improvement.  Except  as provided  in  Section 4.3, Company shall relocate  its Gas Facilities  at its own expense.   The City shall  give Company  reasonable notice of plans  to vacate for a City improvement project, or to grade, regrade, or change the  line of any Public Way or to construct or reconstruct any City Utility  System.  If a relocation  is ordered within five years of a prior relocation  of the  same Gas Facilities,  which  was  made  at  Company  expense, the City shall reimburse Company for Non-Bettem1ent Costs on a time and material basis, provided that if a subsequent relocation is required because of the extension of a City Utility System to a previously unserved area, Company may be required to make the  subsequent  relocation  at  its expense.  Nothing  in this Ordinance requires  Company to relocate, remove, replace or reconstruct  at its own expense its Gas Facilities where such relocation, removal, replacement or reconstruction is solely for the convenience of the City and is not reasonably necessary for the construction or reconstruction  of a Public Way or City Utility  System or other City improvement.

4.2	Relocation  of  Gas  Facilities  in  Public  Ground.	City may require Company at Company's expense to relocate or remove its Gas Facilities from Public GroU11d upon a finding by City that the Gas Facilities have become or will become a substantial impainnent to the existing or proposed public use of the Public Ground.

4.3	Projects with Federal Funding.  City shall not order Company to remove or relocate its Electric Facilities when a Public Way is vacated, improved or realigned for a right-of­ way project or any other project which is financially subsidized in whole or in part by the Federal Government or any agency thereof, unless the reasonable non-betterment costs of such relocation are first paid to Company. The City is obligated to pay Company only for those portions of its relocation costs for which City has received federal funding specifically allocated for relocation costs in the amount requested by the Company, which allocated funding the City shall
specifically request. Relocation, removal or rearrangement of any Company Electric Facilities made necessary because of a federally-aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 161.46, as supplemented or amended. It is understood that the rights herein granted to Company are valuable rights.

4.4	No Waiver. The provisions of this franchise apply only to facilities constructed in reliance on a franchise from the City and shall not be construed to waive or modify any rights obtained by Company for installations within a Company right-of-way acquired by easement or prescriptive right before  the applicable Public Ground or Public Way was established,  or Company's rights under state or county permit.
 
SECTION 5. TREE TRIMMING.

Company is also granted the permission and authority to trim all shrubs and trees, including roots, in the Public Ways of City to the extent Company finds necessary to avoid interference with the proper construction, operation, repair and maintenance of Gas  Facilities,  provided  that Company shall save City harmless from any liability arising therefrom, and subject to permit or other reasonable regulation by the City.

SECTION 6. INDEMNIFICATION.

6.1	Indemnity of City. Company shall indemnify, keep and hold the City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury to  persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair , inspection, the issuance of permits, or the operation of the Gas Facilities located in the Public Grounds and Public Ways. The City shall not be indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the City's negligence as to the issuance of permits for, or inspection of, Company's plans or work. The City shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage results from the performance in a proper manner of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by Company , and such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by City after notice of Company's determination .

6.2	Defense of City. In the event a suit is brought against the City under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, Company at its sole cost and expense shall defend the City in such suit if written notice thereof is promptly given to Company within a period wherein Company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice . If Company is required  to  indemnify  and defend, it will thereafter have control of such litigation, but Company may not settle such litigation without the consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld . This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the City and Company, in defending any action on behalf of the City shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf.

SECTION 7. VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.

The City shall give Company at least two weeks prior written notice of a proposed vacation of a Public Way. Except where required for a City improvement project, the vacation of any Public Way, after the installation of Gas Facilities, shall not operate to deprive Company of its rights to operate and maintain such Gas Facilities, until the reasonable  cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to Company. In no case, however , shall City be liable to Company for failure to specifically preserve a right-of-way  under Minnesota Statutes, Section  160.29.

SECTION 8.  CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT.

Any change in the form of government of the City shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance. Any governmental unit succeeding the City  shall, vnthout the consent of Company , succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the City provided in this Ordinance.
 

SECTION 9.  FRANCHISE FEE.

9.1	Fee Schedule. During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in lieu of any permit or other fees being imposed on the Company, the City may impose on the Company a franchise fee by collecting the amounts indicated in a Fee Schedule set forth in a separate ordinance from each customer in the designated Company Customer Class. The parties have agreed that the franchise fee collected by the Company and paid to the City in accordance with this Section 9 shall not exceed the following amounts:

Fee Per Premise Per Month

 
Residential
Commercial Firm Non-Demand Commercial Firm Demand Small Interruptible
Medium and Large Interruptible
Firm Transportation Interruptible  Transportation
 
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
 

9.2	Separate  Ordinance.	The franchise fee shall be imposed by a separate ordinance duly adopted by the City Council, which ordinance shall not be adopted until at least 60 days after written notice enclosing such proposed ordinance has been served upon Company by certified mail. The fee shall not become effective until the beginning of a Company billing month at least 60 days after written notice enclosing such adopted ordinance has been served upon Company by certified mail. Section 2.5 shall constitute the sole remedy for solving disputes between Company and the City in regard to the interpretation of, or enforcement of, the separate ordinance. No action by the City to implement a separate ordinance will commence until this Ordinance is effective. A separate ordinance which imposes a lesser franchise fee on the residential class of customers than the maximum amount set forth in Section 8.1 above shall not be effective against Company unless the fee imposed on each other customer classification is reduced proportionately in the same or greater amount per class as the reduction represented by the lesser fee on the residential class.

9.3	Collection of the Fee. The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly and shall be based on the amount collected by Company during complete billing months during the period for which payment is to be made by imposing a surcharge equal to the designated franchise fee for the applicable customer classification in all customer billings for gas service  in  each  class.  The payment shall be due the last business day of the month following the period for which the payment is made. The franchise fee may be changed by ordinance from time to time; however, each change shall meet the same notice requirements and not occur more often than annually and no change shall require a collection from any customer for gas service in excess of the amounts specifically permitted by this Section 9. The time and manner of collecting the franchise fee is subject to the approval of the Commission. No franchise fee shall be payable by Company if Company is legally unable to first collect an amount equal to the franchise fee from its customers in each applicable class of customers by imposing a surcharge in Company's applicable rates for gas service. Company may pay the City the fee based upon the surcharge billed subject to subsequent reductions
 
to account for uncollectibles, refunds and correction of erroneous billings. Company agrees to make its records available for inspection by the City at reasonable times provided that the City and its designated representative agree in writing not to disclose any information which would indicate the amount paid by any identifiable customer or customers or any other information regarding identified customers. In addition, the Company agrees to provide at the time of each payment a statement summarizing how the franchise fee payment was determined, including information showing any adjustments to the total surcharge billed in the period for which the payment is being made to account for any uncollectibles, refunds or error corrections.

9.4	Terms Defined.

9.4.1	"Class" shall refer to classes listed in the Fee Schedule and as defined or determined in Company's gas rate book on file with the Commission.

9.4.2	"Fee Schedule" refers to the Schedule in Section 9.1 setting forth the various customer classes from which a franchise fee would be collected if a separate ordinance were implemented immediately after the effective date of this franchise agreement. The Fee Schedule in the separate  ordinance  may include new Customer Classes added by the Company to its gas tariffs after the effective date of this franchise agreement.

9.4.3	Therm shall be a unit of gas providing 100,000 Btu of heat content adjusted for billing purposes under the rate schedules of Company on file with the Commission.

9.5	Equivalent Fee Requirement.	The separate ordinance imposing the fee shall not be effective against Company unless it lawfully imposes and the City monthly or more often collects a fee or tax of the same or greater equivalent amount on the receipts from sales of energy within the City by any other energy supplier, provided that, as to such a supplier, the City has the authority to require a franchise fee or to impose a tax. The "same or greater equivalent amount" shall be measured, if practicable, by comparing amounts collected as a franchise fee from each similar customer, or by comparing, as to similar customers the percentage of the annual bill represented by the amount collected for franchise fee purposes.  The franchise fee or tax shall be applicable to energy sales for any energy use related to heating, cooling or lighting, or to run machinery and appliances, but shall not apply to energy sales for the purpose of providing fuel for vehicles. If the Company specifically consents in writing to a franchise or separate ordinance collecting or failing to collect a fee from another energy supplier in contravention of this Section 9.5, the foregoing conditions will be waived to the extent of such written consent.

SECTION 10.  PROVISIONS  OF ORDINANCE.

10.1	Severability. Every section, provision,  or part of this  Ordinance  is  declared separate from every other section, provision, or part and if any section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section, provision,  or part.  Where  a provision  of any other City ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
 

10.2	Limitation  on Applicability.	This Ordinance constitutes a franchise agreement between the City and Company as the only parties and no provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third person (including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person not a party hereto.

SECTION 11. AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.


Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that the agreement be amended to address a subject of concern and the other party will consider whether it agrees that the amendment is mutually appropriate. If an amendment is agreed upon, this Ordinance may be amended at any time by the City passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the amendment, which amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing of Company's written consent thereto with the City Clerk within 90 days after the date of final passage by the City of the amendatory ordinance.

SECTION 12. PREVIOUS FRANCIDSES SUPERSEDED.


This franchise supersedes any previous Gas franchise  granted  to  Company  or  its predecessor .



Passed and approved: June 15, 2010 .



zpen,lv!ayor

Attest:



am F. Short, City Clerk



Summary Publication of Ordinance 118 approved by the City Council and published in the White Bear Press on June_, 2010.
 
PRINTER'S AFFIDAVIT OF PUBLICATION

 






CITY OF GEM LAKE
 
AFFIDAVIT OF PUBLICATION

STATE OF MINNESOTA)
County of Ramsey)

, or the publisher 's designated agent, being duly sworn, on oath
 
ORDINANCE NO. 118 (SUMMARY)
SUMMARY  PUBLICAT ION. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,§ 412 .191, a summary of an ordinance may be published. While a copy of the entire ordinance is available without cost at the off ice of the City Clerk, the follow­
 
ing summary is approved by the City Council and shall be published in lieu
 
>er  known  as the WHITE  BEAR  PRESS, and  that  I have  full
 
of publishing the entire ordinance:	.
Ordinance  118  renews  the  grant  of  a  franchise  to  Northern  States  he facts which are stated below :
Power (dba Xcel Energy) to construct, operate , repair and maintain a natu- .	.	.	.
ral-gas distribution system in the City of Gem Lake. The Ordinance sets  spaper  has  complied  With  aJl  of the  reqmrements  constituting
forth regulations by which the franchisee must abide. The franchise grant is	.	.
for a 20-year term. Ordinance 118 is effective upon its publication.	.s   a   qualified   newspaper ,   as   provided   by   Minnesota   Statute
Published one time in the White Bear Press on June 23, 2010 .
.).) 1rt.v..:., .).) irt .07, and other applicable laws, and amended.
(B) The printed:                    CITY OF GEM LAKE
ORDINANCE NO. 118 (SUMMARY) - RENEWS GRANT OF FRANCIDSE TO NORTHERN STATES POWER (DBA XCEL ENERGY) RE: NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION  SYSTEM IN CITY OF GEM LAKE
which is attached was cut from the columns of said newspaper and was printed and published for one week on WEDNESDAY, the  23 day of JUNE, 2010 . Printed below is a copy of the lower case alphabet from A to Z, both inclusive, which is hereby acknowledged as being the size and kind of type used in the composition and publication of the notice:
abcdefghijk.lmnopqrstuvwxyz


BY:   	
TITLE:   Publisher


Subscribed and sworn to before me on this 30 day of JUNE, 2010.
 

RATE  INFORMATION

 
(I)   Lowest classified rate paid by commercial users for comparable space.


(2)	Maximum rate allowed
by law for the above matter .


(3)	Rate actually charged for
 




(Line, word or inch rate)



(Line, word or inch rate)
 



Misc/Affid avitPub-WBP-1 Wk .doc
 
the above matter.	$	14.15/INCH
(Line, word or inch rate)
 
ACCEPTANCE  OF ORDINANCE  NO. 119


CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA ACCEPTANCE  OF ELECTRIC  FRANCHISE:
WHEREAS , th e City Council of th e City of Gem La ke, Ra m sey County, Minn eso ta, on th e 15th day of Jun e, 20 10, pa ssed and a d opt ed Ordin a nce N o. 119, entitl ed:

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION, D/B/A XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, REPAIR AND MAINTAIN IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, AN ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND TRANSMISSION LINES, INCLUDING NECESSARY POLES, LINES, FIXTURES AND APPURTENANCES, FOR THE FURNISHING OF ELECTRIC ENERGY TO THE CITY, ITS INHABIT ANTS, AND OTHERS, AND TO USE THE PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES.


which  Ordina n ce w as duly publish ed according to law on th e 23rd da y  o f June , 2010, in the Whit e Bear Press, a  new sp a per circulated  in and  setTing a s th e legal n ew sp a per for th e City of Gem Lake, County  o f Ra m sey, and  Sta te o f Minn eso ta, and which  Ordin ance is n ot effectin unle ss accept ed  in writing by  Northern  States Powe r  Compa n y, a  Minn eso ta  corporation.

NOW THEREFORE , North ern  Sta tes Power Comp a n y, a  l\Iinnc sota  corpora tion  for itself and its su ccessors a nd a ssign s, docs h ereby accept all the te rm s a nd conditi on s of said Ordinance.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, N orthern States Power Compa n y , a f\.Iinnc sota corporation h as caused this d ocument to be executed in its corp orate name b y its duly auth orized per son s and its corporate seal to be h ereto affo cd this 23rd day of July, 2010.




J\ tte st:	Nor th ern States Power Compa ny, a Minne sota corp ora tion


 



Assistant Secretary
 
By :
 


La ura f\.fcCarten , A uth orized Agent
R egional Vice Presid ent, NSP - Minn esota
 
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RA1\1SEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA ORDINANCE NO. 119

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHERN STATES POWER COMPANY, A MINNESOTA CORPORATION, D/B/A XCEL ENERGY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, PERMISSION TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, REPAIR AND MAINTAIN IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, AN ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND TRANSMISSION LINES, INCLUDING NECESSARY POLES, LINES, FIXTURES AND APPURTENANCES,  FOR THE FURNISHING OF ELECTRIC ENERGY TO THE CITY, ITS INHABITANTS, AND OTHERS, AND TO USE THE PUBLIC GROUNDS AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES.

THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GEM LAKE ORDAINS: SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following capitalized terms listed in alphabetical order shall have the following meanings:

1.1	City.  The City of Gem Lake, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota.

1.2	City Utility  System. Facilities used for providing non-energy related public utility service owned or operated by City or agency thereof, including sewer and water service, but excluding facilities for providing heating, lighting or other forms of energy.

1.3	Commission.  The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission , or any successor agency or agencies, including an  agency of the federal governn1ent , which preempts all, or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.

1.4 Company. Northern States Power  Company , a Minnesota  corporation , d/b/a Xcel Energy, its successors and assigns.

1.5 Electric Facilities. Electric transnlission and distribution towers, poles , lines, guys, anchors, conduits, fixtures,  and necessary appurtenances owned or operated by Company for the purpose of providing electric energy for public use.

1.6	Notice. A written notice served by one party on the other party referencing one or more provisions of this Ordinance. Notice to Company shall be mailed to the General Counsel , 414 Nicollet Mall, 5th Floor, Minneapolis, MN 55401. Notice to the City shall be mailed to the City Administrator, 4200 Otter Lake Road, Gem Lake, Minnesota 55110-3763. Either party may change its respective address for the purpose of this Ordinance by written notice to the other party .

1.7	Public  Ground.   Land  owned by the City for park , open space or similar purpose ,
which is held for use in common by the public.
 


City.
 
1.8	Public  Way.	Any  street,  alley, walkway  or other public  right-of-way  within  the
 

SECTION 2. ADOPTION OF FRANCIDSE.


2.1	Grant of Franchise. City hereby grants Company, for a period of 20 years from the date passed and approved by the City, the right to transmit and furnish electric energy for light, heat, power and other purposes for public and private use within and through the limits of the City as its boundaries now exist or as they may be extended in the future.  For these purposes, Company may construct, operate, repair and maintain Electric Facilities in, on, over, under and across the Public Grounds and Public Ways of City, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. Company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes, subject, however, to such reasonable regulations as may be imposed by the City pursuant to ordinance and to the further provisions of this franchise agreement.

2.2	Effective Date; Written Acceptance. This franchise agreement shall be in force and effect from and after passage of this Ordinance, its acceptance by Company, and its publication as required by law. The City, by Council resolution, may revoke this franchise agreement if Company does not file a written acceptance with the City within 90 days after publication.

2.3	Service  and  Rates.	The service to be provided and the rates to be charged by Company for electric service in City are subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission. The area within the City in which Company may provide electric service is subject to the provisions of Minnesota  Statutes, Section 216B.40.

2.4	Publication Expense. The expense of publication of this Ordinance \¥ill be paid by City and reimbursed to City by Company.

2.5	Dispute Resolution. If either party asserts that the other party is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired remedy. The notification shall be written.  Representatives  of the parties must promptly meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the dispute.  If the dispute is not resolved within 30 days of the vvritten notice, the parties may jointly select a mediator to facilitate further discussion.   The parties \¥ill  equally share the fees and expenses of this mediator. If a mediator is not used, or if the parties are unable to resolve the dispute within 30 days after first meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action in  District  Court  to interpret and enforce this franchise or for such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity for breach of contract, or either party may take any other action permitted by law.

SECTION 3. LOCATION, OTHER REGULATIONS.

3. I	Location   of   Facilities.	Electric Facilities shall be located, constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over Public Ways and so as not to disrupt normal operation of any City  Utility  System  previously installed therein. Electric Facilities shall be located on Public Grounds as determined by the City . Company's  construction,  reconstruction,  operation,  repair,  maintenance  and  location  of  Electric
 
Facilities shall be subject to permits if required by separate ordinance and to other  reasonable regulations of the City to the extent not inconsistent with the terms of  this  franchise  agreement. Company may abandon underground Electric Facilities in place, provided at  the  City's  request, Company will remove abandoned metal or concrete encased  conduit  interfering  with  a  City improvement project, but only to the e:x.1:ent such conduit is uncovered by  excavation as part of the City  improvement  project.

3.2	Field Locations. Company shall provide field locations for its underground Electric Facilities within City consistent with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D.

3.3	Street Openings. Company shall not open or disturb any Public Ground  or Public Way for any purpose without first having obtained a permit from the City, ifrequired by a separate ordinance, for which the City may impose a reasonable fee. Permit conditions  imposed  on Company shall not be more burdensome than those imposed on other utilities for similar facilities or work. Company  may, however, open and disturb any Public Ground or Public Way without permission from the City where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of Electric Facilities. In such event Company shall notify the City by telephone to the office designated by the City as soon as practicable. Not later than the second working day thereafter, Company shall obtain any required permits and pay any required fees.

3.4	Restoration.	After undertaking any work requmng the opening of any Public Ground or Public Way, Company shall restore the same, including paving and its foundation, to as good a condition as formerly existed, and shall maintain any paved surface in good condition for two years thereafter. The work shall be completed as promptly as weather permits, and if Company shall not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment  and material, and put the Public Ground or Public Way in the said condition, the City shall have, after demand to Company to cure and the passage of a reasonable period of time following the demand, but not to exceed five days, the right to make the restoration at the expense of Company. Company shall pay to the City the cost of such work done for or performed by the City. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the City for noncompliance with this Section 3.4, but the City hereby waives any requirement for Company to post a construction performance bond, certificate of insurance, letter of credit or any other form of security or assurance that may be required, under a separate existing or future ordinance of the City, of a person or entity obtaining the City's pem1ission to install, replace or maintain facilities in a Public Way.

3.5	Avoid Damage to Electric Facilities. Nothing in this Ordinance relieves any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging Electric Facilities while performing any activity.

3.6	Notice of ln1provements. The City must give Company reasonable notice of plans for improvements to Public Grounds or Public Ways where the City has reason to believe  that Electric Facilities may affect or be affected by the improvement. The notice must contain: (i) the nature and character of the improvements, (ii) the Public Grounds and Public Ways upon which the improvements are to be made, (iii) the extent of the improvements, (iv) the time when the City will start the work, and (v) if more than one Public Ground or Public Way is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed.   The notice must be given to Company a sufficient length of time in
 
advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit Company to make any necessary additions, alterations or repairs to its Electric Facilities.

3.7	Shared Use of Poles. Company shall make space available on its poles or towers for City fire, water utility, police or other City facilities upon terms and conditions acceptable  to Company whenever such use will not interfere with the use of such poles or towers by Company, by another electric utility, by a telephone utility, or by any cable television company or other form of communication company. In addition, the City shall pay for any added cost  incWTed  by Company because of such use by City.

SECTION 4.   RELOCATIONS.

4.1	Relocation of Electric Facilities in Public Ways. If the City determines to vacate a Public Way for a City improvement project, or at City's cost to grade, regrade, or change the line of any Public Way, or construct or reconstruct any City Utility System in any Public Way, it may order Company to relocate its Electric Facilities located therein if relocation is reasonably necessary to accomplish the City's proposed public improvement. Except as provided in Section 4.3, Company shall relocate its Electric Facilities at its own expense. The City shall give Company reasonable notice of plans to vacate for a City improvement project, or to grade, regrade, or change the line of any Public Way or to construct or reconstruct any City Utility System. If a relocation is ordered within five years of a prior relocation of the same Electric Facilities, which was made at Company expense, the City shall reimburse Company for non-betterment costs on a time and material basis, provided that if a subsequent relocation is required because of the  extension  of  a City  Utility System to a previously unserved area, Company may be required to make the subsequent relocation at its expense. Nothing in this Ordinance requires Company to relocate, remove, replace or reconstruct at its own expense its Electric Facilities where such relocation, removal, replacement or reconstruction is solely for the convenience of the City and is not reasonably necessary for the construction or reconstruction of a Public Way or City Utility System or other City improvement.

4.2	Relocation of Electric Facilities in Public Ground. City may require Company, at Company's expense, to relocate or remove its Electric Facilities from Public Ground upon a finding by City that the Electric Facilities have become or will become a substantial impairment to the existing or proposed public use of the Public Ground.

4.3	Projects  with  Federal  Funding.	City shall not order Company to  remove or relocate its Electric Facilities when a Public Way is vacated, improved or realigned for a right-of­ way project or any other project which is financially subsidized in whole or in part by the Federal Government or any agency thereof, unless the reasonable non-betterment costs of such relocation are first paid to Company. The City is obligated to pay Company only for those portions of its relocation costs for which City has received federal funding specifically allocated for relocation costs in the amount requested by the Company, which allocated funding the City shall specifically request. Relocation, removal or rearrangement of any Company Electric Facilities made necessary because of a federally-aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 161.46, as supplemented or amended. It is understood that the rights herein granted to Company are valuable rights.
 
4.4	No Waiver.	The provisions ohhis franchise apply only to facilities constructed in reliance on a franchise from the City and shall not be construed to waive or modify any rights obtained by Company for installations within a Company right-of-way acquired by easement or prescriptive right before the applicable Public Ground or Public Way was established, or Company's rights under state or county permit.

SECTION 5. TREE TRIMMING.

Company may trim all trees and shrubs in the Public Grounds and Public Ways of City to the extent Company finds necessary to avoid interference with the proper construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any Electric Facilities installed hereunder, provided that Company shall save the City harmless from any liability arising therefrom, and subject to permit or  other reasonable regulation by the City.

SECTION 6.   INDEMNIFICATION.

6.1	Indemnity  of  City.	Company shall indemnify, keep and hold the City free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, the issuance of permits, or the operation of the Electric Facilities located in the Public Grounds and Public Ways. The City shall not be indemnified for losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or claims arising out of or alleging the City's negligence as to the issuance of permits for, or inspection of, Company's plans or work. The City shall not be indemnified if the injury or damage results from the performance in a proper manner, of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by Company, and such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by City after notice of  Company's detem1ination.

6.2	Defense of City. In the event a suit is brought against the City under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, Company at its sole cost and expense shall defend the City in such suit if written notice thereof is promptly given to Company within a period wherein Company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If Company  is  required  to  indemnify  and defend, it will thereafter have control of such litigation, but Company may not settle such litigation without the consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or in1munity otherwise available to the City and Company, in defending any action on behalf of the City, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or in1munity that the City could assert in its own behalf.

SECTION 7. VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.

The City shall give Company at least two weeks prior written notice of a proposed vacation of a Public Way. Except where required for a City improvement project, the vacation of any Public Way, after the installation of Electric Facilities, shall not operate to deprive Company of its rights to operate and maintain such Electric Facilities, until  the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to Company. In no case, however, shall City be liable to Company for failure to specifically preserve a right-of-way under Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.29.
 

SECTION 8.  CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT.

Any change in the form of government of the City shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance. Any governmental unit succeeding the City shall, without the consent of Company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations of the City provided in this Ordinance.


SECTION 9.  FRANCIDSE FEE.

9.1	Fee Schedule. During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in lieu of any permit or other fees being imposed on Company, the City may impose on Company a franchise fee by collecting the amounts indicated in a Fee Schedule set forth in a separate ordinance from each customer in the designated Company Customer Class. The parties have agreed that the franchise fee collected by the Company and paid to the City in accordance with this Section 9 shall not exceed the following amounts.

Fee Per Premise Per Month

 
Residential
Sm C & I-Non-Dem Sm C & I -Demand Large C & I
Public Street Ltg Muni Pumping -N/D MuniPumping -Dem
 
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
 

9.2	Separate Ordinance. The franchise fee shall be imposed by a separate ordinance duly adopted  by the City Council, which ordinance shall not be adopted until at least 60 days after written notice enclosing such proposed ordinance has been served upon Company  by certified mail. The fee shall not become effective until the beginning of a Company billing month at least 60 days after written notice enclosing such adopted  ordinance has been served upon Company by certified mail. Section 2.5 shall constitute the  sole  remedy  for  solving disputes between Company and the City in regard to the interpretation of, or enforcement of, the separate ordinance. No action by the City to implement a separate ordinance will commence until this Ordinance is effective. A separate ordinance which imposes a lesser franchise fee on the residential class of customers than the maximum amount set forth in Section 9.1 above shall not be effective against Company unless the fee imposed on each other customer classification is reduced proportionately in the same or greater amount per class as the reduction represented by the lesser fee on the residential class.

9.3	Terms Defined. For the purpose of this Section 9, the following definitions apply:


9.3.1	"Customer Class" shall refer to the classes listed on the Fee Schedule and as defined or determined in Company's electric tariffs on file with the Commission.
 
9.3.2	"Fee Schedule" refers to the schedule in Section 9.1 setting forth the various customer classes from which a franchise fee would be collected if a separate ordinance were implemented immediately after the effective date of this franchise agreement. The Fee Schedule in the separate ordinance may include new Customer Class added by Company to its electric tariffs after the effective date of this franchise agreement.

9.4	Collection  of the Fee.	The franchise fee shall be payable quarterly and shall be based on the amount collected by Company during complete billing months during the period for which payment is to be made by imposing a surcharge equal to the designated franchise fee for the applicable customer classification in all customer billings for electric service in each class. The payment shall be due the last business day of the month following the period for which the payment is made . The franchise fee may be changed by ordinance from time to time; however, each change shall meet the same notice requirements and not occur more often than annually and no change shall require a collection from any customer for electric service in excess of the amounts specifically permitted by this Section 9. The time and manner of collecting the franchise fee is subject to the approval of the Commission. No franchise fee shall be payable by Company if Company is legally unable to first collect an amount equal to the franchise fee from its customers in each applicable class of customers by imposing a surcharge in Company's applicable rates for electric service. Company may pay the City the fee based upon the surcharge billed subject to subsequent reductions to account for uncollectibles, refunds and correction of erroneous billings. Company agrees to make its records available for inspection  by the City at reasonable times provided that the City and its  designated representative agree in writing not to disclose any information which would indicate the amount paid by any identifiable customer or customers or any other information regarding identified customers. In addition, the Company agrees to provide at the time of each payment a statement summarizing how the franchise fee payment was determined, including information showing any adjustments to the total surcharge billed in the period for which the payment is being made to account for any uncollectibles, refunds or error corrections.

9.5	Equivalent Fee Requirement. The separate ordinance imposing the fee shall not be effective against Company unless it lawfully imposes and the City monthly or more often collects a fee or tax of the san1e or greater equivalent amount on the receipts from sales of energy within the City by any other energy supplier, provided that, as to such a supplier, the City has the authority to require a franchise fee or to impose a tax. The "same or greater equivalent amount" shall be measured, if practicable, by comparing amounts collected as a franchise fee from each similar customer, or by comparing, as to similar customers the percentage of the annual bill represented by the amount collected for franchise fee purposes. The franchise fee or tax shall be applicable to energy sales for any energy use related to heating, cooling or lighting, or to run machinery and appliances, but shall not apply to energy sales for the purpose of providing fuel for vehicles. If the Company specifically consents in writing to a franchise or separate ordinance collecting or failing to collect a fee from another energy supplier in contravention of this Section 9.5, the foregoing conditions will be waived to the extent of such written consent.
 
SECTION 10. PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE.

10.1	Severability.	Every section, provision, or part of this Ordinance is declared separate from every other section, provision, or part and if any section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section, provision, or part. Where a provision of any other City ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.

10.2	Limitation  on Applicability.	This Ordinance constitutes a franchise agreement between the City and Company as the only parties, and no provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any third person (including the public at large) so as to constitute any such person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person not a party hereto .

SECTION 11. AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.


Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that the agreement be amended to address a subject of concern and the other party will consider whether it agrees that the amendment is mutually appropriate. If an amendment is agreed upon, this Ordinance may be amended at any time by the City passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the amendment, which amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing of Company's written consent thereto with the City Clerk within 90 days after the date of final passage by the City of the amendatory ordinance.

SECTION 12. PREVIOUS FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED.

This franchise supersedes any previous electric franchise granted to Company or its predecessor.


 
Passed and approved: June 15, 2010.
 


.1
b zpen,lv!ayor
 

Attest:



. Short, City Clerk



Summary Publication of Ordinance 119 approved by the City Council and published in the White Bear Press on June 2010.
 
PRINTER'S AFFIDAVIT OF PUBLICATION


 







CITY OF GEM LAKE
 
AFFIDAVIT OF PUBLICATION

STATE OF MINNESOTA)
County of Ramsey)

er, or the publisher's  designated  agent, being duly sworn, on oath
 
ORDINANCE  NO.119 (SUMMA RY)	t}	bJ" h	t}	bl° h	'  d	.	t d	t	d	)
SUMMARY PUBLICATIO N.Pursuantto MinnesotaStatutes.§412.191,
a summary of an ordinance may be published. While a copy of the entire  aper known  as  the WHITE  BEAR  PRESS   and that  I have  full
ordinance 1s available without cost at the office of the City Clerk, the follow-	'
ing summary is approved by the City Counc il and shall be published in lieu  "th  c:    t	h" h	tat  db I	.
of publishing the entire ordinance:	e 1aC S W   IC   are S	e	e  OW.
Ordinance 119 renews the grant of a franchise to Northern States	.	.	•	.	. Power (dba Xcel Energy) to construct, operate , repair and maintain an elec- wspaper has complied with all of the requirements const1tutm g
tricity distribution system in the City of Gem Lake. The Ordinance sets forth	.	.
regulations by which the f ranchisee must abide. The franchise grant is for    as  a  qualified   newspaper ,  as  provided   by   Minnesota   Statute
a 20-yea r term. Ordinance 119 is effective upon its publication.
Published one time in the Wh ite Bear Press on June 23, 2010.	A.07, and other applicable laws, and amended .

(B) The printed:                     CITY OF GEM LAKE

ORDINANCE NO. 119 (SUMMARY) - RENEWS GRANT OF FRANCIDSE TO NORTHERN STATES POWER (DBA XCEL ENERGY) RE: ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM IN CITY OF GEM LAKE
which is attached was cut from the columns of said newspaper and was printed

and published for one week on WEDNESDAY, the  23  day  of  JUNE,  2010 . Printed below is a copy of the lower case alphabet from A to Z, both inclusive, which is hereby acknowledged as being the size and kind of type used in the composition  and publication  of the notice:
abcd efghijk lmn opqrstuvwxyz


BY:   	
TITLE :    Publisher


Subscribed and sworn to before me on this 30 day of JUNE, 2010.





f	Notary Public, Minnesota

RATE INFORMATION

(1)	Lowest classified rate paid by commercial users for
comparable space.	$ 	
(Line, word or inch rate)
 

(2)	Maximum rate allowed
by Jaw for the above matter.	$


(3)	Rate actually charged for
 



(Line, word or inch rate)
 



M i sc/AffidavitPub-WBP-1  Wk .doc
 
the above matter.	$	14.15/INCH
(Line, word or inch rate)
 
City of Gem Lake
Municipal Water and Sanitary Sewer System
Ordinance Nu mber 129



Municipal  Water  and  Sanitary Sewer System.   The City's municipal  systems consisting of lift stations, manholes , collection piping, service piping, force main , and associated appurtenances located within the public right-of-way and applicable easements shall be operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenue shall be derived, subject to the provisions of this chapter. This chapter shall be referred to as the City's Utility Regulations.


Com plianc e with  Regulations . No person, firm or corporation shall connect any water or sanitary sewer service to the municipal systems or make use of the systems except in the manner provided in this chapter.  All connections to or extensions of the systems shall be in accordan ce with relevant portions of the Minnesota Building Code, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and City of Gem Lake Standard Details for utility construction.


Sanitary Sewer and Water  Fund .  There is also created and the City shall maintain on the official books and records of the City a separate and special fund to be designated as the Sanitary Sewer Fund , and a special fund to be designated as the Water Fund which shall be held and administered by the City separate and apart from all other funds until the purposes for its creation have been
accompl ished.


Conn ection s with Sewer Requir ed.


(A)	Existing Structures. Any buildings presently used or capable of being used for human habitation or in which a toilet or other plumbing facilities for disposal of human waste is installed and located on property adjacent to a sewer main, or in the platted block through which the system extends, shall be connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer
System within one year from the date on which a connection is available to such building.  Where the property owner has failed to connect to the sanitary sewer system within ten years or within six months if the septic system fails, the following procedures shall be followed:

(I)	The property owner shall be notified that it is the intent of the City to connect the property to the sanitary sewer system and assess the cost of connection against the property owner. The notice shall be mailed by registered mail to the property address.
 

(2)     The cost of the improvement shall include all costs incurred by the City in order to connect the property to the main sewer line and shall include Ci ty permit and connection charges which must be submitted to the Metropolitan Council Environn1ental Services.


(B)	New Structures.  All buildings hereafter constructed within the City on property adjacent to a sewer main or in a platted block through which the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System extends, shall be provided with a cormection  to the sewer system for disposal of all human waste before occupancy of the building shall be allowed or a certificate of
occupancy issued.

(C)	Sewer Not Available. Where sewer is not available to a building, the building shall be connected to and deliver waste to an individual sewage treatment system.


Municip al Sanitary Sewer System Ch arges.   A portion of the cost of construct i ng and maintaining the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be recovered by the imposition of special assessments pursuant to Minnesota Statute 429, a connection charge, and a sewer availability charge (SAC) on behal f of the Metropolitan  Council.

(A)	Connection Charge.  A connection charge, as determined from time to time by City Council ordinance, shall be collected when housing units are connected to the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System.  In addition, before a connection permit will be issued, the City shall determine that one of the following conditions exist:

(1)	The lot or tract of land to be served by such connection has been assessed for the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main with which the connection is made; or

(2)	Ifno special assessment has been levied for such construction cost, the proceedings for levying the special assessments have been or wi II be commenced and completed in due course; or

(3)	If no special assessment has been levied, and no special assessment proceedings will be completed in due course, a sum equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main which would be assessable against said lot or tract has been paid to the City; or
 

(4)	If none of the above conditions are met, no permit to connect to any sanitary sewer main shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay an additional connection fee which shall be equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the said sanitary sewer main which would be specially assessed against said lot or tract served by such connection.  Said assessable cost is to be determined by the Engineer upon the same basis as any special assessment previously levied against other property for said main.  If no special assessment has been levied, the assessable cost will be detem1ined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which shall be charged for similar connection with said sanitary sewer main.

(B)	The Metropolitan Council has established sewer service availability and connection charges (SAC) for all buildings constructed or connected to the Metropolitan Disposal System.
Connections wi th Wat er Required


(A)	Existing Structures. Any buildings present!y used or capable of being used for human habitation or in which a toilet or other plumbing facilities for disposal of human waste is installed and located on propert y adjacent to a water main, or in the platted block through which the system extends, shall be connected to the Municipal Water System within ten years from the
date on which a connection is available to such building.  Where the property owner has failed to connect to the s system within ten years the following procedures shall be followed:

(1)	The property owner shall be notified that it is the intent of the City to connect the property to the water system and assess the cost of connection against the property owner. The notice shall be mailed by registered mail to the property address.


(2)    The cost of the improvement shall include all costs incurred by the City in order to connect the property to the main water line and shall include City permit and connection charges which must be submitted to the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services.

(B)	New Structures.  All buildings hereafter constructed within the City on property adjacent to a water line or in a platted block through which the Munici pal Water System extends, shall be provided with a connection
 
to the water system before occupancy of the building shall be allowed or a certificate of occupancy issued.



Municipal Water System Charges  A portion of the cost of constructing and maintaining the municipal water system shall be recovered by the imposition of special assessments pmsuant to Minnesota  Statutes 429, trunk water facilities charges, and co1mection charges.

(A)	Trunk Water Facility Charges.  The trunk water facility charge shall be collected when the property is platted , subdivided or otherwise developed. These charges are required to be paid to the City prior to the City accepting the lateral water mains, pipes and appurtenances constructed by the property owner.  The charge is calculated as a lump sum amount determined by multiplying a front foot charge, as determined from time to time by the City Council ordinance, times the lineal feet of all streets within or abutting the plat , subdivision or development and shall be computed by the Engineer and paid by the property owner to the City prior to the issuance of any building permit.


(B)	Connection Charge.  A connection charge, as determined from time to time by City Cow1cil ordinance, shall be collected when housing units are connected to the municipal water system.  In addition, before a connection permit will be issued, the City shall detem1ine that one of the following conditions exist:

(1)	The lot or tract of land to be served by such connection or tap has been specially assessed for the cost of constructing the water main and trunk water systems with which the connection is made ; or

(2)	If no special assessment has been levied for such construction cost, the proceedings for levying special assessments have been or will be commenced in due course; or

(3)	If no special assessment has been levied, and no special assessment proceedings will be completed in due course, a sum equal to the portion of the cost of constructing the water main and trunk water system, which would be assessable against said lot or tract, has been paid to the City; or

(4)	If none of the above conditions are met, no permit to tap or
 
connect to any water main or trunk water system shall be issued unless the applicant shall pay an additional connection fee which shall be equal to the portion of the cost of constructing the water main and trunk water system which would be assessable against said lot or tract serviced by the connection.  The assessable cost is to be determined by the Engineer upon the same basis as any assessment previously levied against other property for the water main and trunk water system.  If no assessment has been levied, the assessable cost will be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which shall be charged for similar tapping or connection with said main and trunk system, determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of
the water main and trunk water system, allocated on a frontage
basis, plus the cost of service or services.


Connection Permits.  A permit must be obtained to connect to the municipal systems. The connection permit fee, as established by Gem Lake City Counci l ordinance, shall be submitted at the time of permit application. All permits for service installations shall be made by the owner of the property, or his duly authorized agent and shall state the size and location of the service connection and all other information as required.  The applicant shall pay to the City prior to the issuance of the permit, the total amount of  fees or deposit required for the installation of the service connection as herein provided.
No permit shall be issued except to a licensed plumber, certified pipe layer, or homeowner performing work on his or her own premises. City inspections are required for all connections to, and extensions of, the municipal systems.


Statements for Water and Sanitary Sewer Use Charges.


(A)	Water and Sanitary sewer use charges, as determined from time to time by City Council ordinance shall be payable quarterly.  Such statements shall be due and payable on or before the first day of the second month following receipt of the billing.  Where service is for less than a quarterly period, the quarterly charge shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis.  .  Ifa water meter is found to have been operating in a faulty maimer, the amount of water used will be estimated in accordance with the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year.

(B)	Penalties for Delinquent Payments. A penalty equal to 10% of the amount due shall be added to accounts not paid in full on or before the first day of the second month following the billing period and to each quarterly billing thereafter until the amount of the delinquent account plus accrued penalty is paid in full or otherwise certified to the County
 
Auditor as a delinquent account.


(C)	Annual Certification of Delinquent Accounts. Each year the City shall prepare a list of delinquent service charge accounts, including accrued penalties thereon, in the form of an assessment roll. The City Council shall annually review the delinquent service charge assessment roll and adopt an appropriate resolution directing that the assessment roll be ce11ified to the County Auditor as a lien against
the premises served and directing that the County Auditor collect the
assessment as part of the ensuing year's tax levy.

Service Charges relating to Municipal Water Utility . When actions or activities of
water customers require coordination with or a call out of City utility personnel
(e.g. turning water supply on/off at curbs tops), a water service charge shall be assessed to the utility account. When the call out occurs outside of normal business hours, it will be deemed an emergency call out.  The service charges for regular and emergency call outs will be established by Gem Lake City Council ordinance.


Di scontinu ance of Water  Service .


(A)	Conditions.  The City reserves the right to discontinue service to any consumer of the mu ni cipal water system whenever:

(1)	The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any persons working on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the water system, has violated or threatens to violate or causes to be violated, any of the City's water utility regulation s.

(2)	In the judgmen t of the City or its designee, such action is necessary to protect the purity of the municipal water supply or the safety of the water system and/or l ife, health, or safety of its consumers.
(3)	Any charge for water, service, meter, or other financial obligation imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises  served, is paid.

(4)	The owner or occupant  of  the  premises  served  has  made fraudulent statements or misrepresentations in connection with an applicati on for service.

(5)	The property is unsecured and/or vacant.
 

(B)	Procedure. Prior to shut off, the property will be posted, and the owner and/or occupant of the property shall be mailed notice to the last address shown on the application on file with the City and current billing statements. Said notice shall advise the owner and/or occupant of the reason for the proposed shut off and that a hearing may be requested in writing within ten (I0) days of the date shown on the notice given to them. It shall further provide that failure to request a hearing in writing to the City shall be deemed a waiver and that the water will be shut off upon the expiration of the ten (10) days.


Authorized  Water Shut Downs . The City shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections, or from any other cause whatever.  In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to
insure a supply for firefighting.  When making repairs to existing infrastructure
or construction of new infrastructure, water may be shut off at any time and kept shut off as long as necessary.


Maintenance of Service Pipe.  It shall be the responsibility  of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the curb box into the house or building. In the case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in the pipe within twenty-four (24) hours after verbal or written notice by the City thereof, the water will be shut off. When the waste of water is great, or when damage is likely to result from the leak , water may be turned off immediately pending repairs.


Treatment of Proh ibited Wastes . Where it is determ ined that any waste discharged or to be discharged has certain characteristics or elements which are or may be harmful to the structures, processes, or operation of the sanitary sewer system
or persons operating it, such discharge shall be discontinued or the waste shall
be treated prior to its discharge into the system in a manner which will eliminate such characteristics or elements.


Surface or G round Water. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or user of any premises to direct into or allow any storm water, surface water, ground water, well water, or water from industrial or commercial air conditioning systems to drain into the City's sanitary sewer system. Roof drains, foundation drains, sump pumps, and other forms of surface drainage shall not be connected to or discharged to the sanitary sewer system. The City shall periodically perform Inflow and Infiltration (l&I) inspections to verify that connections to the City's
 
sanitary sewer system are in compliance with the provisions of this section.


Prohibited Waste Discharge.


(A)	No person shall discharge, cause, or allow to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system, any waste containing concentrations in excess of the following:

 
Pollutant
@y} Cadmium Chromium, total mg/l Copper mg/l
Cyanide, total Lead
Mercury
Nickel
Zinc Temperature pH
 
Limitations (Maximum for anv operating
2.0 mg/I
8.0
6.0


4.0 mg/I
1.0 mg/I
0.1 mg/I
6.0 mg/I
8.0 mg/l
150°F (65°C)
5.00-10.00
 

(B)	No person shall discharge, cause, or allow to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system any wastes which contain any of the following:


(1)	More than  100 mg/I of fats, wax, grease or oils (hexane soluble), whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degree centigrade) at the point of discharge into the sewer system.

(2)	Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sanitary sewer system or to the operation of the system.  At no time shall two successive readings on an explosimeter, at the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive l imit (L.E.L.).

(3)	Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are or may be sufficient to
 
prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.

(4)	Any toxic substance, chemical elements or compound s in quantities sufficient to interfere with the biological processes of efficiency of treatment works, or that will pass through a treatment works and cause the effluent therefrom or the water into which it is discharged, to fail to meet applicable state or federal standards.

(5)	Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

(6)	Radioactive wastes or isotopes or such half-life of concentration s that they are in noncompliance with present or future regulations issued
by the appropriate authority having control over their use and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the system or personnel operating it.

(7)	Solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or other interference with the proper operation of any disposal system , such as grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bone s, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood , feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas, tar, asphalt , residues from refining or proc essing of fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphth a, and similar substances.

(8)	Any waste from septic tank s or similar facilities.

(9)	Any mineral acids, waste acid pickling or plating liquors from the picklin g or plating or iron, steel, brass, copper or chromium, or any other dissolved or solid substances which will or may endanger health or safety, or attack or corrode any part of the sanitary sewer system.


(I 0)	Liquids or vapors ha ving a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit immediately prior to discharge into the sewer system.

(11)	Phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in
concentrati ons which will or may cause the effluent from the
 
treatment works or the water into which it is discharged to fail
to meet applicable state or federal standards.


(12)	Materials which  exert or cause :
(a)	Unusua lly high concentrations of inert suspended solids or of dissolved solids.
(b)	Excessive discoloration.
(c)	Unusually high volume of flow or concentration of waste exceeding five times the average daily concentration of flow during normal operation.

(13)	Unusually high concentrations of suspended soli ds, BOD, COD, or chlorine requirements, in such quantities as lo constitute a significant load on the treatment works.

(14)	Any substance which is not amenable to treatment to reduction by the type of sewage treatment processes employed to a degree sufficient to permit the effluent from the treatment
works and the water into which it is discharged to meet applicabl e state and federal standards.  If prohib ited waste is
discharged into the systems the offend ing party shall pay for all clean up and be fined an additional 25% of the clean-up charge. Ifpayment is not made, the Financial Officer will certify to the County Auditor as a lien against the premises served and
directing that the County Auditor collect the assessment as part
of the ensuing year's tax levy.


Wa ste Trap and Sep a rators. Oil, grease, and sand waste traps and separators shall be installed for the proper discharge of waste water containing excessive amounts of oil, grease, sand, or flammabl e liquids when required by the Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minnesota Rules, Chapter 4715, the Regional Administrator of the Metropolitan Council , or when the city determines such traps or separators are necessary. Waste traps and separators shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by the owner and at the owner"s expense, through the periodic removal of any accumulated residue. Ifa trap or separator is not properly maintai ned, the city may have the system, including affected city sewers, cl eaned at the owner's expense.


Tampering with  Municipal  Svstems  is Prohibited . No person shall  maliciously, willfully, or negligently damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any part of the Municipal Sewer or Water Systems.
 
Cross-Connecti on Control.  Cross-connection between  the municipal water system and  other systems, private wells, or equipment containing water or other  substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited , except when and where, as approved by the City, suitable backflow prevention devices are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis as per the following requirements:
(A)	A backflow prevention device i s to be owned, tested , and maintained by the customer/owner of the premise s being served.

(B)	Installation, maintenance, and testing of backflow preventers shall
be according to the State of Minnesota Plumbing Code.

( l)		It is required that reduced pressure zone backflow preventers be tested annually and overhauled at interva ls not lo exceed five years. Testing shall be performed by a qualified backflow tester. A licensed plumber qualified in backflow testing shall perform all internal maintenance to the device. Test results shall be furnished to the City.

(2)	A person who is recognized by the Minnesota Department of Health as a backflow preventer tester is considered by the City to test backflow preventers and certify them to be functional.

(C)	Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be cause to discontinue water service.

Water Use Restri ction s.  A sprinkling ban is adopted in ord er to encourage water conservation, and to insure avai lability of an adeq uate suppl y of City water without incurring unnecessary capital expenditures.

(A)	Water Use Restriction.  Except as hereinafter provided , the watering of lawns, gardens, and shrubs is prohibited from May 15 through September  15 annually.

(1)	Exceptions.
(a)	Property with odd numbered postal addresses may water
on odd numbered days.
(b)	Property with even numbered postal addresses may
water on even numbered days.
(c)	Private wells may be u sed on any day.
(d)	Watering newly sodded or seeded yards is allowed upon a receipt of an exemption permit from the Public Works Departm ent for a period of two weeks.
 
(e)	Attended watering of plants, shrubs, and gardens may
be watered by hand on any day.


(B)	Enforcement.  Violations of the water use restrictions will result in a warning letter for first violation, and the imposition of administrative fines that will be reflected on the next utility bill or in the issuance of a citation in accordance with adopted Council ordinance.
(C)	City Council Resolution.  During dry weather periods, the City Council may impose additional restrictions on the use of City water by the adoption of an appropriate resolution.  Any violation of the water restriction resolution shall be referred to the City Attorney for prosecution as a misdemeanor.


Private Wells.  The use of private wells may continue after connection is made to the water system, provided there is no means of cross-connection between the private well and the municipal supply at any time.  Hose bibs that will enable a cross­ connection of the two systems are prohibited  on internal and external piping. The threads on the boiler drain of the well volume tank shall be removed or the boiler drain hose bib replaced with a sink faucet. When both private and City systems are in use, outside hose bibs shall not be installed on piping connected to the municipal system.


Operation of Fire Hvdrants.  No person other than authorized City employees shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City, subject to the following conditions:

(A)	Permit.  A hydrant meter permit to use a fire hydrant for the purpose of purchasing water from the City is required. The permit shall state the applicant's name and address, phone number, location of the work site, and type of work being conducted.

(B)	Deposit.  The applicant shall be required to make a deposit, as detem1ined by City ordinance, to guarantee payment for water used and to cover breakage and/or damage to the hydrant or meter.  Charges will be deducted from the deposit, and a billing or refund will be generated.

(C)	Charges.  The applicant shall pay rental charges for each thi11y-day­ period or fraction thereof, and water use charges as detem1ined by City Council ordinance.



Water Serv ice Contractors.  A license is required. All water service work shall be
 
performed by certified contractors licensed by the appropriate State authority. This section shall not apply to homeowners performing work on lheir own premises.


Water Meters.  Except for extinguishing of fire, no person except authorized City employees shall use water from the water supply system or permit water to be drawn therefrom unless the same be metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the City.  Only persons authorized by the City shall connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any manner change or cause to be changed, or interfere with any such meter or the action thereof.

(A)	Charge.  At the time of the initial connection to the municipal water system, a charge for water meters shall be paid to the City by customers before delivery of the water meter for installation. Said charge shall be determined by City Council ordinance.

(B)	Maintenance.  The City shall retain ownership of water meters and shall be responsible for standard mainten ance and repair. Costs associated with replacement , repair , or adjustment of a meter due to any act, carelessness, or neglect of the owner or occupants of the premises shall be charged against and collected from the water consumer.  Water service may be discontinued until the cause is corrected and the amount charged is collected.

(C)	Testing.  Upon written request, the City will re-read water meters and test the meter for accuracy, if necessary. In case a test should show an error of over five percent of the water consumed in favor of the City, a correctly registering meter will be installed and adjustments to water billing statements will be considered.  In case the test shows an accurate measurement of water or an error in favor of the consumer , the expenses of making such a test, and the additional costs, if any, will be included
on the next quarterly statement. The meter testing charges will be
established by City Council ordinance.

(D)	City Access.  Authorized City employees shall have access at reasonable hours of the day to all buildings and premises connected to the municipal water system for the purpose of maintenance of water meters without charge to the water consumer.  In the event the water consumer denies authorized City employee access, the water consumer
will, at their own cost, provide for meter replacement or maintenance by
a licensed plumber, and said licensed plumber shall be required to provide documentation to City as to va lidity of the work perfom1ed.
 




Cer tain Conn ections Prohibited .  No buildings located on property lying oulside the limits of the City of Gem Lake shall be connected to that portion of lhe systems of the City discharging into the Met Council Sanitary sewer system, except that the City may permit the installation, maintenance, and operation of a sanitary sewer service connection between its public sewer system and the following described real property, lying beyond the corporate limits of the City, and situated in the CityNillage of Gem Lake, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota, to-wit:











The connection of any of the above-described areas of the sanitary sewer system of the City is dependent upon express authorization for such connection being obtained from the City Council.
Maintenance of Sewer Service.


(A)	Liability.  The City assumes ownership of the sanitary sewer service from the main collector line to the connection.  If based on an inspection by the City this portion of the sewer service requires repair the City shall assume aJl costs associated with the repair. The owner of the premises shall be liable for all repairs required to the portion of the sewer service from the connection point to the residence.

(B)	Maintenance.  The owner of the premi ses is responsible to maintain the sewer service from the main collector to the residence in functioning condit i on.



City Access.   Authorized City employees shall have access at reasonable hours of the day to all buildings and premises connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system for the purpose of infiltration and inflow inspections without charge to the sanitary sewer consumer.  In the event the sanitary sewer consumer denies authorized City employees access, the sanitary sewer consumer will, at their
own cost, provide for infiltration and inflow inspections by a licensed plumber ,
 
and said licensed plumber shall be required to provide documentation to City
as to validity of the work performed.


Non-Compli ance Surcharge. A qua1terly surcharge, as determined by City Council ordinance, shall be added to the utility billing statement for a property where:

(A)	An inspection has not been allowed or certification provided within
30 days after notice by the City.


(B)	The necessary installations, inspections, and/or repairs have not been made within the time specified.

A surcharge wi ll be added for every quarter during which the property is not in compliance, whether the non-compliance has been for the entire qua11er or a portion thereof.


Water Service Lines. In order to eliminate a health or safety hazard from private property, the City is authorized to install or repair water service lines from a City water
main to a private dwelling or to contract for such work. The cost of installing or repairin g water service lines may be specially assessed against the benefited property and the City may issue obligations to defray the expense of such work all pursuant to the provi sions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 429 and its
subdivi sions.


WHEREUPON, the above ordinance was adopted at the regular City Council meeting for the City of Gem Lake, Ram sey County, Minnesota, on August 23, 2016, by a motion made by Councilmember Lindn er, seconded by Counci lmember Bosak.


ATTEST:
I, William Short, the duly qualified City Clerk of the City of Gem Lake, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota, do hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance is a true and accurate representation of action taken by the City Counci l of the City of Gem Lake on the date first written.




f II	' I I

William Short, City Clerk	Date
 


ORDINANCE NO. 130

City of Gem Lake


AN ORDINANCE OPTING-OUT OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF
MINNESOTA  STATUTES, SECTION 462.3593



WHEREAS, on May 12, 2016, Governor Dayton signed into law the creation and regulation of temporary family health care dwellings, codified at Minn. Stat. §462.3593, which permit and regulate temporary family health care dwellings;

WHEREAS , subdivision 9 of Minn. Stat. §462.3593 allows cities to "opt out" of those
regulations;

THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF Gem Lake, ORDAINS as follows:

OPT-OUT OF MINNESOTA  STATUTES, SECTION 462.3593:

Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of  Gem Lake  opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. §462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings .


This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its passage and publication.

ADOPTED this 23rd day of August 2016, by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake.



Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 1
CITY OF GEM LAKE, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA
ORDINANCE NO. 131
CONSOLIDATED LAND USE ORDINANCE
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1
SECTION 1 - TITLE 9
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE 9
SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 10
3.1 Rules 10
SECTION 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 11
4.1 Districts 11
4.2 Map 11
4.3 Boundaries 11
SECTION 5 – SINGLE FAMILY ESTATE “RE" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 12
Section Intro Info
5.1 Permitted Uses 12
5.2 Permitted Accessory Uses 12
5.3 Conditional & Interim Uses 12
5.4 Height Regulations 13
5.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements 14
SECTION 6 – SINGLE FAMILY EXECUTIVE “RX" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 15
Section Intro Info
6.1 Permitted Uses 15
6.2 Permitted Accessory Uses 15
6.3 Conditional & Interim Uses 15
6.4 Height Regulations 16
6.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements 16
SECTION 7 – SINGLE FAMILY (1 Acre) “RO” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 18
Section Intro Info
7.1 Permitted Uses 18
7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses 18
7.3 Conditional & Interim Uses 18
7.4 Height Regulations 19
7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements 19
SECTION 8 – SINGLE FAMILY “RS” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 21
Section Intro Info
8.1 Permitted Uses 21
8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses 21
8.3 Conditional & Interim Uses 21
8.4 Height Regulations 22
8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements 22
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 3
SECTION 9 - “G” GATEWAY DISTRICT 24
9.1 Intent and Purpose 24
9.2 Generally Applicable Regulations 25
9.3 Placement of Subzones 27
Figure 1 – Gateway Subzone Map 28
9.4 Thoroughfare Standards 29
Figure 2 – Light-Use Thoroughfares 30
Figure 3 – Medium Use Thoroughfares 31
9.5 Civic Space Standards 32
Figure 4 – Civic Spaces A-D 32
Figure 5 – Civic Spaces E & F 33
9.6 Building Type Standards 34
Figure 6 – Single Family House 36
Figure 7 – Twin Home 37
Figure 8 – Townhouse/Rowhouse 38
Figure 9 – Apartment/Condominium 39
Figure 10 – Bungalow Court 40
Figure 11 – Live/Work Unit 41
Figure 12 – Mixed-Use Building 42
Figure 13 – Retail/Office Building 43
Figure 14 – Single Use Building 44
Figure 14a – Liner Building 45
Figure 14b – Collar Building 46
Figure 15 – Auto-Oriented Layout 47
Figure 16 – Residential Accessory Uses 48
Figure 17 – Other Accessory Uses 49
9.7 Large Development Proposal Procedures 51
9.8 Plans for Re-development of Single Lots or Small Subdivisions 54
9.9 Parking Regulations 55
9.10 Design Review Standards 56
SECTION 10 - Open Space/Recreational Overlay District “OS/R” 59
10.1 Intent and Purpose 59
10.2 Permitted Uses 59
SECTION 11 - Reserved 60
SECTION 12 - Reserved 60
SECTION 13 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 61
13.1 Purpose 61
13.2 Permitted Uses 61
13.3 Coordination with Subdivision Regulations 61
13.4 Submission of Material Required for Approval 62
13.5 Enforcement of Development Schedule 62
13.6 Conveyance and Maintenance of Common Open Space 62
13.7 Standards for Common or Open Space 62
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 4
13.8 Review and Amendment 63
SECTION 14 - GARDEN OVERLAY DISTRCT 64
14.1 Findings and Purpose 64
14.2 Requesting Garden Overlay 64
14.3 Termination of Garden Overlay 64
14.4 Interim Use 65
14.5 Permitted Accessory Uses 65
14.6 Prohibited Practices 65
14.7 General Regulation 65
SECTION 15 - INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 66
15.1 Purpose 66
15.2 Permitted Uses 66
15.3 Permitted Accessory Uses 66
15.4 Conditional & Interim Uses 66
15.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements 67
15.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements 68
15.7 Landscaping and Screening 68
15.8 Procedures for Requesting an Overlay 68
SECTION 16 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 72
16.1 Application of this Ordinance 72
16.2 Severability 73
16.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures 73
16.4 Lot Provisions 74
16.5 Accessory Buildings 74
16.6 Required Yards, Open Space and Height 74
16.7 Traffic Visibility 75
16.8 Farming Operations 75
16.9 Essential Services 75
16.10 (Deleted) 75
16.11 (Deleted) 75
16.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units 75
16.13 Fences 75
16.14 Outdoor Swimming Pools and Spas 77
16.15 Land Reclamation 79
16.16 Mining 80
SECTION 17 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 81
17.1 Enforcing Officer 81
17.2 Building Permits 81
17.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator 81
17.4 Variances 81
17.5 Conditional & Interim Use Permits 83
17.6 Amendments 85
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 5
17.7 Appeals 87
17.8 Fees 87
17.9 Violations & Penalties 87
SECTION 18 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 88
18.1 General 88
18.2 Requirements for Consideration 88
18.3 Exterior Storage 90
18.4 Refuse 91
18.5 Screening 91
18.6 Landscaping 92
18.7 Maintenance 92
18.8 Lighting and Glare 92
18.9 Vibration 93
18.10 Off-Street Loading 93
18.11 Traffic Control 93
18.12 (Deleted) 94
18.13 Architecture 94
18.14 Explosives 94
18.15 Radiation and Electrical Emissions 94
18.16 Aircraft 94
18.17 Other Nuisance Characteristics 94
18.18 Consistency with Plans and Policies 94
18.19 Clustering and Density Transfer 94
18.20 Park Land Dedication 95
SECTION 19 – SIGNS 98
19.1 Purpose and Intent 98
19.2 Findings 98
19.3 Permit Required 98
19.4 Inspections and Enforcement 100
19.5 Applicable Standards 101
19.6 Definitions 105
19.7 Severability 105
SECTION 20 - OFF STREET PARKING AREAS 106
20.1 Purpose 106
20.2 Site Plan 106
20.3 General Provisions 106
20.4 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas 106
20.5 Required Off-Street Parking 107
SECTION 21 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS,
AND SHORELANDS 108
21.1 General Provisions 108
21.2 Policy 108
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 6
21.3 Use of Gem Lake 111
SECTION 22 - SOIL EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 112
22.1 Erosion and Sediment Control 112
22.2 Stormwater Management 113
SECTION 23 - BROADCAST / TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS 117
23.1 Purpose and Intent 117
23.2 Zoning Districts for Construction 117
23.3 Performance Standards 117
23.4 Proof of Non-Interference 117
23.5 Tower Set-Backs 119
23.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review 119
23.7 Exceptions 119
SECTION 24 - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS 120
24.1 Purpose 120
24.2 Zoning Allowance 120
24.3 License Required 120
24.4 Code Compliance 121
24.5 Standards for Siting, Installation and Operation of WECS 121
24.6 Test Towers 122
24.7 Inspection 122
24.8 Abandonment 122
SECTION 25 - SUBDIVSION 123
25.1 Purpose 124
25.2 Jurisdiction 124
25.3 Interpretation 124
25.4 Requirements 124
25.5 Park Land Dedication Requirements 124
25.6 Minor Subdivisions 124
25.7 Severability 125
25.8 Conflict and Interaction of Ordinances 125
25.9 Rules and Definitions 125
25.10 Filing and Review Procedures of Plans 125
25.11 Design Standards 131
25.12 Required Basic Improvements 136
25.13 Variances from This Section 138
25.14 Violations and Penalty 139
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 7
SECTION 26 - LANDSCAPING 140
26.1 Purpose 140
26.2 Definitions 140
26.3 Landscaping Requirements for New Construction in Residential Districts 140
26.4 Landscaping Requirements for New Construction in Non-Residential Districts 141
26.5 General Requirements for All Districts 142
26.6 Native Landscapes 143
26.7 Landscaping of Existing Uses 143
26.8 Screening Requirements in Non-Residential Districts 143
26.9 Additional Screening Requirements 144
26.10 Screening Methods 144
26.11 Landscaping Plans 145
26.12 Performance Surety for Landscaping in Non-Residential Districts 145
26.13 Maintenance of Landscaping In All Districts 146
26.14 Penalty 146
26.15 Section Read in Concert with Other Ordinances 146
26.16 Severability 146
SECTION 27 – TREE PRESERVATION 147
27.1 Purpose 147
27.2 Severability 147
27.3 Interaction Between This Section and Other Sections 147
27.4 Wording of This Section 147
27.5 Definitions 147
27.6 Protection Standards 147
27.7 Data Submission 147
27.8 Removal Thresholds 148
27.9 Reforestation 149
27.10 Construction Damage to Significant Trees in or Near the Preservation Area 150
27.11 Agreement to Replace Trees 150
27.12 Collector and Arterial Roads and Trunk and Lateral Utility Construction 150
27.13 Exceptions to This Ordinance 150
27.14 Tree Replacement 151
27.15 Release and Retention of Performance Security 151
27.16 Penalty 151
SECTION 28 – ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 153
28.1 State Law Adopted 153
28.2 Application 153
28.3 Determination of Need for Environmental Review 153
28.4 Procedures on Determination that EAW is Required 153
28.5 Procedure when an EIS is required 154
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 8
28.6 Prohibition on Approvals During Environmental Review 154
28.7 Severability 154
SECTION 29 - STORM SEWER USE 155
29.1 Purpose and Intent 155
29.2 Applicability 155
29.3 Responsibility for Administration 155
29.4 Compatibility with other Regulations 155
29.5 Severability 155
29.6 Ultimate Responsibility 155
29.7 Discharge Prohibitions 155
29.8 Watercourse Protection 156
29.9 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges 156
29.10 Compliance Monitoring 157
29.11 Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Storm Water Pollutants
By the Use of Best Management Practices 158
29.12 Notification of Spills 158
29.13 Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties 158
29.14 Costs 159
29.15 Suspension of MS4 Access 159
29.16 Civil Penalties 160
29.17 Criminal Penalties 160
29.18 Appeal of Notice of Violation 160
29.19 Enforcement Measures After Appeal 160
29.20 Cost of Abatement of the Violation 160
29.21 Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance 161
29.22 Remedies Not Exclusive 161
29.23 Effective Date 161
SECTION 30 - ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT 162
APPENDIX A – CONSOLIDATED LAND USE ORDINANCE DEFINITIONS
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 9
Statement on former Zoning Ordinance Number 43 revision K
THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF GEM LAKE, MINNESOTA, RELATING TO AND REGULATING THE
LOCATION, SIZE, USE AND HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS, THE ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS, AND
THE DENSITY OF POPULATION IN THE CITY OF GEM LAKE, AND FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING
THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, ORDER, CONVENIENCE, PROSPERITY AND GENERAL WELFARE IN SAID
CITY, AND FOR SAID PURPOSE, TO DIVIDE THE CITY INTO DISTRICTS, AND MAKE DIFFERENT
REGULATIONS FOR DIFFERENT DISTRICTS.
The City of Gem Lake does ordain as follows:
SECTION 1 - TITLE
Section 1.1 This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the ORDINANCE 131 CONSOLIDATED LAND USE
ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this Ordinance”.
SECTION 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE
INTENT
The intent of this consolidated land use ordinance is to provide a single source for all real property subjected to development
within the City of Gem Lake. It combines zoning (including the Gateway District), subdivisions, signs, landscaping, and tree
preservation, into one single ordinance and combines the definitions into one appendix. This Consolidated Land Use Ordinance
is to be used in conjunction with Gem Lake’s Comprehensive Municipal Plan to guide development and redevelopment and will
serve as the basis from which the merits of proposed development and redevelopment projects will be evaluated. While this
consolidated land use ordinance has combined several formerly stand-alone ordinances, it has not changed the scope and intent
of those ordinances. Instead, the consolidated land use ordinance simply gathers these several ordinances and places them inside
a single ordinance.
Section 2.1 This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:
2.1.1 Protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
2.1.2 Dividing the City into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction,
Reconstruction, alteration, and use of structures and land.
2.1.3 Promoting orderly development of the residential, business and industrial areas.
2.1.4 Providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property.
2.1.5 Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings
and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them.
2.1.6 Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
2.1.7 Supporting the ideals of and providing for local controls consistent with the Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal
Plan as adopted and, from time to time, amended.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 10
SECTION 3 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section 3.1 Rules. The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules
of construction:
3.1.1 The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
3.1.2 The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
3.1.3 The word “shall” is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive.
3.1.4 The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
3.1.5 Where words or phrases are not defined within the definitions of this Ordinance, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings within the context in which they are used.
3.1.6 All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.
For Definitions, see Appendix A
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 11
SECTION 4 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Section 4.1 Districts
4.1.1 In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Ordinance, the City of Gem Lake is hereby divided into
the following Zoning Districts and groups of Districts.
A) Residence Districts
1) “RE" Single Family Estate (5.0 acre minimum lot size)
2) “RX” Single Family Executive (3.0 acre minimum lot size)
3) “RO” Single Family Residential (1.0 acre minimum lot size)
4) “RS” Single Family Residential (0.50 acre minimum lot size)
B) Gateway District “G” (uses determined by PUD)
C) Open Space/Recreational “OS/R”
Section 4.2 Map
4.2.1 The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established on that certain map entitled “City of Gem Lake
Zoning Map,” dated September 2017 and from time to time amended, which map is properly approved and hereinafter
referred to as the “Zoning Map”. This map and all of the notations, references and other information shown thereon
shall have the same force and effect as it fully set forth and described herein.
Section 4.3 Boundaries
4.3.1 District boundary lines as indicated on said map follow lot lines, the center lines of streets, alleys, or railroads, the
center lines of streets or alleys projects, the center of water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon
the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto. If district boundary lines do not follow any of the above
described lines, the district boundary lines are established as drawn on the zoning map. Where a District boundary line
divides a lot of record which was in single ownership at the time of enactment of this Ordinance and places portions of
such lot of record in two (2) or more Use Districts, any portion of such lot with fifty (50'0") feet on either side of such
a dividing district boundary line may be used for any use of either Use District; provided, however, if any portion of
such lot shall extend beyond the fifty (50'0") feet limitation, the District line as shown shall prevail. Appeals from the
Zoning Administrator’s determination and questions of doubt concerning the exact location of District boundary lines
shall be heard by the Board of Appeals.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 12
SECTION 5 - “RE" SINGLE FAMILY ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The minimum lot size in the “RE” zoning district is five (5) acres, but most of the existing ‘estates’ are located on land parcels
much larger than five (5) acres. All but one of the parcels mapped as “estate” are built upon and are not expected to be subdivided
or re-developed in the near future. This five (5) acre minimum lot size plan allows for land transfers from the least dense land
category to a classification that allows for denser development. However, it is important to note that the Gem Lake
Comprehensive plan does not project or assume any immediate change in the existing pattern of development on these
properties.
If, in the future, this land is sub-divided, it would be is possible to include “RS” development along the perimeter thoroughfares
of the “RE” area to provide diversity of housing.
Principal and accessory buildings should be located so as to allow for possible future subdivision to “RX” or “RS” lots. In order
to maximize the efficiency of roads and municipal services, master planning, clustering or similar land use concepts should be
used when sub-dividing “RE” zoned land to maximize benefits. (Refer to pages 5-5 and 5-21 of the 2008 Comprehensive plan
for the source of these details).
Section 5.1 Permitted Uses. Within any “RE" Zoned Residential Use District, no structures or land shall be used except for one
(1) or more of the following uses:
5.1.1 One family detached dwellings
5.1.2 Truck gardening and other horticultural uses provided that only those products produced on the premise be sold
or offered for sale.
Section 5.2 Permitted Accessory Uses. Within any “RE" Zoned Residential Use District, the following uses shall be permitted
accessory uses.
5.2.1 Attached or detached housing for domestic servants
5.2.2 Private garage, car port or parking space
5.2.3 The keeping of not more than two (2) roomers
5.2.4 Private swimming pool, tennis court, horse training ring, and other sites necessary to conduct a home sporting
event.
5.2.5 Home occupation
5.2.6 Signs as regulated by this Ordinance
5.2.7 Structures temporarily located for purposes of construction on the site for a period of time not in excess of such
construction.
5.2.8 Conservatories for plants and flowers, not including any business, trade or industry.
5.2.9 Decorative landscape features including but not limited to pools, arbors, hedges, walls, shrubs, trees, etc.
5.2.10 Essential services
Section 5.3 Conditional & Interim Uses. Within any “RE" Zoned Residential Use District, no structures or land shall be used
for the following uses except by Conditional Use Permit:
5.3.1 Country clubs, golf courses and other private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities, including swimming
pools; provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located not less than fifty (50') feet from any
other lot in an “R” District.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 13
5.3.2 Essential Service Structures
5.3.3 Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.
5.3.4 Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm
animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the
following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:
A) The structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be
existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and
with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;
B) the structure shall be at least one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;
C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall
not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;
D) the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on
the property;
E) such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.
5.3.5 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
5.3.6 Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.
5.3.7 Family Day Care Home
Section 5.4 Height Regulations
5.4.1 No principal structure shall exceed thirty-five (35'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed twentyfive
(25'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point
of the roof structure.
5.4.2 Back and side facades may exceed thirty-five (35'0") feet in height but not more than forty-five (45'0") feet in
height subject to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A) The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of
the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation
or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full
growth in the summer season; and,
B) the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or
other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical
plane of greater than thirty-five (35'0") feet at any point; and,
C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure
for height measurements; and,
D) lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides
for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively
is required or created; and
E) whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further
set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one
(1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 14
F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances
of the lot and its surroundings.
Section 5.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
5.5.1 The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
TABLE 5.5.1
TOTAL AREA
5.0 acres
BUILDABLE AREA
50% total area
FRONTAGE
200 feet
FRONT YARD
50 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
30 foot set-back
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
75% total area
LAKE FRONTAGE
200 feet
A) That portion of a lot considered as the front yard shall be as determined by the City Council.
B) All Residential structures shall be set-back at least one-hundred (100') feet from the ordinary high water level
of the lake. The ordinary high water level of the lake shall be as determined by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources (DNR).
5.5.2 The following structures can be erected within set-backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front
of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:
A) Fences
1) Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent
property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2) All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide
for owner maintenance; and
3) All fences installed within the set-back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent
property.
B) Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 15
SECTION 6 - SINGLE FAMILY EXECUTIVE “RX” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Most of the presently zoned “RX” land in the City of Gem Lake zoning area is developed. Additional new primary structures
within this land use classification will likely be constructed within the range of 3,500 to 10,000 square foot of space, similar to
the existing primary structures now in the rest of this district.
As additional land is considered for rezoning into this classification by planned re-development and subdivision from the “RE”
zoned classification, master planning, clustering and other similar concepts should be used to maximize efficiency of roads and
municipal services within the district. (Refer to pages 5-6 and 5-22 of the Gem Lake 2008 Comprehensive plan for the source
of these details)
Section 6.1 Permitted Uses
6.1.1 Within any “RX” Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used expect for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 5.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 6.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
6.2.1 Within any “RX” Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 5.2 and as regulated therein shall be permitted accessory use,
except as herein amended.
Section 6.3 Conditional & Interim Uses
6.3.1 Within any “RX” Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
Conditional Use Permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 5.3 and as regulated therein, except as herein
amended.
B) Two (2) family dwellings.
6.3.2 Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.
6.3.3 Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm
animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the
following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:
A) the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be
existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands
and with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;
B) the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;
C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall
not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;
D) the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on
the property;
E) such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 16
6.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
6.3.5 Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.
6.3.6 Family Day Care Home
6.3.7 Country clubs, golf courses and other private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities, including swimming
pools; provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located not less than fifty (50') feet from any
other lot in a residential District.
6.3.8 Essential Service Structures
6.3.9 Double Homes
6.3.10 Townhomes and Villas, attached and detached thru the PUD process
Section 6.4 Height Regulations
6.4.1 No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen
(15'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of
the roof structure.
6.4.2 Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject
to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A) The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views
of the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained
vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be
measured at full growth in the summer season; and
B) the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s),
or other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted
vertical plane of greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,
C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the
structure for height measurements; and,
D) lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides
for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet
collectively is required or created; and
E) whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further
set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one
(1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,
F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and
circumstances of the lot and its surroundings.
Section 6.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
6.5.1 The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 17
TABLE 6.5.1
TOTAL AREA
3.0 acres
BUILDABLE AREA
20% total area
FRONTAGE
150 feet
FRONT YARD
40 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
35 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
50% total area
LAKE FRONTAGE
200 feet
A) A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20') feet.
B) That portion of a lot considered as the front yard shall be as determined by the City Council.
C) All Residential structures shall be set back at least one-hundred (100') feet from the ordinary high water level
of the lake and its attendant wetlands. The ordinary high water level of the lake shall be as determined by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
6.5.2 The following structures can be erected within set-backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front
of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:
A) Fences
1) Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent
property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2) All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide
for owner maintenance; and
3) All fences installed within the set-back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent
property.
B) Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 18
SECTION 7 - SINGLE FAMILY “RO” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The existing structures within this zoning district are single family homes found primarily along the edges of the City of Gem
Lake. This district is almost fully developed with single family homes and the Gem Lake Comprehensive plan does not project
or assume any gains in housing units from this Zoning area. It is expected that any new residential construction or redevelopment
in this district would continue to be built in a density of 1 residential unit per acre to maintain the visual feel of the
area and the value of the existing homes.
It is possible that additional areas, along the perimeter major thoroughfares and along the edges of the “RE” and “RX” zoning
districts, could be zoned as “RO” districts to provide diversity of housing. There are also lots within this district that would
allow re-development if multiple adjacent parcels are combined and existing structures moved or demolished. The combined
land could then be subdivided in smaller lots.
If further residences are added in this district, master planning, clustering and similar concepts would be used to maximize the
benefits from community resources such as municipal water and sanitary sewer.
(Refer to pages 5-6, 5.21 and 5-23 of the Germ Lake 2008 Comprehensive plan for the source of the above details)
Section 7.1 Permitted Uses
7.1.1 Within any “RO” Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 6.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
B) The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots less than one (1.0) acre shall not be allowed.
Section 7.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
7.2.1 Within any “RO” Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 6.2, excluding and as regulated therein except as herein
amended.
B) Swimming pools provided such pool is fenced so as to control access and is located not less than fifteen
(15') feet from any other lot in an “R’ District, and subject to Council approval.
Section 7.3 Conditional & Interim Uses
7.3.1 Within any “RO” Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
Conditional Use Permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 6.3 as regulated therein, except as herein
amended.
B) Two-family dwellings.
C) The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots greater than one (1.0) acre.
D) Townhomes or Villas
7.3.2 Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 19
7.3.3 Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm
animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the
following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:
A) the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be
existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and
with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;
B) the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;
C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall
not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;
D) the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on
the property;
E) such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.
7.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
7.3.5 Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.
7.3.6 Family Day Care Home
Section 7.4 Height Regulations
7.4.1 No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen
(15'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of
the roof structure.
7.4.2 Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject
to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A) The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of
the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation
or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full
growth in the summer season; and,
B) the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or
other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical
plane of greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,
C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure
for height measurements; and,
D) lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides
for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively
is required or created; and
E) whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further
set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one
(1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,
F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances
of the lot and its surroundings.
Section 7.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 20
7.5.1 The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
TABLE 7.5.1
TOTAL AREA
1 acre
BUILDABLE AREA
20% total area
FRONTAGE
150 feet
FRONT YARD
40 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
35 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
40% total area
A) A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
7.5.2 The following structures can be erected within set-backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front
of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:
A) Fences
1) Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent
property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2) All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide
for owner maintenance; and
3) All fences installed within the set-back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent
property.
B) Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 21
SECTION 8 – SINGLE FAMILY “RS" RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The existing structures within this zoning district are single family homes found primarily along the edges of the City of Gem
Lake. This district is almost fully developed with single family homes and the Gem Lake Comprehensive plan does not project
or assume any gains in housing units from this Zoning area. It is expected that any new residential construction or redevelopment
in this district would continue to be built with a density of approximately 1 residential unit per acre to maintain
the visual feel of the area and the value of the existing homes.
It is possible that additional areas, along the perimeter major thoroughfares and along the edges of the “RE” and “RX” zoning
districts, could be zoned as “RS” districts to provide diversity of housing. There are also lots within this district that would allow
re-development if multiple adjacent parcels are combined and existing structures moved or demolished. The combined land
could then be subdivided in smaller lots.
If further residences are added in this district, master planning, clustering and similar concepts need to would be used to
maximize the benefits from community resources such as municipal water and sanitary sewer.
(Refer to pages 5-6, 5.21 and 5-23 of the Germ Lake 2008 Comprehensive plan for the source of the above details)
Section 8.1 Permitted Uses
8.1.1 Within any “RS” Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used except for one (1) or more of the
following uses:
A) All uses permitted in Section 7.1 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 8.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
8.2.1 Within any “RS” Zoned Residential District, the following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses:
A) Those uses or structures permitted in Section 7.2 and as regulated therein except as herein amended.
Section 8.3 Conditional & Interim Uses
8.3.1 Within any “RS” Zoned Residential District, no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by
Conditional Use Permit.
A) Those uses or structures listed as Conditional Uses in Section 7.3 and as regulated therein except as herein
amended.
B) Dwelling - Two-family.
C) Townhomes and Villas, attached and detached thru the PUD process
D) The harboring and housing of agricultural animals on lots greater than one (1.0) acre.
8.3.2 Structures with side or rear elevations up to ten (10'0") feet in excess of the standard front building height.
8.3.3 Agricultural Structures, including but not limited to barns, stables, kennels and the like. Structures in which farm
animals or fowl are to be housed shall require a set-back of one hundred (100') feet of any lot line except where the
following conditions may provide for easing the restriction:
A) the structure shall be partially screened from the views from neighboring houses, with said screening to be
existing or planted and maintained vegetation or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands and
with the amount of screening to be measured at full growth in the summer season;
B) the structure shall not be less than one-hundred (100'0") feet from any well, ISTS or neighboring dwelling;
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 22
C) the drainage characteristics of the land shall be such that the concentration of animals and animal waste shall
not cause real or potential pollution or nuisance problems;
D) the design and construction materials of the of the structure shall be consistent with the main dwelling on
the property;
E) such other factors as may be deemed material by the City.
8.3.4 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
8.3.5 Vehicles, including motor homes, campers and trailers, in excess of 7,000 pounds or 20 feet in length.
8.3.6 Family Day Care Home
Section 8.4 Height Regulations
8.4.1 No principal structure shall exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen
(15'0") feet in height measured from the ground six (6'0") feet from the primary front entrance to the highest point of
the roof structure.
8.4.2 Back and side facades may exceed thirty (30'0") feet in height but not more than forty (40'0") feet in height subject
to a Conditional Use Permit which addresses, at a minimum, the following criteria:
A) The facade in question should be partially screened from comparable and reasonable vantage point views of
the neighbors while in their dwelling(s), said screening to be by existing or planted and maintained vegetation
or the natural topography of the lot and surrounding lands with the amount of screening to be measured at full
growth in the summer season; and,
B) the verticality of any facade in question shall be interrupted by roof line(s), deck(s), bow/bay window(s), or
other such three-dimensional architectural feature(s) which preclude the creation of an uninterrupted vertical
plane of greater than thirty (30'0") feet at any point; and,
C) chimneys, weather veins, cupolas, antennas and the like should not be counted as an element of the structure
for height measurements; and,
D) lower level walkout design features may be included only in areas where the natural topography provides
for the design and no artificial topographical build up or grading change in excess of four (4'0") feet collectively
is required or created; and
E) whenever a side or rear elevation exceeds the allowed height for that district, the structure must be further
set back from the side and rear lot lines by the standard set back distance plus two (2'0") feet for every one
(1'0") foot above the standard front height; and,
F) such other factors as the City may determine based upon the special or unique conditions and circumstances
of the lot and its surroundings.
Section 8.5 Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements
8.5.1 The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A)When on-site septic systems will be used for structures constructed in the “RS” zoning district the following
applies:
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 23
TABLE 7.5.1 A)
TOTAL AREA
.75 acre
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area
FRONTAGE
100 feet
FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
40% total area
B) When city sewer is currently available and will be used for the structures constructed in the “RS” zoning
district the following applies:
TABLE 7.5.1 B)
TOTAL AREA
.50 acre
BUILDABLE AREA
75% total area
FRONTAGE
100 feet
FRONT YARD
35 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
15 foot set-back
REAR YARD
25 foot set-back
OPEN SPACE
40% total area
C) A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
8.5.2 The following structures can be erected within set-backs as long as no part of the structure is closer to the front
of the lot than the rear of the principal structure:
A) Fences
1) Fences may only be placed directly on the property line with the written permission of the adjacent
property owner and when maintenance free materials are used; and
2) All other fences may only be installed with adequate set back from adjacent property lines to provide
for owner maintenance; and
3) All fences installed within the set-back area must provide for a finished facade facing adjacent
property.
B) Patios, fireplaces, sheds and pools.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 24
SECTION 9 – GATEWAY “G” DISTRICT
9.1 The intent of the Gem Lake Gateway District (“Gateway” or “G”) is intended to allow for development and redevelopment
of the real property associated with Hoffman Corner and points westward along Ramsey County Road E extending northward
to the border with the zoning districts identified in Sections 5 and 6 of this Ordinance. This area has been the subject of a
visioning study and includes both commercial and residential opportunities as described in the City of Gem Lake Comprehensive
Plan and other city documents. As introduced by the visioning plan and envisioned by the Comprehensive Plan, the Gateway
will emphasize commercial development and/or redevelopment in the Hoffman Corner intersection which traditionally has
been the location of the Gem Lake commercial district. As one moves westward along County Road E, the intent of the Gateway
is to transition into more residential type neighborhoods becoming less dense until it transitions to either the Estate Residential
district or the Executive Residential district.
It may be permissible to apply to rezone the Neighborhood Edge subzone of the G District to existing traditional zoning (RE,
RX, RS, RO) provided all setbacks and area requirements of said sections are met. Any such rezoning may preclude the use of
Planned Unit Development as an option.
9.1.1 Purposes. Specifically, the Gateway zoning district will attempt to:
A) Promote development and redevelopment consistent with the visioning plan for the Gateway area by
encouraging residential uses in conjunction with commercial and expanded recreational activities which in turn
will create an active street life, while enhancing the vitality of businesses and reducing vehicular traffic.
B) Provide for mixed-use development(s) that are carefully planned to promote efficient use of land, parking
and roadway systems.
C) Provide enhanced oversight through conditional use permit provisions, to ensure compatibility of mixed
uses and consistency with the approved master plan for the site.
D) Ensure compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.
E) Provide significant incentives to promote mixed-use redevelopment projects.
F) Encourage sustainable architectural, engineering and landscape design that is implemented by responsive
green construction practices.
G) Preserve natural resources, minimize the carbon footprint of the City, and establish a key zone within Gem
Lake that is respectful of neighboring areas and is instructive for future generations.
H) Encourage pedestrian and bicycle use.
I) Ensure that commercial and residential uses in a development are designed to be compatible with each other.
J) Ensure high standards of site design, spatial relationships, architectural design, building materials and
landscape design.
K) Seek to put in place those areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan (as supported by the master plan) that
includes four “sub-zones”:
1. Neighborhood Edge: Intended for lower density single-family residential housing development to
act as a transition between new mixed-use construction and existing single-family detached structures
on adjacent lands. This subzone in its basic form will accommodate single-family dwellings on larger
lots, or with application of incentives, more compact homes on common larger lots or on compact
lots with enhanced buffers (used in clustering), shared with accessory buildings and generally served
from a front or side driveway. This subzone may be used to accommodate the development of public
open spaces as identified in Section 10 and Section 18.20 of this Ordinance.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 25
2. Neighborhood General: Intended to begin the transition from purely residential use at low densities
to more intensive mixed-use development at the district’s center. This subzone will accommodate a
variety of residential structures at varying densities, and also begin to integrate lower-impact office or
retail activities which complement the residential setting.
3. Neighborhood Mixed Use: Intended to establish a neighborhood focus that is distinguished by
mixed use buildings, together with denser residential options and smaller-scale commercial and office
buildings without residential components. This subzone will accommodate a variety of activities and
services within easy walking distance from homes throughout the District, supporting daily
convenience shopping and personal service needs, and also providing opportunities for public
gathering and social contact.
4. Neighborhood Center: Intended for the most urban conditions within all of the shown mixed use
areas. The mixture of land uses emphasizes ground-floor retail with offices and residential/rental above
(as market acceptance matures) and structures providing commercial space for medium and large–sized
retailers. Street frontages throughout this subzone should be pedestrian-oriented, and the public space
should be defined by placing building facades at the edge of the sidewalk. Neighborhood Center land
that abuts other subzones on the north and west sides will be carefully planned to ensure lower-density
buildings. Where developers insert a minimum 200-foot buffer at existing non-Gateway residential
properties, or especially along the extreme eastern edge of this subzone, the City may allow as a
conditional use multifamily housing, including townhomes, row houses, or apartment buildings three
stories or less in height.
9.2 Generally Applicable Regulations
9.2.1 Relationship to other portions of this Ordinance and other City Ordinances. The requirements of this Section may
conflict with or duplicate some portions of this Ordinance. Any such conflict, when it relates to the use of land in the
Gateway District, shall be resolved in favor of the language in this Section. All other provisions of this Ordinance apply
within the Gateway “G” District, including provisions for Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Institutional Overlay.
PUD or institutional overlay proposals may be used in combination with or in place of the regulations and procedures
set forth in this Section.
All other Gem Lake ordinances which relate to the construction of buildings and use of land included in the
Consolidated Land Use Ordinance and other land used Ordinances (including but not limited to the Adult Use
Ordinance, Building Code Adoption, and Pawnbroker Ordinance) apply within the Gateway District.
9.2.2 Administration, Conditional Uses, Variance, and Appeal.
A) The Building Type standards are intended to be employed and used to entitle the construction of a building
upon land in the same manner that listing a use as “permitted” entitled land in other Zones defined by this
Ordinance. The processing of conditional use permits, variances, amendments, platted subdivisions and other
land use applications which may necessarily accompany an application for building approval in the Gateway
District shall be processed simultaneously with the review of the Gateway District proposal, whenever possible.
B) All new construction, remodeling or expansion (except for the remodeling or expansion of single-family
detached dwellings) within the Gateway District requires a Zoning Compliance Permit. The Zoning
Compliance Permit is indefinite in duration and the entitlements stated on the permit shall run with the land.
A Zoning Compliance Permit is granted after determination that the proposal complies with all applicable
standards set forth within this Section (Thoroughfare Standards, Civic Space Standards, Building Type
Standards, Parking, and Design Standards). As set forth below, the final approval for the Zoning Compliance
Permit will come from the City Council for proposals which require Council approval in some form (such as a
platted subdivision or conditional use permit), and the Zoning Administrator for proposals which do not
otherwise require Council review (such as single buildings or minor subdivisions without variances).
C) For the purpose of providing administrative review and processing of development proposals within the
Gateway District, the City Council hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to serve as the primary point of
contact between the City and applicants for zoning approval. Upon receipt of an application for land use in the
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 26
Gateway District, the Zoning Administrator shall ensure that the application is complete within five (5) business
days of receipt. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall return all materials with an
explanation of what is required to make the application complete. When the application is determined to be
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall distribute copies of all submitted documents to the City’s appointed
consultants in architecture, engineering and planning. The Zoning Administrator shall obtain written comment
on the application from each consultant before the scheduled Planning Commission review of the application,
or before making an administrative approval where authorized.
D) If a City consultant identifies a failure to meet the standards of this Section, the Zoning Administrator may
not administratively approve a permit for the proposal. The Zoning Administrator shall meet with the applicant
to attempt to resolve the deficiency, and re-submit any revised or clarified proposal to the consulting
professional who identified the problem for review. If the consultant agrees that the deficiency is corrected, the
Administrator may issue the permit.
E) For applications on a City Council approval track, the Zoning Administrator shall also attempt to resolve
any deficiencies noted in consultant review with the applicant prior to the final Council action on the proposal.
The Planning Commission and City Council may choose to act on the proposal within their reasonably used
discretion, even if the matter is not resolved prior to final action.
F) All applicants seeking a Zoning Compliance Permit must submit a development plan with their application.
G) Conditional Uses. All elements of a development plan which require conditional use permit approval may
be combined into a single conditional use permit application for the proposal, with a single applicable CUP fee
for review and processing in addition to other required application fees. Portions of proposed buildings which
may be used for permitted or conditional uses need not apply for conditional use approval as part of the
development application, unless the tenant, occupant or owner of the space is known at the time of application
and will need a conditional use permit. All applications for conditional use permit approval shall otherwise be
processed in the same manner as other applications for conditional use permit approval, using the procedures
and criteria stated in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance.
H) Any variances requested in connection with a Gateway District development proposal shall be processed in
the same manner as variances from other Sections of this Ordinance, using the procedures and criteria stated
in Section 17.4 of this Ordinance
I) Any applicant aggrieved by a decision, mandate or other action of the Zoning Administrator may appeal the
matter in the manner provided by Section 17.7 of this Ordinance.
9.2.3 Existing Uses and Structures at Adoption of Chapter.
The standards generally applicable under Section 16.3 of this Ordinance shall apply to existing structures and uses
located within the Gateway District upon the adoption of this Section, or existing on land later added to the Gateway
District by re-mapping on the date a new zoning map becomes effective. An applicant seeking a building permit to
materially alter or expand a legally nonconforming structure within the Gateway District shall submit a partial
development plan, containing information as requested by the Zoning Administrator to allow review of the alteration
or expansion’s compliance with Design Review requirements set forth at 9.8 and the Connectivity Requirements set
forth at 9.5.3.
9.2.4 Incentives.
The City Council may establish incentives which apply to encourage certain types of land use or preservation activity
within the Gateway District. The Council may set the incentives by adopting a separate ordinance which identifies clearly
the item or items the Council seeks to encourage, the allowance or allowances which the Council is willing to offer
applicants, and sufficient criteria to allow the Zoning Administrator and City consultants to evaluate and score
applications seeking to apply the incentives and allowances. The following text is an example only:
The City of Gem Lake seeks to improve transit options within the City. Proposals which incorporating public
transit options into an overall development plan will receive enhanced civic space credit for the space dedicated to
the public transit option. Space bonuses will apply as follows:
Bus waiting area, uncovered: 2% bonus
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 27
Bus waiting area, covered: 4%
Bus waiting area, integrated w/ building: 8%
Bus Rapid Transit access: 10%
Rail access or access to station: 10%
Rail transit station: 30%
Intermodal transit center: 50%
Proposed spaces must meet the criteria for public transit facilities established by the Metropolitan Council in
order to qualify for space bonuses. The City Council shall approve all requests for transit incentive bonuses.
The Zoning Administrator shall consult with the City Engineer to review and make recommendations on the
request for incentive treatment within an application.
The ability to alter or change incentives may not be used to allow a variance from the standards of this Section or this
Ordinance overall. An ordinance establishing or modifying available incentives shall not take effect until 45 days after
adoption and publication, and shall not apply to any applications filed with the City prior to the effective date. The
ordinance creating incentives may, at the City Council’s discretion, provide a method for an applicant to propose an
incentive as part of a development application in lieu of only seeking a modification of dimension or placement
standards through amendment or variance.
9.3 Placement of Subzones and Integration with Neighboring Zones
9.3.1 The Gateway district is composed of four sub-zones:
A) Neighborhood Edge
B) Neighborhood General
C) Neighborhood Mixed-Use
D) Neighborhood Center
9.3.2 Mapping requirements. The City Council shall assign the sub-zones to land included within the Gateway District.
The Council shall assign land to each sub-zone without reference to existing lot lines or tax parcels contained within
the Gateway District. In assigning land to sub-zones, the Council shall at a minimum:
A) assign all land lying within 200 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or Executive
Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Edge; and
B) not assign any land lying within 450 feet of a developed parcel zoned Estate Residential (RE) or Executive
Residential (RX) as Neighborhood Center.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 28
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 29
9.4 Thoroughfare standards. Streets, sidewalks and other pedestrian or bicycle ways within dedicated rights-of-way shall be
considered and designed together as “thoroughfares.” The street and pedestrian circulation system in any development plan
shall be used to organize and define the community, acting as functional and visual links between neighborhoods, the
neighborhood center, civic and commercial areas and open space. The circulation system shall be based on a defined,
interconnected network to provide adequate traffic capacity, provide connected pedestrian and bicycle routes, control through
traffic, limit lot access to streets of lower traffic volumes, and promote safe and efficient mobility through the community.
9.4.1 General street design principles. The following principles should be followed in street layout and design:
A) Local street lengths should be short.
B) Streets should be designed with gentle curves and changes in grade to break the sight line of the road into
smaller visual elements and cause drivers to slow down.
C) Traffic calming features such as curb extensions, traffic circles, and medians should be used to encourage
slow traffic speeds.
9.4.2 Thoroughfare Types Permitted by Subzone. The thoroughfare design in a given area of the Gateway District is
determined in part by the subzone to which the land is assigned. Right-of-way dedication and the use of the right-ofway
is set forth in the Thoroughfare Type diagrams at Figures 2 and 3. The presence of trees within a diagram indicates
a requirement to plant “street trees” within the indicated area. A development plan’s thoroughfares shall comply with
the dimensional and layout standards applicable to each thoroughfare type. The following Thoroughfare Types are
allowed in each sub-zone:
i) Neighborhood Edge: A, B, Alley;
ii) Neighborhood General: A, B, C*, Alley, Boulevard
(Type C only allowed within 250’ of Mixed-Use sub-zone boundary);
iii) Neighborhood Mixed-Use: C, D, Alley, Boulevard;
iv) Neighborhood Center: D, Alley, Boulevard; Scheuneman Road and Hoffman Road should be treated as
Type D thoroughfares in plans.
(May also propose a Plaza with a thoroughfare as regulated by Figure 5).
NOTE: County Road E and Highway 61 are not included within these Thoroughfare Types and should not be used or depicted
as “frontage” for any Building Type when using this Code.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 30
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 31
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 32
9.5 Civic Space Standards.
The City of Gem Lake’s visioning plan requires well-planned and functional open spaces, preservation areas, parks and
gathering places, which are generally referred to in this Section as “civic space.” An application’s development plan shall
dedicate or otherwise set aside sufficient land for public civic space. At a minimum, 10% of the total acreage in development
shall be identified on the plans as Civic Space. The acreage of wetlands protected by state statute and any wetland buffer
required by a governing watershed district shall be excluded from calculations of “total acreage in development” and from the
calculation of the 10% dedication to civic space. A Civic Space shall conform to one or more of the Civic Space Templates at
Figures 4 and 5. The Civic Space Type used to design a given Civic Space shall be indicated on any plan or diagram intended
to show compliance with this section.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 33
9.5.1 No cash payment in lieu of civic space may be approved for applications within the Gateway District.
9.5.2 The minimum width required for any Building Type under Figures 6 through 15 may be reduced by up to 30% if
the area which would have been contained within that building lot before the reduction is transferred to a Civic Space
located within 1/4 mile of the lot.
9.5.3 For Civic Spaces which include at least one automotive traffic lane or access, the area of the traffic lane or access
is not applied toward the 10% minimum requirement. Areas within the Civic Space, areas within a thoroughfare or
shared parking can apply toward the requirement if designed in conformity with applicable Thoroughfare or Building
Type templates and the Parking regulations in Section 9.9.F. Plaza
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 34
9.6 Building Type Standards.
9.6.1 New construction in the Gateway District shall conform to one of the following Building Types:
A) Single Family Detached House (Figure 6)
B) Single-Family Attached Housing
1. Twin Home (Figure 7)
2. Townhouse/Rowhouse (Figure 8)
C) Apartment/Condominium (Figure 9)
D) Bungalow Court (Figure 10)
E) Live/Work Unit (Figure 11)
E) Mixed Use Building (Figure 12)
F) Commercial
1. Retail/Office Building (Figure 13)
2. Single Use Building (Figure 14)
a. With Liner Building (Figure 14a)
b. With Collar Uses (Figure 14b)
3. Auto-Oriented Layout (Figure 15)
9.6.2 Use of Building Type Templates. Figures 6 through 15 contain all regulatory information governing the dimensions
of lots and the dimensions, setbacks, height, mass, placement and use of buildings in the District. The City’s review of
a development application shall primarily apply the information contained in the applicable Building Type Templates.
Terms and concepts used within the Building Type Templates are further defined as follows:
A) Frontage Street. The Thoroughfare Type on which the Building Type may be placed. The building must be
oriented toward the frontage street and have its primary entrance on the permitted frontage street, unless an
alternative is allowed by the terms of the Building Type chosen. “Width” is measured along frontage street;
“depth” measured perpendicular to the frontage street. For purposes of placing buildings, Highway 61 and
County Road E are not frontage streets, and the property boundary with those roads’ rights-of-way should be
aligned as the rear lot line to the greatest extent possible. Parking lots may abut the Highway 61 or County Road
E rights-of-way, subject to the landscaping requirements of the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance.
B) Height by Story. The permitted height of any building is determined by the number of stories allowed and
built. The height of each story is determined by the space between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, or the ceiling (peaked roof) or roof (flat roof) above for top stories. A story
must have a minimum height of 12 feet and a maximum height of 15 feet; buildings with assigned ground-floor
retail and commercial shall have a ground-floor height of at least 15 feet and no more than 20 feet. The top of
a peaked roof is limited to the average story height of the building, measured from the ceiling of the topmost
floor to the highest gable of the roof. Half-stories (finishing the space, if any, between the roof and the topmost
full-story ceiling) are permitted for all building types in all subzones.
C) Building types with specified height limits shall be measured from the average elevation of the sidewalk on
which the building’s primary entrance is located and the coping of a flat roof or the deck line of a mansard
roof.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 35
D) Basements. All building types are permitted to have basements if it is technically feasible to build basements
on the chosen building site. A walk-out basement is considered a “story” for height regulation, but other kinds
of basements are not counted against the height of the building.
E) Footprint. The building footprint is the area occupied by the horizontal projection of the building’s first
floor, excluding the floor area of attached garages and porches or decks built as allowed encroachments into
setbacks. Within the building envelope defined in the Building Type Template, the horizontal projection of
upper floors may not extend more than ten feet in any direction over the footprint, except for portions of the
upper floor built directly over an attached garage.
F) Mass, Ratio. When used on a Building Type Template, the percentages listed in the Mass table define the
maximum area allowed the horizontal projection of one floor in relation to the area of the horizontal projection
of the building footprint and attached garage, if any.
G) Building Placement Diagram. The diagram on each Building Type Template provides regulatory information
on the setbacks, build-to lines (lines on which some or all of the building façade must be placed), the “building
envelope” in which the footprint may be placed, frontage types, permitted encroachments of porches, decks
and balconies, placement of accessory structures, and other items which regulate the built environment on a
given lot.
9.6.3 Combination of Building Types on Single Lot. The Building Type templates regulate lot size, but it is not required
that each building be on a separately conveyed lot. If multiple building types are proposed, the dimensional standards
should be applied as though the lot were being divided. Any total surface coverage or building footprint standards may
be combined among all of the buildings included on a particular lot.
9.6.4 New Building Types. New building types may be proposed in the manner of other amendments to the Zoning
Code using the procedure in Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. A proposal must contain all information included in existing
analogous Building Types, including but not limited to the dimensional standards, use designations, and frontage
requirements.
9.6.5 Use Regulation in the Gateway District. The Gateway District’s regulatory focus is first upon the form of each
building and its relation to the surrounding environment. This section regulates the use of space within buildings, except
to the extent that any structure or land use existed as a legally nonconforming use prior to the adoption of this Section,
as a matter secondary to the built form. The use of land in the District is regulated by the Building Type Templates and
is directly related to the building form.
A) General Terms and Permitted Uses. The Building Type Templates assign categories of uses to certain floors
of a building. When multiple use categories are listed and separated by a slash (such as “office/retail”), the uses
may be combined on the floor at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. When multiple use
categories are stated as alternatives (such as “office or residential”) the floor may only be assigned one category
of use, at the discretion of the owner or occupant of the building. Building Type Templates may also contain
specific exclusions or limitations which modify the application of a use category to the particular building. The
categorical terms are defined as follows:
Residential - Premises for long-term human dwelling.
Office - Non-residential premises used for administrative, clerical, professional or similar activities. Office as
used in this section includes medical and dental offices used by five (5) or fewer medical principals (doctor,
dentist, chiropractor or similar professional).
Retail - Premises for the sale of merchandise and food service. For purposes of this Section, banks with teller
service are considered “retail” instead of “office.” Athletic clubs and fitness centers that are not the primary
use of the building space are considered a “retail” use. Certain personal service businesses are considered
“retail” if not the primary use of a building: barbershop/beauty salon; clothing rental and dry cleaning pickup
(but not on-site processing); and tailor shops.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 36
Commercial - Premises for the conduct of the following activities, which are not included within the meaning
of “office” or “retail” for purposes of this Section: Athletic club/fitness center (when primary or only use of
building space); business school or trade school; veterinary clinic; funeral home; hotel; recreational primary use
(such as a bowling alley); cabinet and carpentry shops, heating, plumbing or electrical sales and service; printing
shop, upholstery shop, warehousing. Conditional uses of space assigned as “commercial” are: automotive repair
and service (including gas stations); car wash; light industrial uses which manufacture, process, store and
distribute foods and materials not likely to create offensive noise, odors, vibrations, dust smoke, heat, glare or
other objectionable influences and are in general dependent upon raw materials refined elsewhere.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 37
FIGURE 6
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 38
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 39
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 40
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 41
FIGURE 10
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 42
FIGURE 11
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 43
FIGURE 12
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 44
FIGURE 13
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 45
FIGURE 14
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 46
FIGURE 14a
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 47
FIGURE 14b
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 48
FIGURE 15
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 49
FIGURE 16
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 50
FIGURE 17
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 51
9.7 Proposals for Undeveloped Land or for Large Redevelopment. An applicant shall follow the following procedure when
seeking approval for construction upon land undeveloped at the time this Section was adopted, or upon any plan requiring the
platted subdivision of land or the construction of new streets. Proposals which include a major subdivision of land shall
proceed through the platting procedure mandated by the Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance, and shall submit the materials
requested herein in addition to the materials required to support the application for subdivision.
9.7.1 Pre-application Meeting. Before making a formal application for a land use plan which will involve the creation of
new streets or platted subdivision of land, the potential applicant shall prepare sketch plans and preliminary descriptions
which reflect the six items addressed below and any additional items required by Section 12.1 of the Subdivision
Ordinance. The applicant shall schedule and attend the pre-application meeting described in Section 11.1 of the
Subdivision Ordinance, in which the participants shall address all of the following areas:
A) Subdivision plat and related infrastructure;
B) Thoroughfare network and civic space;
C) Building Type placement and disposition;
D) Proposed Design of completed buildings;
E) Potential incentives, if any, which may apply to the proposal; and
F) Likelihood that environmental review under Ordinance 92 is necessary.
9.7.2 Submission of Development Plan. An applicant shall submit an application for a Zoning Compliance Permit and
supporting documentation to the City which addresses all components of the proposed development. The applicant
shall submit twelve (12) sets of all applications and required supporting materials in forms acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator, including:
A) Development Plan. All attachments to development plans shall be drawn to scale and provide the following
information, unless otherwise specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator:
1. A vicinity map, to include locations of any public streets, railroads, major streams or rivers and other
major features within 500 feet of the site.
2. Boundaries and dimensions shown graphically, along with a written legal description of the property.
3. Present and proposed topography of the site and adjacent areas within 50 feet by contour lines at
intervals of no more than five feet, and directional arrows showing proposed flow of stormwater runoff
from the site.
4. The location of existing and proposed structures, with height and gross floor area noted.
5. Elevation views of all proposed buildings and structures, with building materials and proposed colors
noted.
6. Phasing plans, where applicable.
7. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed curb cuts, aisles, off-street parking and loading
spaces, and walkways.
8. Location, height and material for screening walls and fences, and other screening devices.
9. Location of all existing and proposed water and sewer facilities and storm drainage systems.
10. Existing and proposed public streets or rights-of-way, easements, or other reservations of land on
the site.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 52
11. Location and method of screening of outdoor trash storage areas.
12. Location and size of all proposed signage.
13. Location and height of proposed lighting facilities.
B) Subdivision Plat supporting data as required by Section 12 of the Subdivision Ordinance (if subdivision
is proposed);
C) Grading and Filling Plan;
D) Tree Preservation Plan;
E) Sediment and Erosion Control Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, as applicable; and
F) Landscaping Plan.
9.7.3 Thoroughfare Network.
A) Orientation of Thoroughfares. The orientation of streets and pedestrian access should enhance open spaces
and prominent buildings and provide for the maximum number of lots with southern exposure. All streets shall
terminate at other streets or at public land, except as specified below:
i) Type A thoroughfares that terminate in cul-de-sacs may be permitted only when topography prevents
the use of loop streets.
ii) Any thoroughfare may terminate in a stub street when the stubs act as connections to future phases
of the development or adjacent undeveloped areas. A stub requires a dedication of public right-of-way
or similar title restriction encumbering the area on the property from the closest intersection to the
phase line or property boundary over which the thoroughfare would run if built out.
B) Street Layout.
i) No lot shall be more than 550 feet from a street intersection. A future intersection proposed as part
of a later phase of the same development may be used to meet this requirement. Local streets shall be
designed to limit and slow through traffic by narrower roadways, short lengths and other geometric
configurations.
ii) Low volume streets (Types A and B) should be aligned to form three-way intersections when
possible. Three-way intersections create an inherent right-of-way assignment (the through street
receives precedence), which significantly reduces accidents without the use of traffic controls.
iii) A low volume street that intersects a higher-order street (Types C, D and Boulevard), should be
aligned with another street to form a four-way intersection, which can easily be regulated by a stop sign
or other traffic control device.
iv) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. No street shall intersect another at an
angle of less than 75 degrees.
v) The roadway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius
of 20 feet for low-volume streets and 30 feet for intersections involving higher-order streets.
a. Where the intersection of low-volume streets will be controlled by the placement of stop
signs, the radius may be reduced to 15 feet.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 53
b. The intersection of a low-volume street and an alley shall be rounded by a tangential arc
with a minimum radius of 10 feet.
vi) Pedestrian crossing distances at intersections shall be shortened to the greatest extent possible, using
curb bump-outs to cover space assigned to parking in other parts of the thoroughfare (see Figure 5,
Boulevard, for example), or similar methods to reduce the average time required for a pedestrian to
cross the travel lanes of a thoroughfare.
vii) Clear sight triangles shall be maintained at intersections, unless controlled by traffic signal devices.
a. For Type C and D streets intersecting low-volume streets the minimum required clear sight
distance shall be 120 feet.
b. For a Type C or D street intersecting another Type C or D street the minimum required
clear sight distance shall be 130 feet.
c. For any street intersecting either County Road E or U.S. Highway 61, the minimum required
clear sight distance is subject to the standards of Ramsey County or the Minnesota Department
of Transportation.
d. For Type A and B streets intersecting any other streets the minimum required clear sight
distance shall be 15 feet.
C) Pedestrian Network. Pedestrian sidewalks, paths and walkways shall be provided within the community and
shall constitute an integral element of the overall site design. They shall provide safe, convenient and attractive
connections to, from and among community focal points, including residential neighborhoods, town and
neighborhood centers, transit stops, schools, parks and recreation areas, municipal buildings, and other public
facilities.
i) Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets, except for residential access lanes (Type
A streets), which may have sidewalks on one side.
ii) Pedestrian paths shall be landscaped to provide scale, enclosure and shade.
iii) Intersections of pedestrian paths with streets shall be designed with clearly defined edges.
Crosswalks shall be well-lit and defined with contrasting paving materials or striping.
iv) Sidewalks and paths shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width in residential areas, and 10 feet within
commercial and civic areas, where practicable. Where space for the minimum width is not available,
the maximum practicable width shall be used.
v) Within lots, walkways shall provide pedestrian access through parking areas or open space to
building entries. Such walkways shall be located and aligned to directly and continuously connect areas
and points of pedestrian origin and destination. Such walkways shall be at least 5 feet in width and be
delineated by grade separation, planters, or alternate paving material.
vi) Where the primary pedestrian access to a building or site crosses an internal traffic lane or other
automotive access, the pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place priority on pedestrian access and
safety. The material and layout shall be continuous as the pedestrian access crosses, with a break in
continuity of the automotive paving and not in the pedestrian access way.
vii) All sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be handicapped accessible. Curb cuts and ramps shall be
located at convenient, safe locations for the physically disabled, bicyclists, and people pushing strollers
or carts. The location and design of curb cuts and ramps shall meet the requirements of County and
State Americans with Disabilities Act ramp standards, and shall avoid crossing or directing pedestrian
and bicycle traffic through loading areas, drive-in lanes, and solid waste storage and collection areas.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 54
viii) Where transit service is available or planned, site plans shall provide pleasant and convenient access
to transit stops. Where transit shelters are provided, they shall be placed in locations that promote
security through natural surveillance and visibility, and shall be well-lighted and weather-protected.
9.7.4 Civic Space Placement. The plans should identify the 10% or more of the total acreage in development which will
be developed as Civic Space. Layout and relation to surrounding thoroughfares should be clearly depicted on the plans.
If a development is proposed in phases, the 10% Civic Space requirement shall be calculated for the development as a
whole, instead of for each phase. The apportionment of Civic Space dedication may be unbalanced among the proposed
phases, though any initial phase of a development must include at least one Civic Space in proportion to the size of the
phase. Phased development plans which propose to meet over half of the Civic Space requirement in a second or later
phase must include a timetable which shows the development dedicating or building at least half of the required Civic
Space within 3 years of initial development approval.
9.7.5 Building Placement Standards. The types of buildings proposed in the plan and their placement within the property
is governed by the Building Type Standards set forth at Section 9.6 and depicted in Figures 6 through 15. The plan must
depict the types of buildings intended for construction, their proposed disposition, any incentives sought by virtue of
the intended design of any buildings or arrangement of building types, and any special requirements or requests for
variance required to implement the building placement plan.
9.7.6 Design Review. The Zoning Administrator shall refer all applications requiring evaluation of the Design Standards
in 9.10 to the City Architect. The Architect shall review the development plan and supporting documents for
conformance with the Design Review guidelines at Section 9.10 and provide written comment to the Zoning
Administrator. If any deficiencies are noted by the City Architect in the design when the applying the Design Standards,
the Architect shall describe the deficiency and suggest at least one complying alternative.
9.7.7 Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time of development
application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and their effect on the overall
Development Plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically delegated within the ordinance creating
the applicable incentive. The Zoning Administrator shall confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by
ordinance or at the Administrator’s best discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make
recommendations to the approving authority. If incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall
reach agreement on the application of incentives prior to submitting the application to the Planning Commission. If
any applied-for incentives are recommended for rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of the plans to
incorporate the recommendation without incurring new application fees; the applicant electing to re-submit plans shall
submit a written statement agreeing to an extension of applicable timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. §
462.358, and other applicable laws and ordinances. The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the
re-submitted materials within the timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any
applicable time period.
9.8 Plans for Re-development of Single Lots or Small Subdivisions.
An applicant shall follow the following procedure when seeking approval for new building construction (not an addition or
expansion to an existing building) upon land which was developed at the time of the application, either requires no subdivision
or is eligible for minor subdivision approval, and for which no new streets are required. Such applications should be processed
for a Zoning Compliance Permit administratively by the Zoning Administrator unless the proposal requires conditional use
permit or variance approval.
9.8.1 Suggested Presentation. The plans for this type of development shall use the Building Type templates at Figures 6
through 15, as allowed by the sub-zone in which the property lies. Plans should introduce new lot lines, if any, and then
depict the placement and disposition of the proposed building type for each lot.
9.8.2 Required Submissions. The applicant shall submit four (4) sets of the application materials listed in 9.7.2. The
Zoning Administrator may allow the applicant to omit certain items if it is clear that they are not applicable to the overall
proposal. In all circumstances, the proposal shall include the elements required for review under Sections 9.7.5 (Building
Type) and 9.7.6 (Design).
9.8.3 Connectivity requirements. While improvements to an existing roadway are not required, plans under this
subsection must indicate how the proposed construction would relate to the roadway if it were reconstructed in
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 55
accordance with the requirements of Section 9.7.3. Proposals under this Section 9.8 involving more than one lot shall
comply with Section 9.7.3(C). Single-lot proposals must indicate design incorporating the requirements of 9.7.3(C), but
only must build the improvements when the adjacent lots on the same side of the right-of-way also have built such
improvements or have been approved for construction under this Section.
9.8.4 Evaluation of Incentives. Any incentives created by the City Council and in effect at the time of development
application may be sought by the applicant. The incentive items and allowances, and their effect on the overall
development plan, shall be approved by the City Council, unless specifically delegated within the ordinance creating the
applicable incentive. The request for incentive approval does not require City Council approval of the entire plan. The
Zoning Administrator shall confer with at least one City consultant, as directed by ordinance or at the Administrator’s
best discretion, in order to evaluate the proposed incentives and make recommendations to the approving authority. If
incentives are applied for, the applicant and Zoning Administrator shall reach agreement on the application of incentives
prior to submitting the application to the Planning Commission. If any applied-for incentives are recommended for
rejection, the applicant may elect to re-submit portions of the plans to incorporate the recommendation without
incurring new application fees; the applicant electing to re-submit plans shall submit a written statement agreeing to an
extension of applicable timelines under Minn. Stat. § 15.99, Minn. Stat. § 462.358, and other applicable laws and
ordinances. The extension request shall be indefinite; the City shall process the resubmitted materials within the
timelines specified by law, treating the date of re-submission as the first day of any applicable time period.
9.8.5 Administrative Approval. If the application satisfies all applicable criteria, the Zoning Administrator shall approve
the Zoning Compliance Permit. The applicant shall execute a Development Agreement with the City prior to the receipt
of any building permit under the plan.
9.9 Parking Regulations.
9.9.1 On-street parking, either diagonal (angled) or parallel, shall be provided along all streets other than Alleys. Parking
is indicated on the Thoroughfare standards at Figures 2 and 3. Where angle parking is permitted or required, the parking
may be forward or reverse angle. Parking spaces (other than handicapped spaces) on thoroughfares and on-grade
parking lots shall be no wider than 9 feet. Plans for new development and other major subdivisions are encouraged to
plan thoroughfares and civic spaces to provide a significant portion of the parking required for planned buildings. Onstreet
parking within 1/8 of a mile of a building entrance may be applied toward that building’s applicable parking
requirement.
9.9.2 A parking plan shall be included for all buildings, indicating how the parking requirement for each proposed
building is met through on-street parking, shared off-street parking or dedicated off-street parking. Reductions in the
number of spaces required by the Building Type regulations may be approved if the proposal is supported by a parking
study specific to the proposed building(s) and likely tenants. Shared parking proposals are encouraged and should
reference the Urban Land Institute’s Shared Parking Guidelines or similar guidance. Plans including off-street parking
and loading facilities within the Gateway District shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and City Planner. If, upon
review, either consultant determines that an alternative to the proposed parking plan is desirable, it will recommend an
alternate parking plan to the Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the City Council for final
review and approval.
9.9.3 The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require a contribution of land or money
toward community parking facilities in lieu of providing off-street parking facilities on the property to be developed.
9.9.4 On-grade parking areas within lots are prohibited within any front yard setback or in front of the principal building.
On-grade parking areas shall be located at the side or the rear of buildings in mid-block areas, and may not be located
within 50 feet of the intersection of any public streets (excluding Alleys). Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance
with the Gem Lake Landscaping Ordinance.
9.9.5 Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of interlocking pavers or similar materials is strongly encouraged
for areas that serve low-impact parking needs, such as remote parking lots, parking areas for periodic uses and parking
in natural amenity areas.
9.9.6 Bicycle Parking. Parking plans shall include designed space and facilities for bicycle parking, at a ratio of 1 bicycle
parking space for each 4 residential units or 20 required automobile spaces. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 56
within fifty (50) feet of building entrances and shall be visible from the uses they serve. They shall not be located so as
to impede pedestrian or automobile traffic flow or to cause damage to plants and trees from bicycle traffic. The facilities
shall be of permanent construction, attached to the ground, and designed to allow the bicycle frame and both wheels to
be securely locked to the parking structure. Facilities shall be at least two feet in width and six feet in length, and be
placed to allow a minimum of five feet of back-out or maneuver space.
9.10 Design Review Standards.
The guidelines established in this section are for the purpose of promoting quality development that is attractive, convenient
and compatible with surrounding uses. These guidelines are intended to be general in nature and not to restrict creativity, variety
or innovation. However, unless site characteristics or conditions dictate otherwise, Gem Lake’s expectation is that these
guidelines be adhered to. In cases where building and site design standards are specific to Building Types, those standards are
noted within the Building Type Template.
9.10.1 Site layout guidelines.
A) Site design shall incorporate existing topography and natural features, such as hillsides, wooded areas and
greenways. Important vistas and viewpoints, both from the site and into the site, should be protected and
enhanced.
B) Building arrangement. When multiple buildings are proposed for a site, care should be taken to provide
maximum street exposure for all buildings.
C) Service and docking facilities. Loading, delivery and service bays should be oriented away from existing
residences and public streets. When this is impractical, service and docking areas shall be screened from view
through the provision of walls, fencing or landscaping.
D) Drive-through facilities, where permitted, shall be designed with safe and easily understood traffic patterns
and shall provide sufficient stacking space, based on requirements of Section 9.9. Drive-through windows
should not face public streets; and loudspeakers should not create nuisances for adjacent properties.
E. Shadowing. Where possible, buildings shall be located so that they minimize shadowing on adjacent
properties. A sun and shadow study may be required for any building that is more than 2 ½ stories or 35 feet
in height.
9.10.2. Building placement – Nonresidential and Mixed uses. At least 70 percent of the front facade of any building shall
be located on the front build-to line as indicated by the Building Type Template (with the exception of a “dooryard”
layout as indicated on the template’s layout diagram). The placement of buildings shall reinforce the street wall, maximize
natural surveillance and visibility, enhance the character of the surrounding area and facilitate pedestrian access and
circulation. Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building or use served. The City Council,
with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement, provided that any adverse
effects shall be mitigated by a masonry wall, decorative fence or planted materials, between 38 and 46 inches in height,
which reinforces the street wall.
9.10.3. Building placement – Residential-only uses. Buildings shall be located so that the front doors of the building or
individual units face the public street rather than the interior of the site, unless a courtyard layout is authorized on the
Template for the particular building. Parking areas and garages larger than 3 cars shall be located to the rear or interior
of the site, or underground. The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to
this requirement when one or more of the following occurs:
A) The proposed building has primary or corner frontage on a Type C or Type D street.
B) Commercial buildings are located across the street from the proposed building.
C) Unusual or unique site conditions make the requirement impractical.
9.10.4. Building height and scale. In addition to the height and mass instructions contained within the Building Type
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 57
Templates, the height and scale of new buildings shall be related to the prevailing scale of surrounding development
and shall be compatible with surrounding buildings in roof form and pitch. Larger buildings, where permitted, shall be
designed to reflect the same architectural massing and style as other buildings built or proposed within a two-block area.
If no other single, large buildings are present or proposed in the area, then the facade of the new building shall
be designed to reflect the form, mass and shape of several contiguous smaller buildings within the two block area.
The City Council, with the City Architect’s recommendation, may approve alternatives to this requirement if a larger
building is proposed, to reduce its apparent size by dividing the building mass into smaller sections, including:
A) Stepping back or extending a portion of the building façade;
B) Emphasizing architectural elements, including windows and entries; and
C) Emphasizing architectural elements of the roof, including dormers, chimneys and gables.
9.10.5. Building facades. Building facades shall provide architectural detail and shall contain windows at the ground level
in order to create visual interest and maximize outdoor surveillance and visibility. Exterior materials and appearance
shall be compatible with surrounding buildings.
A) Front Facades and Entries.
1. Primary entries to residential buildings shall be emphasized through the use of architectural features
such as porches and roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details that express the importance of
the entrance. At least 20 percent of the first floor facade that faces a public street or sidewalk shall
consist of windows and doors. Windows shall be distributed in a more or less even manner. Plans
should avoid placing garage doors and openings on the front façade of a building. If the garage door
or opening is placed on the front façade, it shall not be located on the building’s leading edge facing
the street, but shall be set back at least six feet from the front line of the building or an approved front
yard encroachment (such as a porch, or a deck over a tuck-under garage).
2. Primary entries to nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be emphasized through the use of
architectural features such as roofs, recessions into the facade, or other details that express the
importance of the entrance. At least 60 percent of the first floor facade that faces a public street or
sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly-tinted glass that allow views into and out of the
building. The windows shall be distributed in a more or less even manner. The use of traditional
window dimensions and a one-over-one or two-over-one sash arrangement is strongly preferred.
Buildings shall have entrances to a street or public open space placed no more than sixty (60) feet apart.
Buildings are strongly encouraged to use awnings on the front façade, particularly over the main entry.
The awning should be compatible in style, material and color to the rest of the building, and the width
of the awning should fit the geometry of the building façade. There may be signage on the end panel
or front valance of an awning, proportional to the space available. The installation of the awning should
not hide any architectural detail or character features of the building.
B) Side and Rear Facades. The exterior materials and appearance of the rear and side walls of any building shall
be similar to and compatible with the front of the building. Where the façade is visible from a public street or
right-of-way or any residential district and concrete-block construction is used, the façade shall use integrally
colored block or textured block. Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public street, public
open space, or abutting property may not exceed sixty feet (60’) in length without significant visual relief
consisting of one or more of the following:
1. The façade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different materials or textures;
2. Horizontal offsets of at least four feet (4’) in depth;
3. Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet (4’); or
4. Fenestration at the first-floor level which is recessed horizontally at least one foot (1’) into the façade.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 58
9.10.6. Architectural variety. The use of a variety of architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give
each building or group of buildings a distinct character. When accent colors are proposed, the number of colors should
be limited to prevent a gaudy appearance.
9.10.7. Materials. All buildings shall be constructed with materials that are attractive in appearance, durable with a
permanent finish, and of high quality. New mixed-use or commercial buildings erected within the Gateway District shall
be of masonry construction, an equivalent, or better. Exterior building materials shall be classified as either primary,
secondary, or accent materials. Primary materials shall cover at least sixty percent (60%) of the façade of a building.
Secondary materials may cover no more than thirty percent (30%) of the façade. Accent materials may include door and
window frames, lintels, cornices and other minor elements, and may cover no more than ten percent (10%) of the
façade.
A) Primary materials may be face brick, stone, glass, architectural concrete or precast concrete units (integrally
colored block or textured block), provided that surfaces are molded, serrated examples or treated with a
textured material in order to give the wall surface a three-dimensional character.
B) Secondary materials may be decorative block or integrally colored stucco, fiber cement siding (integrally
colored or painted) with hidden seams. Synthetic stucco may be used as a secondary material on upper floors
only.
C) Accent materials may be wood, metal or fiber cement when used in trim, fascia or soffit if appropriately
integrated into the overall building design and not situated in areas which will be subject to physical or
environmental damage.
D) Prohibited Materials. No buildings shall be constructed of sheet aluminum, asbestos, iron, steel, corrugated
metal, plastic or fiberglass siding. Face materials which rapidly deteriorate or become unsightly such as
galvanized metal or unfinished structural clay tile are not permitted.
9.10.8 Colors. Colors used for exterior surfaces shall be harmonious with surrounding development and shall visually
reflect the traditional concept of the town center. Contrasting colors should be used to emphasize architectural detail.
Where a development plan proposes multiple buildings, the plan shall carry over colors and materials across adjacent
buildings.
9.10.9 Roofs. The predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood Center subzone is flat with articulated parapets; the
predominant roof shape in the Neighborhood General subzone is peaked. Roof shapes in the Neighborhood Mixed-
Use subzone should achieve a gradual transition between the two roof types.
9.10.10 Outdoor Storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either materials or products except through the issuance
of a conditional use permit.
9.10.11 Screening. Property boundaries abutting property that is not included within the Gateway District shall have
significant dense vegetative screening.
9.10.12 Signage. Signage should be integrated as an architectural element, with attention given to the color, scale and
orientation of all proposed signs in relation to the overall design of the building. Signs shall conform to the regulations
in Section 19 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 59
SECTION 10 - PUBLIC OPEN SPACE/RECREATIONAL DISTRICT “OS/R”
10.1 Intent and Purpose
This zoning district is for land in the City of Gem Lake reserved for: 1) open space or, 2) Recreational uses. There currently is
no publicly held open or recreation space within the City of Gem Lake. The only recreational facility within the City is a private
golf course and it is the desire of the City to have the golf course property remain recreational in nature. There may be an interest
in the future for small neighborhood “parks” in other areas of the City.
The City desires that this golf course recreational area space use be continued in the future. Based on past zoning practices,
the golf course owners wishes, and the City's likely inability to purchase the golf course property, the golf course will
continue as a conditional use within residential districts. The land under the golf course is currently zoned as being in the “RE”
zoning district.
Section 10.2 Uses
10.2.1 A golf course shall be a conditional use in residential areas of the City of Gem Lake.
10.2.2 Public parks may be provided as part of development formed by a PUD in residential areas in the City.
10.2.3 The City will continue to explore options for acquiring true public open spaces or preservation areas, focusing
on land which directly impacts the water quality of the water body called Gem Lake.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 60
SECTIONS 11 TO 12 RESERVED.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 61
SECTION 13 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Section 13.1 PURPOSE
13.1.1 The purposes of this section are:
A) To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its improvements through the preservation of
natural features and amenities than is possible under the more restrictive application of zoning requirements. This
section may allow modifications such as non-standard lot sizes, private streets and driveways, reduced rights-of-way and
street widths, housing types, zero lot lines and building setbacks. These changes shall meet the standards and purposes
of the City of Gem Lake Comprehensive Plan while preserving the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.
B) To allow for the potential mixture of uses in an integrated and well planned area.
C) To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and a preservation of the natural resources of the
site.
D) To facilitate the economical provision of streets and public utilities.
E) To facilitate mixed use developments, and/or affordable housing, recreational uses and institutional uses.
F) Parks and open space. The creation of public open space may be required by the city. Such park and open space shall
be consistent with the comprehensive park plan and overall trail plan.
G) Energy conservation through the use of more efficient building designs and sightings and the clustering of buildings
and land uses.
H) Use of traffic management and design techniques including the provision of transit and pedestrian linkages to reduce
the potential for traffic conflicts. Improvements to area roads and intersections may be required as appropriate. Where
appropriate, the use of transportation demand management strategies may be required within a project.
Section 13.2 PERMITTED USES.
13.2.1 Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a development plan.
A) Each PUD shall primarily be used for the use or uses for which the site is designated in the City of Gem
Lake Comprehensive Plan. Specific uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in a PUD
development plan.
B) Where the site of a proposed PUD is designated for more than one land use in the Comprehensive Plan,
the city may require that the PUD include all the land uses so designated or such combination of the designated
uses as the City Council shall deem appropriate to achieve the purposes of this ordinance and the
Comprehensive Plan.
13.2.2 A PUD is an allowable conditional use in all zoning districts in the City of Gem Lake except for land zoned Open
Space/Recreational (‘OS/R”).
Section 13.3 COORDINATION WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATION.
13.3.1 It is the intent of this section that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review of a planned
development under this section.
13.3.2 The plans required under this section must be submitted in a form, which will satisfy the requirements of the
Gem Lake subdivision section of this Consolidated Land Use Ordinance for the preliminary and final plats.
13.3.3 Flexibility of design standards and criteria of the Gem Lake subdivision section may be allowed as part of a
planned unit development.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 62
Section 13.4 SUBMISSION OF MATERIAL REQUIRED FOR APPROVAL
13.4.1 The materials and description of contents required for approval of a PUD are described in the City of Gem Lake
Planned Unit Development Procedure 4-17 available from City Hall. Request a copy of this procedure with your PUD
application form.
Section 13.5 ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE
13.5.1 The construction and provisions of all of the common open spaces and public and recreational facilities which
are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same phase of the construction of dwelling units. From
time to time the zoning administrator may review all of the building permits issued for the planned development and
examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If he shall find that the rate of construction of dwelling
units is greater than the rate at which common open spaces and public and recreational facilities have been constructed
and provided, he shall forward this information to the city council, which may modify or revoke the planned unit
development permit.
Section 13.6 CONVEYANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE
13.6.1 All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be conveyed to homeowners
association or similar organization provided in an indenture establishing an association or similar organization for the
maintenance of the planned development. The common open space must be conveyed to the homeowners association
or similar organization subject to covenants to be approved by the City Attorney which restrict the common open space
to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of the common open space
in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
13.6.2 If a homeowners association is created, the applicant shall submit any required homeowner association
documents at the time of the first final plat of development to the City Attorney and City Staff which explain:
13.6.2.1 Ownership and membership requirements.
13.6.2.2 Articles of incorporation and bylaws.
13.6.2.3 Time at which the developer turns the association over to the homeowners.
13.6.2.4 Approximate monthly or yearly association fees for homeowners.
13.6.2.5 Specific listing of items owned in common including such items as roads, recreation facilities, parking,
common open space grounds, and utilities.
Section 13.7 STANDARDS FOR COMMON OR OPEN SPACE
13.7.1 No open area may be approved as common open space under the provisions of this article unless it meets the
following standards:
13.7.1.1 The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space must be suitable for the planned
development.
13.7.1.2 Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for the
common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the planned development, considering
its size, density, expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be provided.
13.7.1.3 Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use but common space containing
natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements
which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the
common open space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard
to its topography and unimproved condition.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 63
13.7.1.4 Outlots to be dedicated for park, ponding or other purposes shall be deeded to the city before the final
plat is released for recording.
Section 13.8 REVIEW AND AMENDMENT
13.8.1 From time to time the Zoning Administrator may review PUDs within the city and may make a report to the
City Council on the status of non-compliance for a particular PUD. If the Zoning Administrator finds that the
development has not commenced within one (1) year after the original approval of the conditional use for the PUD,
the Zoning Administrator may recommend that the City Council extend the time or revoke the conditional use permit
as set forth in Section 17.5 of the Consolidated and Use Ordinance. Prior to cancellation or revocation of this permit,
the City Council shall hold a public hearing at which time all interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.
13.8.2 For additional phases of the PUD, if within three (3) years the project has not progressed, the Zoning
Administrator may recommend that the City Council determine what action will be taken with the remainder of the
project. Prior to determining the outcome of the PUD, the City Council shall hold a public hearing at which time all
interested parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.
13.8.3 Minor changes in the location, placement, and heights of the buildings or structures may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was
approved.
13.8.4 Approval of the Planning Commission and City Council shall be required for other changes such as
rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of the
approved final development plan.
13.8.5 Any amendment to the PUD shall require the same procedures as for the application for a conditional use permit
as set forth in Section 17.5 of this Consolidated Land Use Ordinance.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 64
SECTION 14 - GARDEN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 14.1 Findings and Purpose.
14.1.1 The City Council makes the following findings:
A) The land-use plans of the City of Gem Lake historically have not assigned any land in the City for long-term
agricultural use, as the City has developed and continues to develop as a primarily residential community
surrounded by fully developed suburban neighborhoods. The City Council reaffirms the City’s intent to
encourage development of the City in accordance with its adopted comprehensive plans.
B) At the time this Ordinance is considered, large land parcels in the City have yet to develop any primary use
and stand vacant. Additional large-lot property in the City is projected to subdivide and develop into smaller
lots over the next 10 to 30 years. The City Council recognizes that economic conditions are not always favorable
for real estate development, and that the costs to carry vacant land can create pressures that promote suboptimal
development. Permitting small-scale agriculture as a primary use will allow owners of large undeveloped
parcels to qualify for agricultural tax classification, and thus lower tax payments, without affecting the longterm
plans for the land. The Council finds that providing this means to temporarily ease this pressure will
enhance the City’s ability to fully realize the goals of its comprehensive plans.
C) Several cities and metropolitan areas are placing a greater emphasis on local food production as a means of
improving public health. Allowing the use of available space in the City for “community gardens” or “market
gardens” to grow food will promote local food production and improve public health in Gem Lake and the
surrounding community.
D) As an interim use of land, subject to the regulations proposed, community gardening and market gardening
will be compatible with all allowed land uses in the City of Gem Lake, and with the goals of the City’s
comprehensive plan.
14.1.2 The Council intends that the Garden Overlay District be available to overlay on parcels of land in any existing
zoning district to add the uses described in the district regulations to the list of uses allowed upon that land. The Garden
Overlay District may be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district, defined in this Zoning
Ordinance, as existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. Nothing in this Section is
intended to affect the ability of landowners to maintain accessory uses that are allowed without the Overlay zone upon
their property, whether or not the Overlay zone covers their property. This overlay district is intended to permit a
temporary land use, and should no longer be needed on a parcel when it eventually develops in accordance with the
regulations of the underlying zoning district.
Section 14.2 Requesting Garden Overlay. Applications to create a Garden Overlay District shall be made and considered as a
re-zoning request in accordance with Section 17.6 of this Ordinance. In addition to the documents and materials generally
required for a re-zoning application, the applicant shall supply copies of draft leases, contracts or use agreements to which the
groups or individuals using the gardens will agree prior to using the garden space. Such agreements must provide the land owner
or designated representative with the legal ability to evict a tenant and bar entry to any individual member of a group, if the
tenant or individual violates the terms of this Ordinance, the terms of the Interim Use Permit for the property, any restrictive
term of the lease or agreement, or any other applicable City Ordinance or state law.
Section 14.3 Termination of Garden Overlay. A Garden Overlay District shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:
14.3.1 City approval of a zoning application for a use or uses permitted in the underlying zone (e.g. development plan,
conditional use permit, or building permit); the Garden Overlay status and any permits granted under the terms of this
Section shall expire six months from the date of approval; or
14.3.2 The Interim Use Permit for the property expires, and no application is made to renew the permit within six
months of the expiration; or
14.3.3 The Interim Use Permit for the property is revoked by the City Council for violations of this Ordinance, permit
conditions, or any other applicable law or ordinance.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 65
Section 14.4 Interim Uses.
14.4.1 Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to be Interim Uses in the Garden
Overlay District:
A) Community Gardens.
B) Market Gardens.
14.4.2 Interim Use Permits granted under this Section expire on March 15th of each year. The permit may be renewed
annually, at the discretion of the City Council. Application for and approval of an Interim Use Permit shall follow the
procedures set forth in Section 17.5 of this Ordinance. In addition to the requirements of that Section, the applicant
shall provide a written summary of the proposed uses of fertilizers, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals in the
maintenance of the gardens. In approving an Interim Use Permit, the City Council may attach such additional conditions
as it deems necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding land uses, including conditions relating to the use of
agricultural chemicals on the property.
Section 14.5 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are allowed accessory
uses to any validly issued Interim Use Permit in any Garden Overlay District:
14.5.1 Hoop houses, cold frames and similar structures used to extend the growing season.
14.5.2 Benches, planting beds, compost bins, rain barrels and similar structures used to facilitate the growth of plants.
14.5.3 Off-street parking and loading areas.
Section 14.6 Prohibited Practices.
14.6.1 No motorized implements or machinery may be used in the cultivation and maintenance of any garden, except
for plowing of the plots between the hours of 8:00 A.M and 5:00 P.M, Monday through Friday. Motor vehicles of less
than 7,000 lbs. gross vehicle weight may be used to deliver and carry away equipment, supplies and product.
14.6.2 Animal husbandry and aquaculture are not permitted activities within a Garden Overlay zone.
14.6.3 No fuel, fertilizer, pesticides or similar chemicals shall be stored on the property.
Section 14.7 General Regulations.
14.7.1 The minimum land area for application of a Garden Overlay shall be ten acres.
14.7.2 All gardening activity and all structures and equipment shall be set back at least 20 feet from the property line of
any property not included within a Garden Overlay Zone, and at least 150 feet from any dwelling.
14.7.3 All gardens shall be divided into garden plots, separated from other plots and from required setback areas by
unpaved walkways of at least 6 feet in width. No single plot shall cover more than 10% of the total land area of the
property on which the plot is located.
14.7.4 Off-street parking and loading areas shall be unpaved and shall not exceed 15% of the lot area covered by garden
plots and required walkways.
14.7.5 The property owner is responsible for the collection and disposal of litter on the property.
14.7.6 The hours of operation for a permitted garden are ½ hour before sunrise until ½ hour after sunset.
14.7.7 The property owner is responsible for ensuring compliance with all other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations, including city ordinances and watershed district rules governing wetlands and stormwater control.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 66
SECTION 15 - INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 15.1 Purpose
15.1.1 The Institutional Overlay District is intended to provide a means of overlaying an existing Zoning district
located in the City of Gem Lake, for facilities devoted to serving the public. This district is unique in that the primary
objective of uses within this district is for the providing of services, frequently on a non-profit basis, rather than for
the sale of goods or services. It is intended that all uses within such an overlay area will be compatible with all
adjoining uses.
15.1.2 The Institutional Overlay District shall be applied to and superimposed as an overlay upon any zoning district,
defined in this Zoning Ordinance, as existing or amended by this section and as shown on the official Zoning Map. The
Institutional Overlay District will remain in effect as long as the use and the user remains the same. If an overlay area is
no longer used, uses are changed or terminated, the parcel will revert back to its original underlying zoning classification.
Section 15.2 Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted uses in an
Institutional Overlay District:
15.2.1 Religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues, but with activities limited to worship
and related social activities.
15.2.2 Private Child Care and Education facilities as defined in the definitions section of this Ordinance, but with
activities limited to school/educational activities.
A) An enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years:
B) A total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);
C) A maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) “full-day equivalent” students with a full-day* defined as ten (10)
hours.
D) The “full-day equivalent” shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during
each hour of the “full-day” of school. This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.
Section 15.3 Permitted Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are permitted accessory
uses in any Institutional Overlay District:
15.3.1 Accessory uses, customarily incidental to the uses permitted as a Permitted Use or Conditional or Interim Use (if
a Conditional or Interim Use is allowed).
15.3.2 Off-street parking and loading areas.
15.3.3 Accessory building as described in Appendix A of this Ordinance.
Section 15.4 Conditional or Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the following are considered to be
Conditional Uses in the Institutional Overlay District.
15.4.1 Living quarters (such as parsonage, rectory or care-takers house) that are supplied as an accessory use to a
principal use provided that:
A) The use shall not be used as rental property.
B) The maximum of one (1) such dwelling shall be allowed.
C) There shall be a demonstrated and documented need for such a facility.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 67
15.4.2 Governmental and public regulated buildings and essential service structures as defined in this Ordinance and
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the City, excluding public works facilities and uses provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setback and side yard setbacks
and side yard requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in
adjacent residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections
of this Ordinance.
15.4.3 Public recreational facilities provided that:
A) The site is landscaped.
B) The use is available to the “public”.
C) The land area of the property containing such uses or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
D) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections
of this ordinance.
15.4.4 Publicly owned or cultural buildings, such as libraries, city offices, auditoriums, public administration offices and
historical developments, but excluding public works type facilities and uses, provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard
requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent
residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections
of this ordinance.
15.4.5 Day care, social services or other non-directly related worship activities, as an accessory use within a religious
building, provided that:
A) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard
requirements are met. Architectural standards for all buildings shall be consistent with those in the adjacent
residential property.
B) Any equipment is completely screened in a permanent structure with no outside storage.
C) Adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in compliance with other sections
of this ordinance and the Landscape Ordinance.
15.4.6 Accessory buildings with a cumulative total greater than one-thousand (1,000 sq ft.) square feet.
Section 15.5 Lot Area and Setback Requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an Institutional Overlay District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this ordinance:
15.5.1 The minimum land area for an Institutional Overlay shall be two and three quarter (2.75) acres of buildable area.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, buildable area means two and three quarter (2.75) acres of land, not including
wetlands and land seasonally flooded on an annual basis, land containing drainage ways or surface water or land
containing aquatic vegetation, and land with slopes in excess of twelve (12%) percent.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 68
15.5.2 Lot width:
A) Two hundred (200) feet of frontage which must be located on a County or State maintained roadway.
15.5.3 Setbacks TABLE 15.5.3
FRONT YARD
50 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
50 foot set-back
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back
A) Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
15.5.4 Accessory Structure(s) Setbacks. TABLE 15.5.4
FRONT YARD
100 foot set-back
SIDE YARD
50 foot set-back
REAR YARD
50 foot set-back
A) Set-back measured from the closest of any lot line, road, road easement, road right-of-way or the like.
Section 15.6 Lot Coverage and Height Requirements.
The following lot coverage and height requirements shall be observed in the Institutional Overlay district.
15.6.1 The total lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent.
15.6.2 The minimum open space requirement for any proposed use shall be twenty-five (25%) percent, including green
areas not covered by buildings, parking lots, access roads, storage areas or other areas covered by impervious surfaces.
15.6.3 No building structure shall exceed thirty-five (35') feet in height.
15.6.4 No accessory structure shall exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25') feet in height, whatever is lesser and no
accessory structure any part of which is within three-hundred (300') feet of an “R” district or a roadway bordering an
“R” district shall exceed fifteen (15') feet in height.
Section 15.7 Landscaping and Screening
15.7.1 As most Institutional Overlays will occur in residential areas or closely adjacent to Residential areas, landscaping
and screening shall be provided to isolate all light and noise from the Institutional Overlay use from entering the adjacent
Residential areas. This landscaping and screening must be done in accordance with the procedures in this Ordinance.
Section 15.8 Procedures for Requesting an Overlay
15.8.1 Application for re-zoning for an overlay.
A) An Institutional Overlay shall be considered a rezoning for a specific parcel of land. This overlay may occur
in any zoning district in the City of Gem Lake. The application for an Institutional Overlay shall be made on a
form provided by the City Clerk. The fee for an Institutional Overlay shall be the same as the rezoning fee,
defined in the Zoning Ordinance. This application for rezoning will only be deemed to be complete when the
following are received:
1) A properly completed application and payment in full is received;
2) A registered property surveyors report is provided properly identifying the parcel to be rezoned;
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 69
3) All requirements of the Plan Review described in Appendix A Section 14.1 of this Ordinance have
been met. These plans must be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission and City Council before any overlay shall be granted. If this is a rezoning to initially define
and overlay, the rezoning activities and the Plan Review shall occur at the same time;
4) Proof of ownership or authorization shall be provided. The applicant shall supply proof of title and
the legal description of the property for which the Institutional Overlay is requested consisting of and
abstract of the title or registered property abstract currently certified together with unrecorded
documents whereby the petitioners acquire a legal ownership or equitable ownership interest or supply
written authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested
Institutional Overlay.
5) A list of all the property owners within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the proposed site. This
certified list shall be obtained from the County Assessor and supplied to the City Clerk.
15.8.2 Procedures
A) Pursuant to Minnesota Statues 15.99 as may from time-to-time be amended, an application for an
institutional Overlay shall be approved or denied within the time allowed for by law from its official and
complete submission unless notice of extension is provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the
applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through required state and federal agencies may extend
the review and decision making period by the additional time allowed by law unless this limitation is waived by
the applicant. Additional City requirements are as follows:
1) Applications for rezoning for an Overlay District shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on
an official application form available for available from the City Clerk. Such applications shall also be
accompanied by five (5) large scale copies and one (1) reduced scale copy of detailed written and
graphic materials fully explaining the processed change, development, or use. The request for an
institutional Overlay shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission meeting
after the date of submission of the completed application. The request shall only be considered
officially submitted when all the informational requirements are complied with.
2) Upon receipt of such application, the City shall set a public hearing following proper hearing
notification as applicable. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings
and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal property
description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten
(10) days prior to this hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days
prior to all owners of land within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the property in question. The City
Clerk shall have the right to provide additional property owners notification beyond the three hundred
fifty (350') foot distance if it is judged that the request will have an impact upon additional properties.
The records of the County Assessor shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and
ownership of all such properties. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses
to which the notice is sent shall be attested and made a part of the records of the proceeding.
3) Failure of a property owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set
forth in this Ordinance provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice
requirements of this section.
4) When reviewing the proposed institutional overlay, the following additional factors shall be included
in the review:
a) The proposed action in relation to specific policies and provisions of the Official City
Comprehensive Plan
b) The proposed use’s conformity with present and future land uses in the area.
c) The proposed use’s conformity with all performance standards contained herein.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 70
d) The proposed use’s effect on the area in which it is proposed.
e) The proposed use’s impact upon property value in the area in which it is proposed.
f) Traffic generation by the proposed use in relation to capabilities of streets and roads serving
the property.
g) The proposed use’s impact upon existing public services and facilities including parks,
schools, streets and utilities and the City’s service capacity.
5) The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional
information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony at the eh expense of the applicant, said
information to be declared necessary to evaluate the request and establish performance conditions in
relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance. Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all
necessary supportive information may be grounds for recommendation of denial of the request.
6) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to
answer question concerning the proposed request.
7) The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request.
8) The City Council shall not act upon such an Overlay request until they have received a report and
recommendation from the Planning Commission. If, however, the Planning Commission has not acted
upon the request after thirty (30) days from the first regular meeting at which the request was
considered, the City Council may proceed with its consideration and action on the request.
9) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City shall place
the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports
and recommendations shall be entered into and made part of the permanent written record of the City
Council meeting.
10) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council
shall have the option to hold another public hearing if deemed advisable.
11) If, upon receiving such reports and recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City
Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process and thus the final
recommendation of the City Council will differ from that of the Planning Commission, the City
Council may before taking any final action, refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
further consideration. The City council shall provide a written statement detailing the specific reasons
for referral. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular request.
15.8.3 Approvals
A) Approval of the Overlay request shall require passage by a four-fifths (4 of 5 votes) majority of the entire
City Council.
B) The Institutional Overlay zoning shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves the
overlay and after said approval is published in the official newspaper.
C) Prior to the start of building or any remodeling that will change the outside dimensions of a building or
structure, in the Institutional Overlay Zone, a plan review, in accordance with section 14.1 of the Zoning
Ordinance, shall be made. No building permits shall be issued until this plan review is complete.
15.8.4 Denials
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 71
A) If the City Council finds that a proposed use contemplated for the parcel which is the subject of an
application for rezoning to Institutional Overlay Classification is likely to have a material adverse effect on the
public health, safety of general welfare after considering possible adverse effects which may include, but not be
limited to, those delineated in Section 15.8.2.A.4 (a-g) above, then such application shall be denied.
15.8.5 Recording of actions taken
A) If a request for an Institutional Overlay receives approval by the City Council, the applicant shall record
such with the County Recorder within thirty (30) days of the approval date. The applicant, immediately upon
recording such or as soon as is reasonably possible, furnish the City proof of recording, no building permits
for the property in question will be granted until such proof of recording is furnished to the City.
15.8.6 Actions if the overlay is denied
A) Whenever an application for an overlay district has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar
application and proposal for an overlay affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the
Planning Commission or the City Council for at least one (1) year from the date of its denial except as follows:
1) Applications for an overlay are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on the matter.
2) If the City Council determines by a vote of not less than four-fifths (4 of 5 votes) majority that the
circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed significantly.
15.8.7 Time period (duration) of this Institutional Overlay approvals
A) An Institutional Overlay shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:
1) Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the request,
the rezoning for an Institutional Overlay shall become null and void twelve (12) months after the date of
approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started construction of any building,
structure, addition or alteration, or use requested for this overlay. The property owner or applicant shall have
the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this section.
2) If any one of the following occur the overlay shall expire:
a) The use of the property is changed to not be in accordance with the uses outlined in this section of
this Ordinance,
b) The organization to which the permit for and Overlay District has been given is no longer the
occupant of the building or facilities on the site. No leases or subletting of the building or facilities
operating on an Institutional Overlay shall be permitted.
3) If an Institutional Overlay is allowed to expire or is revoked for cause, the parcel of property shall
revert back to the underlying zoning of the parcel.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 72
SECTION 16 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 16.1 Application of this Ordinance
16.1.1 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
16.1.2 Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
16.1.3 Except as in this Ordinance specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed
or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for any purpose, nor in any manner which is not conformity with this
Ordinance.
16.1.4 When land is proposed to be annexed to the City of Gem Lake the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing upon the permanent zoning of said land. The results of the hearing, along with a recommendation, shall be
presented to the City Council. In the event of annexation proceedings becoming final before the permanent zoning is
determined, the annexed area shall be placed in the “RE” District and such classification shall be considered as an
interim step pending permanent classification.
16.1.5 Real Property Development. making application for development of real property in the City of Gem Lake, the
developer shall submit twelve (12) sets of all plans, variance requirements, and permit requirements in forms acceptable
to the Zoning Administrator or City officials including, but not limited to, the following:
A) A Site Plan; and
B) A Grading and Filling Plan; and
C) A Landscape Plan; and
D) A Tree Preservation Plan; and
E) A Sediment and Erosion Control Plan; and
F) A Storm Water Management Plan; and
G) A Description of the Project; and
H) A Description of Future Expansion Plans; and
I) All Variances, Conditional and Interim Use Permits, and Zoning Amendments required; and
J) All other such plans or information as may be required for specific zoning districts.
16.1.6 Development Review Considerations. When making recommendations and decisions considering land use,
variance applications, or rezoning applications, the Planning Commission and City Council shall review and measure
the impact of such uses including, but not limited to, the following as criteria:
A) The impact of the use on adjacent uses; and
B) The impact of the use on air and water quality; and
C) The impact of the use on traffic generation
D) The impact of the use on public safety, health and welfare; and
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 73
E) The impact of the use on the economy
Section 16.2. Severability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City Council that the several provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
Section 16.3 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
16.3.1 Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued at the size and
in a manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter specified.
16.3.2 Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared
unsafe by the City.
16.3.3 When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a confirming
use it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.
16.3.4 Whenever a lawful non-conforming building or structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion,
earthquake, war, riot, or act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it be reconstructed within twelve (12)
months after such calamity, unless the damage to the building or structure is fifty percent (50%) or more of its fair
market value, in which case the reconstruction shall be for a use in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
16.3.5 Whenever a lawful, non-conforming use of a building or structure or land is discontinued for a period of six (6)
months, any future use of said building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
16.3.6 Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is
permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the
nonconforming use.
16.3.7 A lawful non-conforming use may be changed only to a use of the same or more restricted classification.
16.3.8 Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing lawful non-conforming residential units when they
will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units.
16.3.9 Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts
A) Whenever, in any Zoning District, a use is neither specifically allowed nor denied, the use shall be considered
as prohibited. In such cases, the City Council or the Planning Commission may, by their own initiative, or upon
request of the property owner, conduct a study to determine if:
1) The use can be deemed consistent with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan;
2) The use is acceptable to and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners;
3) The use is in the public interest and is not determined to be offensive;
4) Which defined Zoning District would be most appropriate for the use;
5) What conditions and standards relating to development of the use should be imposed. Upon
completion and consideration of the study, the City Council or Planning Commission or the real
property owner may initiate a request for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the
particular use under consideration in accordance with the definitions and provisions contained in this
Ordinance.
Section 16.4 Lot Provisions
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 74
16.4.1 Land covered by Gem Lake, its contiguous bog area including islands (measured to the mean high water mark)
and other DNR protected wetlands shown on applicable section maps covering the area shall not be included in any
area calculations required by this Ordinance.
16.4.2 In all residential districts, a lot must include contiguous buildable area as shown in tables located elsewhere within
the ordinance unless the lot is part of a cluster or planned unit development that has been reviewed and recommended
for approval by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
Section 16.5 Accessory Buildings
16.5.1 No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
16.5.2 No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building. However, in no case, shall such accessory
building exceed twenty-five (25') feet in height.
16.5.3 An accessory building shall be considered to be an integral part of the principal building unless it is six (6) feet or
more from the principal building.
16.5.4 No detached accessory building shall be less than sixty (60') feet from the public right-of-way except on a corner
lot, unless it conforms to the side yard requirements of the principal building. Those accessory buildings located sixty
(60') feet or more behind the right-of-way line shall have a side yard of two (2') feet or more and a rear yard of three (3')
feet or more.
16.5.5 No combinations of accessory buildings shall be allowed to exceed one-thousand (1,000) square feet in size,
except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit from the City Council.
Section 16.6 Required Yards, Open Space and Heights
16.6.1 No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space
less than the minimum required by this Ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than
the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
16.6.2 No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy minimum
lot area requirements for any other buildings.
16.6.3 The following shall be considered as permitted encroachments on set-back and height requirements:
A) In any yards: posts, off-street open parking spaces, open terraces, awnings, open canopies, steps, chimneys,
and flag poles.
B) In front yards: service stations pump islands and fences. Fences must be at least eighty (80%) percent open.
C) In side and rear yards: fences or walls six (6') feet in height or less. However, in a corner lot no obstruction
higher than three (3') feet above curb level shall be located within twenty (20') feet of the lot corner formed by
any two streets, or within fifteen (15') feet of any street right-of-way. See Residential Zoning Districts for
additional regulations for fences.
D) In rear yards, recreational and laundry drying equipment, open arbors and trellises, balconies, breeze ways,
porches, detached outdoor living rooms, barbecue facilities and portable seasonal living structures.
E) Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos, and other structures on farms; to church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; public utility facilities; Accessory and
Secondary Use antennas and parapet walls extending not more than four (4') feet above the limiting height of
the building.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 75
Section 16.7 Traffic Visibility
16.7.1 No fences, structures or planting exceeding thirty (30") inches in height above the center line grade of the street
shall be permitted within the required front yard set-back on a corner lot.
Section 16.8 Farming Operations
16.8.1 All farms in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance and all farms which are brought into the City by
annexation shall be a permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation. However, all regulations
contained herein and other City Ordinances as in effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will
cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character. See Residential Zoning Districts
for additional regulations of agricultural buildings.
Section 16.9 Essential Services
16.9.1 Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the City of Gem
Lake.
Section 16.10 (Deleted)
Section 16.11 (Deleted)
Section 16.12 Relocation of Dwelling Units
16.12.1 It shall be the stated policy of the City of Gem Lake to maintain a harmonious and high standard of residential
development and to protect residential areas from deleterious effects through insuring that both new and relocated
dwellings form other areas, both within the City of Gem Lake and from outside, shall meet specified requirements. Such
relocation of dwellings as stated above must conform to all regulations of the Building Code and shall be permitted in
the zoning district where all necessary specifications as to lot sizes, setbacks, type of use, height regulations and all other
conditions as laid down in this Ordinance are met.
16.12.2 In addition, such relocations shall require a Conditional Use Permit from the City Council wherein the following
procedures shall be followed and provisions shall be met:
A) Application shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk.
B) A fee for the Relocation of Dwelling Units shall be required in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council at its first meeting in January of each year. Further, the City may impose additional fees including,
but not limited to, engineering costs, attorney’s fees, expert opinions and publishing costs payment of which
may also be required of the applicant as part of the process. The building mover shall meet all requirements for
licensing and insurance as required by Minnesota Statues 221.81 and as from time to time amended.
C) The application shall be referred to the City Council, who shall set a time and place for a public hearing
giving at least ten (10) days’ public notice of such hearing.
D) At least ten (10) days before such hearing, the Council shall mail a notice of said hearing to property owners
within three-hundred fifty (350') feet of the relocation premises. Failure of the Council to mail the notice, or
failure of the title holder to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
E) The Planning Commission shall make a report to the City Council on the matter before or at the public
hearing.
F) The City Council shall make a finding and declare whether or not the structure to be moved is architecturally
compatible.
Section 16.13 Fences
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 76
16.13.1 General Provisions
A) No fences shall be placed on or extend into a public or private right-of-way or utility easement.
B) The side of the fence considered the “face’ (i.e. the side having no structural supports) shall face abutting
property or the public or private right-of-way.
C) Both sides of the fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and appearance by its owner
and shall not be allowed to become or remain in a condition of disrepair or danger or constitute a nuisance,
public or private.
D) No physical damage of any kind shall occur to abutting property during fence construction.
E) All fences shall be constructed inside the property lines of a lot. If corner property stakes cannot be readily
identified, a certificate of survey and setting of corner property stakes is necessary before fence construction
starts.
F) All man-made fences shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the following: decorative
masonry, wrought iron or wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use, or wood of proven
durability such as cedar or redwood is used.
G) Chain link fences shall only be used for dog confinement areas (six (6'0") foot maximum height), around
swimming pools or spas four (4'0") foot maximum height) or for tennis courts (twelve (12'0") foot maximum
height) in rear and side yards only. Chain link fences which need additional height or for other uses or placement
shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
H) Fences, utilized for the protection of gardens, crops and shrubs from deer and other wildlife which are
setback a minimum of twenty-five (25'0") feet from any property line, are at least eighty (80%) percent open
and not greater than six (6'0") feet in height and are limited to specified areas requiring protection, shall be
exempt from any City review or processing requirements.
I) It is recommended that all fences be screened with trees or shrubs to buffer views, neighboring property or
public right-of-way, or to generally ensure aesthetic quality and compatibility with the natural character of the
community.
16.13.2 Specific Fence Standards. Fences may be allowed in the City of Gem Lake subject to the following standards:
A) Split rail fences not exceeding forty-eight (48") inches in height are permitted anywhere within the property
lines of a lot located within the City. Location of the fence in relation to the property line as described in 16.13.1
E) must be followed.
B) Except as may be provided herein, fences up to six (6'0") feet in height and no more than eighty (80%)
percent solid matter shall be permitted along the boundaries of the side and rear yard of a lot on a permanent
basis. Location of the fence in relation to the property line as described in 16.13.1 E) must be followed.
C) Fences not exceeding six (6'0") feet in height, in areas other than for residential areas of the City, may be
permitted in front of the front building lines as established by the primary structure on the lot, where required
for screening of adjacent property.
D) On corner lots, no fence greater than thirty (30") inches high shall be located in the sight visibility triangle
on the corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or
within fifteen (15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.
E) All swimming pools must be completely enclosed with a safety fence at least four (4'0") feet in height which
shall completely enclose the pool. This fence shall be as described in Section 16.14.3. A temporary fence as
described in 16.14.3. C) shall be installed and shall be in-place before the pool is filled.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 77
F) All outdoor spas shall have either a fence or a latchable cover, as described in 16.14.3 D)
G) Freestanding stone, brick, stucco, concrete, wood or other walls, not required as retaining structures, are
considered fences under this section of this Ordinance.
H) There are no height restrictions on natural hedges or plantings utilized as fences in any residential zoning
district except no plantings greater than thirty (30") inches high shall be located in the sight visibility triangle
on the corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or
within fifteen (15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.
I) Temporary snow fences can be erected for temporary site protection or for diverting snow. Snow fences
shall not be used as permanent fencing. Snow fences shall not be located in the sight visibility triangle on the
corner of the lot defined as within twenty (20'0") feet of the lot corner formed by any two streets or within
fifteen (15'0") feet of any street right-of-way.
16.13.3 Fence standards allowed by Conditional Use Permits.
The following fences may be approved by Conditional Use Permit only, in accordance with the standards as set forth
by the City Council:
A) Fences allowed by Conditional Use Permit are as follows:
1) All chain link fences with a height greater than described in Section 16.13.1.G).
2) Fences, such as sales lot security fences, which include a security gate at a point where access is
provided to the property and/or principal building.
3) Fences greater than six (6') feet in height around a garden, crops, and shrubs utilized for the
protection of such from deer and other wildlife.
4) Barbed wire and electrically charged fences. (All such fences must be marked with caution signs on
all exposures).
16.13.4 Non-conforming fences.
It is the intent of this section to allow the continuation of such non-conforming fences as may already exist until they
are discontinued as provided herein. However, it is not the intent of this Section to encourage the survival of nonconforming
fences and such fences are declared to be incompatible with permitted conforming fences and such fences
are declared to be incompatible with permitted fences within the City. Such fences shall be regulated by the following
provisions:
A) An existing fence not permitted by this Ordinance, except when required to do so bylaw or ordinance, shall
not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such fence is changed to one permitted.
Maintenance of a non-conforming fence will be allowed, however, when this includes necessary repairs and
incidental alterations which do not expand or intensify the non-conforming use.
Section 16.14 Outdoor Swimming Pools and Spas
16.14.1 Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupant of the subject
property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall conform as follows:
A) Permit Required - No outdoor swimming pool shall be constructed or established and no such pool
construction shall be commenced in the City of Gem Lake without first obtaining building and plumbing and,
as necessary mechanical permits approved by the City Building Official.
B) Applications - Applications for a swimming pool related permits may be secured from and shall be submitted
to the City Clerk along with a fee determined by the fee schedule for construction permits in effect at the time
of application and based upon the estimated value of the construction. Applications for swimming pool permits
shall include, without limitation the following information:
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 78
1) Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool.
2) A site plan showing the location of all structures on the lot including the house, garage, fences, trees,
overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, sewage systems and other significant improvements
or natural features;
3) The proposed locations of pumps, filters, electrical power source (if applicable), flushing and
drainage outlets and other operational features;
a) A plan showing where pool water will be discharged and the path such discharged water
will follow. In no case shall any water discharged from a swimming pool or spa be allowed to
flow directly into any lakes, ponds or wetlands.
4) Location and specifications of protective fencing.
16.14.2 Construction setback requirements for pools.
Private outdoor swimming pools shall be constructed as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject
property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall meet the following minimum requirements;
A) Underground or overhead utilities shall be located in conformance with the National Electric Code;
B) No pool shall be located within any private easement, public or private utility easement, ingress or egress
easement, drainage way, marsh, or other location in which it will represent a threat to the natural environment;
C) In areas zoned or used for single family residential purposes, pools are prohibited in the front yard and shall
not be located within thirty (30'0") feet of any lot lines, nor within ten (10'0") feet of any principal structure or
accessory buildings except accessory building without frost footings. No mechanical equipment shall be located
closer than thirty (30'0") feet to any lot line;
D) No portion of any swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be located less than ten (10'0") feet to any
portion of a sewage disposal line or sewage treatment system, nor shall any water supply line for a swimming
pool be less than fifteen(15'0") feet from any portion of the sewage treatment system.
16.14.3 Safety Fence Required.
A safety fence of at least four (4'0") feet in height shall completely enclose the outdoor pool. All openings or points of
entry into the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates or doors. All gates and doors shall
have a latch which is no less than four (4'0") feet above the ground level and which shall be so constructed and so placed
as to be inaccessible to small children. All gates and doors shall be latched when the pool is not in use or is unattended
by an adult with demonstrated swimming ability. Any opening between the bottom of the fence and the ground level
shall not exceed three (3") inches.
A) Safety fences shall be constructed of materials with minimum spaces between the materials and shall be
constructed so as to inhibit the climbing thereof by any person. If a safety fence is located within an area subject
to and covered by a homeowners association, and if such homeowners association has an architectural review
committee, then the architectural review committee shall approve the location and style of the fence.
B) Above ground pools of four (4') feet or more in wall height shall be exempt from complete closure by a type
of fence resistant to being climbed, however, above ground pools shall be equipped with a fence and gate
system at all point of entry to the pool. Said fence and gate system shall effectively control access to the pool
and shall be constructed pursuant to the specifications herein contain for underground pools.
C) Temporary fence. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced any water to a depth of more than
eighteen (18") inches into the shallowest portion of any swimming pool newly constructed or being constructed
until such time as the Building Official authorizes the filling of such pool with water. Such authorization shall
be withheld until, as a minimum, the permittee has caused such pool to be completely enclosed by a swimming
pool construction fence. Said construction fence shall:
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 79
1) Be of snow fence like of similar design and be securely anchored in place.
2) Be constructed with its base flush to the ground.
3) Be at least four (4'0") feet in height and have supportive posts placed no more than eight (8'0") feet
apart.
4) Remain in place until a permanent fence completely enclosing the swimming pool is installed.
D) All outdoor Spas shall either have a fence as described in this section for outdoor swimming pools or a
latchable cover. The cover should be constructed of a material impenetrable by toddlers and subject to
inspection by the City building Official.
16.14.4 Miscellaneous requirements
A) All back-flushing water or pool drainage water shall be directed to be on the property of the owner or on
approved drainage ways. Drainage onto public or private streets or other public or private drainage ways shall
require a permit from the City Building Official.
B) Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to spill or shine upon adjacent properties.
C) All electrical installations shall comply with the State Electrical Code.
D) Precautions during construction:
1) Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby property..
2) Assure that proper care shall be taken in stockpiling excavating materials to avoid erosion, dust or
other infringements upon adjacent property..
3) All access for construction shall be over the owner’s land and due care shall be taken to avoid damage
to streets and adjacent private or public property.
16.14.5 Nuisance.
The conduct of persons and the operation of pools shall be the responsibility of the owner and any tenants thereof and
such conduct of persons and operation of the pool shall be done in a manner so as to avoid any nuisance or breach of
the peace, and it shall be unlawful to allow loud noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the
pool is located to adjacent property.
Section 16.15 Land Reclamation
16.15.1 Under this Ordinance, Land Reclamation shall be defined as the reclaiming of land by depositing of material so
as to elevate the grade. In all Zoning districts, Land Reclamation shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special Use
permit. Any lot or parcel upon which an aggregate amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of fill is to be
deposited shall be defined as Land Reclamation. The request for a Land Reclamation permit shall contain at least the
following:
A) Completed Special Use Permit form and necessary fees
B) Survey of the site where Land Reclamation is to occur showing land contours before and after Land
Reclamation. This survey shall be large enough in scale to allow for at least the inclusion of the immediate
adjacent parcels of land.
C) A sketch showing current water drainage from/to the site and any modifications of such drainage after Land
Reclamation is complete.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 80
D) A description or sketch showing the soil erosion control measures to be used during this Land Reclamation
activity.
E) Description of the amount, origin and types of materials to be placed on the land as part of this Land
Reclamation.
F) A sketch and/or description of the final cover material to be placed on the fill deposited by this Land
Reclamation. The City Council may require a monetary deposit be placed with the City to insure that the final
grading and landscaping be completed per the supplied sketches and description.
G) Statement of when this Land Reclamation is to occur including the hours of the day and days of the week
of such planned activities. The City might further limit these hours and days of operation.
H) A route map showing the route for the trucks moving to and from the site. Copies of any special permits
needed from the county or state highway departments should be attached.
16.15.2 Each Land Reclamation Special Use permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year or as described in the
Special Use permit issued by the City.
Section 16.16 Mining
16.16.1 Under this Ordinance, mining shall be defined as the extraction and incidental processing of sand, gravel, or
other materials from the land in the aggregate amount of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of removal thereof
from a single site. In all zoning districts, the conduct of Land Mining shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special
Use Permit. Each request for a permit for Land Mining shall at least include the following:
A) Completed Special Use Permit form and necessary fees
B) Survey of the site where Land Mining is to occur showing land contours before and after the Mining. This
survey shall be large enough in scale to allow for at least the inclusion of the immediate adjacent parcels of land.
C) A sketch showing current water drainage from/to the site and any modifications of such drainage after Land
Mining is complete.
D) A description or sketch showing the soil erosion control measures to be used during this Land Mining
activity.
E) A sketch and/or description of the final cover material to be placed on the land exposed by this Land
Mining. The City Council may require a monetary deposit with the City to insure that the final grading and
landscaping be completed per the supplied sketches and description.
F) Statement of when these Land Mining activities are to occur including the hours of the day and days of the
week of such planned activities. The City might further limit these hours and days of operation.
G) A route map showing the route for trucks moving to and from the site. Copies of any special permits
needed from the county or state highway departments should be attached.
16.16.2 Each Land Mining Special Use permit shall be valid for a maximum of one year or as described in the Special
Use permit issued by the City.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 81
SECTION 17 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 17.1 Enforcing Officer
17.1.1 The Mayor shall appoint a Zoning Administrator, subject to the approval of the City Council, who shall have the
duty and responsibility of enforcing and administering this Ordinance.
Section 17.2 Building Permit
17.2.1 No structure shall hereafter be erected, or structurally altered until a building permit shall have been issued
indicating that the existing or proposed structure and the use of land, comply with this Ordinance and all Building
Codes. All applications for building permits pertaining to the erection, or major alteration which will affect the outside
dimensions of a structure shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of a site plan to scale showing the actual dimensions
of the lot, lots or parcel to be built upon, the dimensions of the ground plan and the extensions beyond the outside wall
of the proposed structures to be erected or structurally altered, their location on the site in relation to the outside
boundary and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One
copy of the site plan is to be approved and is to be made available on the site.
Section 17.3 Duties of the Zoning Administrator
17.3.1 The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said
authority he shall:
A) Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;
B) Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, all maps,
amendments, and conditional and interim uses, variances, appeals and applications, thereto;
C) Receive, file and forward all applications for zoning amendments, variances, conditional or interim uses or
other matters to the Planning Commission and City Council;
D) Institute in the name of the City of Gem Lake any appropriate actions or proceeding against a violator as
provided by law;
E) Approve all building permits, submitted by the Building Inspector, after determining that the permit is in
compliance with this Ordinance. This approval must be made before the permit is issued.
F) Act as Chairman of the Gem Lake Plan Review Commission.
17.3.2 The City Council may, on prior recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, empower the Ramsey County
Sheriff in specific instances to perform any of the acts which the Zoning Administrator is directed or authorized to
perform by this Section.
Section 17.4 Variances
17.4.1 Purpose and Intent.
The City Council, sitting as the Board of Appeal and Adjustment, may grant Variances from the strict applications of
the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and impose conditions and safeguards in the Variances so granted. These
Variances shall be considered in cases where by reason of narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a lot or where by reason
of exceptional topographic or water conditions or where other extraordinary and exceptional conditions of such lot
exist, the strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance would result in practical difficulties upon the owner
of such lot in complying with the regulations of the zoning district in which said lot is located. “Practical difficulties,”
as used in connection with the grant of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique
to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 82
limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. A variance may not be granted to allow any use
that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the property is located.
17.4.2 Application. An application for any Variance from the Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by
the City. If the Variance is to be considered in association with any other Building Permits, Conditional or Interim Use
Permits, or Subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Variance application so as to
represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an
aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state full all facts relied upon by the
applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the Variance as required
and communicated by the Zoning Administrator.
A) An application will be considered complete on the date the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental
materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As required by law, the City shall act on
the application within the period prescribed unless said required period is extended or waived.
B) When reviewing variance applications, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by
the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact on the Entire Area; and
7) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.
17.4.3 Referral to Planning Commission.
The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the
application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at its first regular meeting following receipt of complete
application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall
have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the Variance or to retain expert
testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application.
17.4.4 Public Hearing.
In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or the City Council
to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal
publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a
summary of the application.
17.4.5 Referral to City Council.
The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact and recommendation to the City Council which shall
include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose
of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
17.4.6 Action by City Council.
Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment, the matter shall be
placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than the number
of days allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no
recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of its receipt,
the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. The City Council
shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding of fact, and convey its decision to approve or deny the
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 83
application. The Council may impose conditions on the grant of a variance, provided that any condition imposed is
directly related to a likely impact of the variance, and in rough proportionality to the scope of said impact. Approvals
shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
17.4.7 Issuance of Variance.
Following a decision by the City Council to approve or deny the application, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly
notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice considered delivered upon deposit for
delivery with the US mail.
17.4.8 Lapse of Variance. Any Variance issued shall lapse if not acted upon within one (1) year of the date of issuance.
Section 17.5 Conditional and Interim Use Permits
17.5.1 Purpose and Intent.
The City Council may, by resolution, grant Conditional or Interim Use Permits for the uses and purposes described
elsewhere in this Ordinance as Conditional or Interim Uses and may, in the granting of such Conditional or Interim
Use Permits, impose conditions and safeguards which promote the guidelines set forth in the Comprehensive Municipal
Plan and which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
17.5.2 Application.
An application for a Conditional or Interim Use permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the Conditional
or Interim Use Permit is to be considered in association with any other building permits, variances, or subdivision, all
related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the Conditional or Interim Use Permit application so as to
represent the full intent of the applicant. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City in an
aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts relied upon by the
applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the application as
required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete on the date the
application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning Administrator. As
required by law, the City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required period is extended
or waived.
A) When reviewing Conditional and Interim Use Permit applications, except those for residential building
height, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and measured by the Planning Commission and City
Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact on the Entire Area; and
7) Consistency with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; and
98) Anticipated Duration of the Conditional or Interim Use.
B) Residential Building Heights.
When reviewing Conditional Use Permit applications which deal exclusively with residential building heights,
the matter shall be forwarded to the Gem Lake Plan Review Commission who shall, in a timely manner, review
all such applications in accordance with criteria established and, from time to time, modified, by the Plan Review
Commission. Upon completion of the review, the Plan Review Commission shall forward the application along
with its written recommendation to the City Council for consideration and approval or denial at its next regular
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 84
meeting. No review by the Planning Commission as required in Section 17.5.3 or Public Hearing as required in
Section 17.5.4 shall be required for this Conditional Use unless specifically ordered by the City Council. In all
such matters, the City Council shall be considered the Board of Appeals.
17.5.3 Referral to Planning Commission.
The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the
application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at its first regular meeting following receipt of complete
application(s). To insure preservation or health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall
have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert
testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission
shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed Conditional or Interim Use on: the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan; the character and development of the neighborhood and Zoning District; conformance with the
Performance Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and
provisions which may affect the Conditional or Interim Use.
17.5.4 Public Hearing.
In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission or the City Council
to receive public comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal
publication not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a
summary of the application. A similar notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within three hundred
fifty (350'0") feet of the Conditional or Interim Use site based upon a list and mailing labels secured from Ramsey
County Property Records and Revenue.
17.5.5 Referral to City Council.
The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 C. of the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall
include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose
of this Ordinance.
17.5.6 Action by City Council.
Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment, the matter shall be
placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be not more than the number
of days allowed by law after the date of receipt of a completed application unless such date is extended or waived. If no
recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of its receipt,
the City Council may take action without further communication from the Planning Commission. In considering the
application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed Conditional or Interim Use: 1) will not be detrimental
to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council shall, in the form of a resolution, make a
written finding of fact, convey its decision to approve or deny the application, and impose such conditions on approvals
as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals shall require a majority vote of the City
Council.
17.5.7 Issuance of Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice
considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals, a Conditional or Interim Use
Permit shall apply only to the use stated on the permit and the application.
17.5.8 Lapse of Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
If the use stated on the permit and application is not taken up and implemented within one (1) year of the date of
issuance, such issued Conditional or Interim Use Permit shall lapse.
17.5.9 General Standards. All Conditional and Interim Uses shall comply with the following general standards.
A) Existing Uses. Shall be in accordance with zoning and building standards in effect at the time of initial
construction and development and shall continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.
B) New Uses. Shall conform as follows:
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 85
1) Compliance with all zoning and other regulations as may otherwise be applicable;
2) The date or the event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty;
3) The existence of the Conditional or Interim Use will not impose additional costs on the public if it
becomes necessary for the public to take the property in the future;
4) The user agrees to any conditions of approval associated with the approval of the Conditional or
Interim Use Permit by the City Council.
C) Existing and New Uses. Shall conform as follows:
1) Shall maintain harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and with the architectural character
and design standards of existing uses and development;
2) Shall meet or exceed all Performance Standards contain elsewhere in this Ordinance;
3) Shall not generate such additional traffic associated with the use that would overburden or exceed
the capabilities of streets and other public services and facilities including, but not limited to, parks,
schools, and utilities serving the area.
Section 17.6 Amendments
17.6.1 General. In accordance with provisions of Minnesota Statues, the City Council may, from time to time, adopt
amendments to this Ordinance providing such amendments are consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan.
17.6.2 Initiation.
The City Council or the Planning Commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text, tables
or district boundaries and maps of this Ordinance. Any person(s), firm(s), or corporation(s) who are the fee title owners
of real property in the City or who have been designated in writing to represent the interest of the fee title owners of
real property in the City may initiate a request to amend the text, tables or district boundaries and maps so as to affect
the said real property or such real property adjacent thereto.
17.6.3 Application.
An application to Amend The Zoning Ordinance shall be made on a form provided by the City. If the application to
Amend The Zoning Ordinance is to be considered in association with any other Building Permits, Variances,
Conditional or Interim Use Permits, or Subdivision, all related applications shall be submitted simultaneously with the
application so as to represent the full intent of the application. The application(s) shall be accompanied by a fee payable
to the City in an aggregate amount as established in the City’s fee schedule. The application(s) shall state fully all facts
relied upon by the applicant and shall be supplemented by such maps, plans, or additional data for consideration of the
application as required and communicated by the Zoning Administrator. An application will be considered complete
on the date of the application(s), fee(s), and all supplemental materials requested have been received by the Zoning
Administrator. As required by law, The City shall act on the application within the period prescribed unless said required
period is extended or waived.
17.6.4 Referral to Planning Commission.
The matter along with all related information shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall review the
application(s) and hear the applicant or representative thereof at its first regular meeting following receipt of complete
application(s). To insure preservation of health, safety, and general welfare of the public, the Planning Commission shall
have authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning the application or to retain expert
testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning the application. The Planning Commission
shall review the matter determining the effect of the proposed application on: the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; the
character and development of the affected neighborhood(s) and Zoning District(s); conformance with the Performance
Standards and other provisions of this Ordinance; compliance with other applicable law, regulations, and provisions
which may affect the amendment.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 86
A) Only applications for zoning amendment which meet one of the following conditions should be considered:
1) A mistake has been made in the original zoning which was inconsistent with the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan adopted by the City which should now be corrected; or
2) Substantial changes have occurred within the City since the adoption of the Comprehensive
Municipal Plan which changes should result in an amendment of both the zoning and the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan; or
3) There shall exist a clear public need for a benefit to be derived from the proposed zoning which
shall be greater than any benefit or convenience of the property owners.
4) Beyond a public need being evident, the application shall show that the public interest would be best
served by rezoning the property in question and that the property in question is the best qualified to
serve said public need; or
5) In the case of “down zoning” which would diminish the intensity of the current use to a less intensive
use, the proposed zoning shall allow the property owners a reasonable use of their property under the
terms of this ordinance as well as serve the public interest.
B) When reviewing a zoning amendment applications, impact on the following criteria shall be reviewed and
measured by the Planning Commission and City Council:
1) Adjacent Uses; and
2) Air and Water Quality; and
3) Traffic Generations; and
4) Public Safety and Health; and
5) Area Aesthetics; and
6) Economic Impact on Then Entire Area; and
7) Consistency with the Comprehensive Municipal Plan.
17.6.5 Public Hearing.
In consideration of the application(s), a public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission to receive public
comment on the matter. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City’s official legal publication not less
than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days with said notice stating the date, time, place and a summary of the
application. If the amendment might affect the zoning or use of specific property, a similar notice shall be mailed to all
owners of real property located within three hundred fifty (350') feet of the affected property based upon a list and
mailing labels secured from Ramsey County Property Records and Revenue by the applicant and within the same time
frame.
17.6.6 Referral to City Council.
The Planning Commission shall make written findings of fact in accordance with Section 12.1.5 A). of the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and recommendation to approve or deny the application to the City Council which shall
include such actions or conditions relating to the request as may be deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose
of this Ordinance.
17.6.7 Action by City Council.
Upon receipt of the written recommendation of the Planning Commission and public comment, the matter shall be
placed on the agenda for a regular meeting of the City Council, the date of such meeting to be within the time prescribed
by law unless such date is extended or waived. If no recommendation is transmitted to the City Council by the Planning
Commission within thirty (30) days of its receipt, the City Council may take action without further communication from
the Planning Commission. In considering the application, the City Council shall determine that the proposed
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 87
amendment: 1) will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare; 2) is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Municipal Plan; 3) is in compliance with this Ordinance. The City Council
shall, in the form of a resolution, make a written finding a fact, convey its decision to approve or deny the application,
and impose such conditions on approvals as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Approvals
shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
17.6.8 Adoption of the Amendment and Incorporation of Amendments Into The Ordinance.
The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision of the City Council, said notice
considered delivered upon deposit for delivery with the US mail. In the case of approvals and unless otherwise specified
by the City Council, the Amendment shall be considered in effect on a date specified by the City Council, but not later
than thirty (30) days subsequent to the City Council’s decision.
Section 17.7 Appeals
17.7.1 All appeals from any order, requirement, or decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall be
brought before the Planning Commission who shall act in the capacity of Board of Appeals in all matters related to this
Ordinance.
17.7.2 All appeals shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator accompanied by any substantiating information
and list of experts who shall may testify on behalf of the appellant. Upon receipt, materials shall be forwarded to the
Chairman of the Planning Commission who shall place the matter on the agenda of the next meeting or a special
meeting, provided a notice of the special meeting is appropriately published in the City’s legal publication. Notice of all
hearings for appeals shall be mailed to all appellants.
17.7.3 Upon review of the appeal and supplemental documentation and testimony related thereto, the Planning
Commission shall decide the matter subject to judicial review or appeal to the City Council.
17.7.4 In the event the appeal is granted, it shall be published in the City’s legal publication and shall become effective
the date of publication.
Section 17.8 Fees
17.8.1 Application Fees. The fees to be paid to the City for an application for amendment of this Ordinance, a Variance
from this Ordinance, a Conditional or Interim Use Permit, or any construction, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or
other related permit shall be made payable to the City in an amount established, and from time to time, amended by
resolution of the City Council.
17.8.2 Supplemental Costs. In addition to application fees, the City shall require payment of supplemental costs related
to an action or application including, but not limited to: attorney’s fees, fees of outside experts; staff time; direct expenses
exceptional to the effort and as identified by City staff. The applicant shall deposit funds with the City, to be held in
escrow, for payment of these supplemental costs, as determined by the City Council in ordinances adopted from time
to time setting forth fees and charges for City services. Any application fees shall be applied to the costs incurred by the
City. All expenses and costs incurred by the City in connection with an application under this Ordinance shall be borne
by the applicant, and paid prior to final action on the application. Any amounts remaining from a deposit posted by an
applicant shall be refunded to the applicant within thirty (30) days after final action on the application.
17.8.3 Fees shall be payable at the time applications are first filed with the City and are not refundable unless the
application is withdrawn prior to referral of the matter for consideration. There shall be no fee in the case of an
application filed in the public interest by members of the Planning Commission or City Council.
Section 17.9 Violations and Penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to the maximum penalties provided for
by law and costs for every offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 88
SECTION 18 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 18.1 General.
The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage high quality development by providing
assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible. The performance standards are also designed to prevent and eliminate
those conditions that cause urban and rural blight. The Zoning Administrator, assisted by the Building Inspector, shall be
responsible for enforcing these standards and may require the submission of information showing compliance or noncompliance
with the standards.
Section 18.2 Requirements for Consideration
18.2.1 Construction Plan Review
A) Residential Construction
1) Prior to the start of construction or remodeling that will create a new building or structure or will
change the outside dimensions of any building or structure located in a residential zoning district, six
(6) copies of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.
a) Existing Improvements. Copies of a site plan drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch
equals fifty feet (1" = 50') for the lot upon which the structures will be built or remodeled.
Each site plan shall identify the location(s) and size(s) of all existing structures, proposed
structures or additions, driveways, sidewalks, parking spaces and Individual Sewage Treatment
Systems (ISTS). The dimensions and area calculations of the lot and all building set-back lines
shall also be shown.
b) Wetlands and Water Bodies. All wetlands and other water bodies on the property shall be
identified and set-back lines to all structures shall be indicated on the site plan.
c) Trees and Landscape. If the proposed construction or remodeling will result in any loss of
existing trees or vegetation, a tree inventory and, if necessary, reforestation plan as described
in Section 27 shall be provided. A landscape plan shall also be provided indicating existing and
proposed vegetation improvements.
d) Plans. Preliminary architectural plans including floor plans and exterior elevations for the
proposed construction or remodeling.
e) Sediment and Erosion Control. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to
be employed on the property to provide sediment and erosion control in accordance with
Section 22 of this ordinance.
f) Additional Data. Any additional data requested by the Zoning Administrator or Plan Review
Commission due to conditions peculiar to the property.
B) Commercial Construction
1) Prior to the start of construction or remodeling that will create a new building or structure or will
change the outside dimensions of any building or structure located in a commercial or business zoning
district, six (6) copies of the following data must be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.
a) Existing Improvements. Copies of a Registered Surveyors Report drawn to a scale not
smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') for the lot upon which the structures will be
built or remodeled. Each site plan shall identify the location(s) and size(s) of all existing
structures, proposed structures or additions, driveways, sidewalks, parking spaces and
Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS). The dimensions and area calculations of the lot
and all building set-back lines shall also be shown.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 89
b) Wetlands and Water Bodies. All wetlands and other water bodies on the property shall be
identified and set-back lines to all structures shall be indicated on the site plan.
c) Topography. A topographical survey in two (2') foot increments and at a minimum scale of
one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') for the proposed construction site which includes
existing topographical and natural features, proposed changes to the topographical and natural
features, existing structures and improvements and proposed structures and improvements.
d) Trees and Landscape. If the proposed construction or remodeling will result in any loss of
existing trees or vegetation, a tree inventory and, if necessary, reforestation plan as described
in Section 27 shall be provided. A landscape plan shall also be provided indicating existing and
proposed vegetation improvements.
e) Fences and Screening. Details and specifications for all fencing, walls and screening devices
to be installed as part of the project.
f) Storm Water Drainage Plans. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to be
employed on the property to provide storm water drainage sufficient to drain and dispose of
all surface water accumulation within the proposed development site, said BMP’s to be in
accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance. These plans to be reviewed by the City Engineer
and the appropriate Watershed Management Organization (WMO).
g) Sediment And Erosion Control. Identification of all Best Management Practices (BMP) to
be employed on the property to provide sediment and erosion control in accordance with
Section 22 of this ordinance. These plans to be reviewed by the City Engineer and the
appropriate Watershed Management Organization (WMO).
h) Traffic and Parking. Detailed plans showing all entrances and exits accompanied by reviews
by Ramsey County if development will access onto a county road or MN DOT if development
will access onto a state highway. Plans shall also include all interior driveway and road details,
parking requirements and emergency access routes.
I) Lighting. Lighting plans shall include all proposed installation of exterior, parking lot, display
and storage lot lighting.
j) Signage. Proposed placement, description and quantity of all sign types and associated
fixtures.
k) Structure Plans. Preliminary architectural plans including floor plans, exterior elevations and
description of exterior facades.
l) Deviations. Plans should be accompanied by a list of all Variances, Conditional or Interim
Use Permits, and Zoning Amendments required for the development.
18.2.2 Cost of data review
A) All costs in excess of those already included in established permit fees incurred by the City in the review of
the data supplied for commercial construction, such as City Engineer plan review costs, shall be paid by the
person presenting the plans, prior to any approval. The final approval of these plans will not be voted on by
the City Council until all costs have been paid.
B) Whenever the proposal may involve a potential for significant environmental impact, or if an Environmental
Impact Statement or an Environmental Assessment Worksheet may be needed by state law or applicable
regulation, the City will require the applicant to prepare or pay for the professional assistance needed in the
preparation of these statements or worksheets.
18.2.3 Procedures for review
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 90
A) Residential Construction
1) No building permits will be issued for the proposed construction or remodeling until the data
required has been reviewed and approved by the Plan Review Commission which shall be charged with
completion of the review in a timely manner.
a) If approved by the Plan Review Commission, one (1) copy of the data shall be filed with
the application for a building permit, one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans
retained by the City for its records and one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans
and made available for inspection at the construction site.
b) In the event the applicant and Plan Review Commission disagree on any portion of the
proposed plans which would preclude issuance of a building permit, the matter may be
submitted to the City Council. In this case, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals
and may order approval of the building permit application as presented, may order approval
of the building permit application with such amendments as it may deem appropriate or may
order denial of the building permit application.
B) Commercial Construction
1) No building permits will be issued for the proposed construction or remodeling until the data in
required has been reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and submitted for review by the Planning
Commission at its next regular meeting. The Planning Commission with assistance as requested by the
Plan Review Commission, City Engineer, Building Official or other such professionals as it may deem
necessary shall review the submittal and forward recommendations to the City Council for approval of
the building permit application, approval of the building permit application with such amendments as
may be appropriate or denial of the building permit application.
a) If approved by the City Council, one (1) copy of the data shall be filed with the application
for a building permit, one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans retained by the
City for its records and one (1) copy shall be attached to the architectural plans and made
available for inspection at the construction site.
b) In the event the applicant and City Council disagree on any portion of the proposed plans,
the matter may be resubmitted with amendments to the Planning Commission for
reconsideration and the Planning Commission shall review the resubmittal and forward
recommendations to the City Council for approval of the building permit application with
amendments as resubmitted or denial of the building permit application.
Section 18.3 Exterior Storage
18.3.1 Residential Districts
A) In Residential Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as
not to be visible) from adjoining properties or a street, except for the following; laundry drying and recreational
equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises,
agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of
passenger automobiles and pick-up trucks, except inoperative automobiles and trucks may be parked once for
a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
B) The use of commercial storage equipment and/or semi-trailer type containers or other similar portable
storage units is not allowed in any residential district except when used in conjunction with an Interim Use
Permit, issuance of which is not subject to a public hearing, issued for a period of not more than one-hundred
twenty (120) days in conjunction with a properly issued Building Permit for the property. Whenever possible,
such containers should be restricted to a location in the side or rear yard.
18.3.2 Business Districts
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 91
A) In business districts all materials, equipment and vehicles shall be stored in a building or fully screened (so
as not to be visible) from adjoining properties or a street except for:
1) Temporary storage of construction and landscaping materials currently being used on the premises.
2) Open Storage Lots where screening but not a building shall be required.
3) Open Sales or Rental Lots where merchandise for retail sales or rental may be displayed in areas
designated by the required Site Plan or a Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
B) The use of commercial storage equipment and/or semi-trailer type containers or other similar portable
storage units is not allowed in any business district unless an Interim Use Permit for a period not to exceed
one-hundred eighty (180) days is first secured in accordance with Section 17.5 17.6 of this Ordinance. Whenever
possible, such containers should be restricted to a location in the side or rear yard.
Section 18.4 Refuse
18.4.1 In All Districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly
contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. Farms may be excluded from this requirement providing
the waste material is that commonly associated and incidental to normal farm operations. The owner of vacant land
shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse, and weeds.
A) In all non-residential districts, all commercial refuse containers shall be enclosed in a building or properly
fenced or screened to prevent any refuse from spilling beyond the fenced or screened area and to prevent access
by children or other unauthorized persons. Fences or screens shall also be subject to the provisions for same
found elsewhere in this ordinance.
18.4.2 In All Districts, no person shall store, park or permit the parking or storage of any junked vehicle, machinery or
equipment external to any structure, on any property within the city.
Section 18.5 Screening
18.5.1 Screening shall be required in all zones where:
A) any off-street parking area contains more than four parking spaces and is within thirty (30') feet of an
adjoining residential use or zone; and
B) where the driveway to a parking area of more than six (6) parking spaces is within fifteen (15') feet of an
adjoining residential use or zone.
18.5.2 Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property zoned or developed
for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property.
Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a developed residential zone, but
not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the Building Inspector).
18.5.3 In all districts all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
A) retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure;
B) materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises;
C) merchandise located on service station pump islands.
18.5.4 The screening in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than five (5') feet high, but shall not
extend within fifteen (15') feet of any street, right-of-way or driveway. The screening shall be placed along property lines
or in case of screening along a street, fifteen (15') feet from the street right-of-way with landscaping between the
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 92
screening and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered “solid” if it blocks direct vision. Planting of a type
approved by the Council may also be used as a screening.
A) Screening shall also be subject to additional provisions of other sections of this Ordinance.
Section 18.6 Landscaping
18.6.1 In All Districts, all exposed ground areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use including but not
limited to street boulevards not devoted to drives, sidewalks, patios and the like shall be landscaped.
18.6.2 Landscaped yards shall be provided along all streets, both public and private. Landscaped yards shall not be used
for parking of vehicles or equipment or for storage or display of household items, materials, supplies or merchandise
advertised for sale. Landscaped yards shall be at least twenty (20') feet in depth along all streets measured from the rightof-
way. Except for driveways, the yard shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot and, in the case of a corner lot,
along both streets.
18.6.3 All property owners and their (sub-) contractors shall employ and maintain sediment and erosion control in
accordance with Section 22 of this ordinance until landscaping is complete.
18.6.4 All landscaping shall be completed within one (1) growing season after completion of any development, grading
and filling, construction, or other activity which shall result in exposed ground on the property.
Section 18.7 Maintenance
18.7.1 In All Districts, all structures, landscaping and fences shall be maintained so as not be unsightly or present harmful
health and safety or nuisance conditions to the adjoining areas.
Section 18.8 Lighting and Glare
18.8.1 In All Districts, any lighting shall be arranged as to deflect light from all adjoining property, and from the public
streets and highways. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from lighting or from high temperature processes such as
welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
18.8.2 Glare or Heat - Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall be performed
with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the
use is located.
18.8.3 Outdoor Lighting - All outdoor lighting shall be so designed and installed so that light will not be directed onto
adjoining property or public streets and highways. Lighting units shall be properly shielded to give no upward
component of light to create a sky-glow.
A) Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be mounted at the lowest possible level above ground, but in no case shall
any pole or structure for mounting such fixtures exceed the maximum principal structure height restrictions.
B) Prior to installing or remodeling any outdoor lighting, a site plan showing type, location and configuration
details and proposed area of direct illumination must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for his
approval.
C) After completion of any outdoor lighting system the property owner may be required to submit an affidavit,
by a registered lighting engineer, that the completed project does not exceed the requirements of this section.
18.8.4 Lighting used to illuminate sales lots - Lighting used to illuminate sales lots for new or used cars shall be arranged
and designed so as to comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the lot, measured 36 inches above
grade, shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120) foot candles.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 93
B) Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured thirty (30') feet out from the property line with the
meter directed toward the lot, shall be five (5) foot candles.
C) The maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point thirty (30') feet out from
the property line, shall be no greater than six-hundred (600) foot Lamberts.
18.8.5 Lighting for outdoor storage areas - Lighting for outdoor storage areas shall comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the area, measured thirty-six (36") inches above
grade, shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles.
B) Maximum maintained vertical illumination, measured five (5') feet out from the property line with the meter
directed toward the area in question, shall be two (2) foot-candles.
C) Maximum point brightness, measured with a brightness meter from a point five (5') feet out from the
property line, shall be no greater than three-hundred (300) foot Lamberts.
18.8.6 Lighting for off street parking - Lighting for off street parking lots shall comply with the following limitations:
A) Maximum maintained lighting level at any point within the boundaries of the parking area, measured thirty
six (36") inches above grade, shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles.
B) Limitations on the hours of lighting operation may be imposed by the City Council.
Section 18.9 Vibration
18.9.1 Any use creating periodic earth-shaking vibrations, such as may be created from a drop forge, shall be prohibited
if such vibrations are perceptible beyond the lot line of the site on which the use is located. This standard shall not apply
to vibrations created during the process of construction.
Section 18.10 Off-Street Loading
18.10.1 In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt
or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading space
on the basis of adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used incidental to the operation of the use.
A) No loading berth of vehicles over two-tons capacity shall be closer than one-hundred (100') feet to any
residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls not less than eight (8') feet in height.
B) Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audile in a residential district, the activity shall terminate
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Section 18.11 Traffic Control
18.11.1 The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will avoid:
A) congestion on the public streets; and,
B) traffic hazards; and
C) additional truck traffic through residential areas.
18.11.2 Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe and orderly flow.
18.11.3 Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall avoid residential areas and in all cases be forwardmoving
with no backing into streets.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 94
18.11.4 All entrances from private property onto city streets shall be subject to review and approval of the City Engineer
and all entrances from private property onto county roads or state highways shall be subject to review and approval by
Ramsey County Public Works or the Minnesota Department of Transportation.
Section 18.12 (Deleted)
Section 18.13 Architecture
18.13.1 It is hereby affirmed as public policy that the appearance of this community is a proper matter for public concern
and that all developed open spaces, and all buildings, signs, plantings, surfaces and structures which may be seen from
the public ways are subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
18.13.2 In All Districts, all principal buildings other than one-family dwellings must be designed or approved by a
registered architect and certified in accordance with the appropriate Minnesota State statutes.
18.13.3 In All Business Districts, a building permit shall not be issued unless the proposed use is designed, sited, oriented
and landscape-planned to produce a harmonious relationship of building and grounds with adjacent buildings and
grounds and with the environment of the neighborhood.
18.13.4 In All Residential Districts, a building permit shall not be issued if the proposed building is so similar or dissimilar
to the other homes in the area as to result in depreciation of property values in the neighborhood.
Section 18.14 Explosives
18.14.1 No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products, such as TNT or
dynamite, which could decompose by detonation shall be permitted except such as are licensed by the Council.
Section 18.15 Radiation and Electrical Emissions
18.15.1 No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radio-activity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no
electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
Section 18.16 Aircraft
18.16.1 Landing Area. Aircraft landing areas are hereby prohibited within the City of Gem Lake.
18.16.2 Operation. The landing and the taking off of aircraft within the City of Gem Lake is prohibited except for
emergencies or by duly authorized law enforcement, military or medical transport aircraft.
Section 18.17 Other Nuisance Characteristics
18.17.1 No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, dangerous wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other such adverse
influences shall be permitted in any district that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby
property.
18.17.2 All wastes shall be properly contained, fenced or screened and disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous to
public health and safety.
Section 18.18 Consistency with Plans and Policies
18.18.1 The proposed use shall preserve the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and shall be consistent with the goals,
plans and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
Section 18.19 Clustering and Density Transfer
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 95
18.19.1 This clustering and density transfer system is to provide a means by which parcels of land in the City of Gem
Lake, having unusual building characteristics due to subsoil conditions, elevation of the water table, water area, and/or
relative location or shape of the parcel may be more efficiently utilized. Density zoning also provides a means to preserve
and protect natural resource areas such as wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes, as well as good agricultural land and scenic
views. Basically, this approach allows a developer to cluster housing or business units in buildable areas in return for
leaving the natural resource areas or agricultural land open from development.
18.19.2 The City Council, in determining the reasonableness of the proposed clustering, shall consider the following
factors:
A) Location, amount and proposed use of open space;
B) Location, design and type of dwellings or business provided,
C) Physical characteristics of the site
D) Relationship of the proposed dwelling or business units to nearby uses.
18.19.3 The owner or owners of any tract of land in the City of Gem Lake may submit to the Planning Commission,
for review and recommendation to the City Council, a plan for use and development of such a tract of land as a cluster
area by making an application for a Conditional Use Permit authorizing completion of the project according to an
approved plan. The plan for the proposed project shall conform to the requirements of the Use District within which
the land is located except as hereinafter modified:
A) The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a Conditional Use Permit requested shall not be less
than five (5) acres in size; and
B) The applicant shall state precisely what, in this opinion, are the unusual characteristics of this site for
purposes of justifying the granting of a Conditional Use Permit for this project; and
C) The plan shall be submitted in the form of a preliminary plan and be in complete conformance with what
would be submitted as described in the City of Gem Lake Subdivision Ordinance for a preliminary plan, and,
D) The number of dwelling or business units proposed for the entire subdivided area shall not exceed the total
number permitted for the Use District within which the land is located, unless a bonus is given for unique uses
of the area; and,
E) The average lot density in the plan shall not be greater than the maximum for the area and the lot area of
any one (1) lot shall not be reduced more than one-half (½) by assigning additional dwelling or business units;
and,
F) That land which is set aside as unbuildable and on which the plan is justified shall be clearly indicated on the
plan. This land shall be dedicated as a “conservation easement” naming both the City and the Minnesota Land
Trust or similar as holders of that title for that land. Provisions for the continual maintenance of that
“easement” area so dedicated and accepted by the City shall be required from the property owner(s).
18.19.4 When calculating the number of dwelling or business units per acre the size of site shall be determined by the
total land area within the perimeter of the privately owned property. This will include any area of newly proposed public
or private roads of road right-of-ways.
18.19.5 A density bonus of up to ten (10%) percent of the maximum allowable dwellings on a defined parcel may be
allowed by the City Council Section
18.20 Park Land Dedication Requirements
18.20.1 As a pre-requisite to plat or Planned Unit Development approval, all developers shall dedicate land for parks,
playgrounds, public open spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City of Gem Lake’s park fund as
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 96
provided by this section of this Ordinance. The form of the contribution, cash or land (or any combination), shall be as
determined by the City Council in an amount equal to ten (10.0%) percent of the total acreage in the development or
ten (10.0%) percent of the pre-development land value.
18.20.2 Subdivision of land which has been previously platted and officially recorded and which contains less than one
(1) acre shall be exempt from dedication requirements.
18.20.3 Land to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds and public open spaces shall be reasonably suitable for its intended
use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed
park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and location. The
City Council, at its discretion, may reject proffered land and mandate monetary contribution.
18.20.4 The Gem Lake Planning Commission shall review all park land dedication proposals including the location of
land and the amount of land to be conveyed or dedicated within a proposed development or subdivision. Upon review,
the Gem Lake Planning Commission shall recommend the land dedication and cash contribution requirements for
proposed developments or subdivisions to the City Council. The exact amount of land or cash considerations to be
dedicated shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
18.20.5 Land areas conveyed or dedicated to the City of Gem Lake, as a park or recreation area, shall not be used in
calculating the density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the proposed development or subdivision, and shall
be in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for Planned Unit Developments.
18.20.6 Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided for in a proposed development,
subdivision or Planned Unit Development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future
residents of the subdivision or PUD , such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the City Council against the
requirement for dedication for park and recreation purposes, providing the City Council finds it is in the public interest
to do so and that the following standards are met:
A) The yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space required to be maintained by the zoning and building
regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open spaces, and
B) That the public ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written
agreements, and
C) That the public open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run
with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be eliminated without
the consent of the City Council, and
D) That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreations purposes,
taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, hydrological conditions, geology, access and
location of private open space lands, and
E) That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the
recreational element of the comprehensive plan, and are approved by the City Council, and
F) That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall not exceed forty (40.0%) percent of the park
dedication requirements for the development.
18.20.7 The City of Gem Lake shall maintain a separate fund into which all cash contributions received in lieu of
conveyance or dedication of land for park and playground, public open space or trail purposes shall be deposited and
shall make, from time to time, appropriations from such fund for acquisition of land for park and playground purposes,
for developing existing park and playground sites, for public open space and trails, or for debt retirement in connection
with land previously acquired for parks and playgrounds which benefit the residents of the City.
18.20.8 If a developer or subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a commitment to the City of Gem Lake as to the
type of buildings that will be constructed on lots in the proposed plat, then the land and cash requirement will be a
reasonable amount as determined by the City Council.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 97
18.20.9 Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City of Gem Lake shall not be considered in the
park land and/or cash contribution to the City.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 98
SECTION 19 - SIGNS
Section 19.1 Purpose and Intent.
19.1.1 The purpose of Gem Lake sign regulation is to promote the creation of an attractive visual environment in the
City. The regulations are intended to promote a healthy economy by allowing businesses and individuals to effectively
inform, identify, direct and communicate with the public using rights of way in Gem Lake. This aim is balanced with
an equal intent to foster public safety and maintain an attractive built environment in the City by encouraging the
appropriate design, scale and placement of signs in the City. The regulations are intended to encourage the orderly
placement of signs, to assure that the information displayed on any sign is clearly visible for its intended purpose, and
to allow the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations by the City of Gem Lake.
Section 19.2 Findings
19.2.1 The City Council concludes that it is necessary to regulate signs in the City in order to promote and preserve
public health, safety and welfare. That conclusion is based upon the following findings:
19.2.1.1 Signs provide an important medium through which individuals and businesses may convey a variety
of messages.
19.2.1.2 Signs can create hazards to motorists and pedestrians, particularly when inappropriately designed or
placed signs interfere with necessary sight distances, divert the attention of drivers and pedestrians, or
obscure directional guidance or traffic control devices.
19.2.1.3 A positive sense of place and community image is important to the health and welfare of individuals
and businesses in Gem Lake. Community image and aesthetic is also a key component of property values in
the City. Permanent and temporary signs have a direct impact on and relationship to the image and aesthetic
of the community.
19.2.1.4 Uncontrolled and unlimited signs result in roadside clutter and obstruction of views for motorists
and pedestrians, and diminish the ability of any sign to effectively convey its intended message.
19.2.1.5 Properly regulated signage can create an atmosphere of prosperity, stimulate positive commercial
activity and consequently lead to increased employment, higher property values and a healthier tax base.
19.2.1.6 Citizens have different expectations for the aesthetic environment of a residential area compared
with that of a commercial area. Signs should be smaller in scale and their use generally more restricted in
residential areas than in commercial areas where the public expects to see a variety of signs.
Section 19.3 Permit Required
19.3.1 No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the City without first securing a permit
from the City. The speech content of the sign shall not be considered when approving or denying a sign permit;
however, the content must be submitted to properly evaluate the signage area, design and placement. A proposed
sign with a structure requiring a building permit or electrical permit must obtain those permits in addition to a sign
permit.
19.3.1.1 Exemptions. The following signs shall not require a permit, but remain subject to the standards of
these regulations concerning erection, maintenance and removal, and the standards of any other applicable
law or ordinance.
A) A sign, of less than four (4) square feet in display area, indicating the address of a building.
B) A sign on a residential property, of less than four (4) square feet in display area, stating the name
of the owner or occupant in addition to the address of the property.
C) Traffic control signs, related directional aids, and traffic control devices installed by a unit of
government having authority over the adjacent right-of-way, or at the direction of such a
government.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 99
D) Signs not visible from a public or private right-of-way.
E) Newspaper boxes.
F) Flags, up to a combined total of 35 square feet, with no one flag larger than 15 square feet in size.
G) Official notices posted on a property at the direction of a court, public body, or public safety
official.
H) A sandwich board, menu board, A-frame, T-frame or similar sign which does not exceed six (6)
square feet in size, is not illuminated, is located within 15 feet of the primary building entrance of the
owner or tenant placing the sign, and is only displayed during hours of business operation. No more
than two signs may be placed by any single owner or tenant at any given time. Signs of this type
must be placed in a location where they will not impede foot traffic
I) A temporary sign or signs, up to a total of ten (10) square feet of display space, erected by the
owner or rental tenant of the property on which the sign is placed.
J) A temporary sign directing people to an event or occurrence located on the property of the person
erecting the sign. Such signs are limited to six (6) feet or less of display space and must be installed
so that they are less than four (4) feet in height. If placed on property not owned or rented by the
person erecting the sign, the property owner must give express permission to erect a sign on the
property. A maximum of five (5) such signs may be placed in the City for any given event or
occurrence. Such signs may be erected up to two (2) days prior to the event or occurrence, and shall
be removed within two (2) days following the event or occurrence. In no event shall such a sign
remain in place for more than seven (7) days.
K) A change in the message content (words, logos, or similar graphics) of an existing permanent sign,
without change in any other characteristics of the sign.
19.3.2 Operation of Minnesota Election Law on Regulations.
For the period beginning August 1 in a State general election year and ending ten (10) days following the general
election, or thirteen (13) weeks preceding a special election until ten (10) days following the special election, these
regulations shall have no effect upon the size or number of non-commercial signs within the City. Signs placed
during this period shall be removed by the person responsible for erecting them within the 10 days following the
election. Signs may be placed upon private property with permission of the property owner, but may not be placed
within the public right-of-way or within a sight triangle. The City retains the right to remove and destroy any such
signs so placed.
19.3.3 Permit Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made upon the City’s application form, and shall
contain the following information:
A) Name, signature, address and phone number of the property owner.
B) Name, signature, address and phone number of the applicant, if different from the property owner.
C) The address or property identification number of the property where the sign is proposed to be erected.
D) An inventory of existing signs on the site and combined display area.
E) A complete set of plans showing elevations, distances, setbacks from lot lines, location of buildings and
other signs, size of the proposed sign and structure, and other details to fully and clearly represent the
construction and placement of the sign.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 100
F) Plans and specifications relating to the method of construction, attachment to buildings, and/or placement
upon the ground.
G) A to-scale drawing or illustration showing proposed height, width, shape, layout, colors, lighting and other
relevant details of the sign, from all perspectives in which the sign is intended to be viewed.
Applicants shall submit one application and supporting materials for each sign, unless submitting a Comprehensive
Sign Plan as described in Section 19.3.7.
19.3.4 Fees
Sign permit fees and any impoundment fee shall be set by the City Council by ordinance, as amended from time to
time. The required fee shall accompany any sign permit application
19.3.5 Review
The Zoning Administrator shall review applications for compliance with these regulations. A decision to approve or
deny should be made within 30 days of receiving a complete application. Applicants shall be informed of the decision
in writing. Decisions to deny a permit shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons for the denial.
19.3.6 Variance and Appeal
An appeal from a sign permit denial shall be taken in the manner of zoning appeals, using the procedure stated in
Section 17.7 of the Zoning Ordinance. Requests for variance from these sign regulations shall be made and
considered in the manner of requests for zoning variance, using the procedure stated in Section 17.4 of this
Ordinance.
19.3.7 Comprehensive Sign Plan
An applicant seeking approval for signs in connection with new building construction, remodeling, or re-development
may submit a comprehensive sign plan with the other required submittals in lieu of making individual applications for
sign permits. All information required in this Ordinance is required to be represented in the supporting
documentation supporting the comprehensive sign request. In acting upon the comprehensive sign plan, the Planning
Commission and City Council may permit consideration of unique conditions, flexibility and creativity in the design
and placement of signs, to the extent such leeway promotes the purposes and goals of any design standards in the
underlying zoning district. If a comprehensive sign plan is approved, the Zoning Administrator may issue sign
permits for individual signs in the plan without further review, upon payment of the applicable sign permit fee.
Section 19.4 Inspections and Enforcement.
All signs shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator, or other official designated by the Zoning Administrator.
The Administrator or designee must be allowed entry upon the property on which the sign is located to ascertain compliance
with the terms of these regulations and the technical specifications provided with the permit application. Such entrance shall
be made during business hours unless an emergency exists.
19.4.1 Signs in Disrepair
The Zoning Administrator or designee may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with
the requirements of these regulations. Upon failure to comply with such order within the time specified, the City
Council may declare the sign a public nuisance and direct that the nuisance be abated under the procedures set forth
in Gem Lake Ordinance No. 86.
19.4.2 Impoundment of Signs on Public Property
The City may at any time, and without notice, remove and impound signs which have been erected on public property
or within a public right-of-way or easement. The sign’s owner may retrieve the sign from the City upon payment of a
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 101
$50 impoundment fee. If the same owner has a subsequent sign impounded within the same calendar year, the
impoundment fee is doubled. The City shall not be held liable for any damage to an impounded sign. If a sign is not
retrieved within thirty (30) days, the City may dispose of it.
19.4.3 Sign Without a Permit or in Violation of Regulations
The Zoning Administrator or designee may order the correction or removal of any sign which has been erected
without a permit, or has been erected or altered such that the sign is in violation of these regulations.
A) The person responsible for the sign may apply for a sign permit “after the fact,” paying double the
applicable sign permit fee, if the only violation is lack of a permit.
B) If an order is not remedied or complied with in the time specified, the City Council may declare the sign a
public nuisance and direct that the nuisance be abated under the procedures set forth in Gem Lake
Ordinance No. 86.
C) In addition to the above, the City Council may give written notice to the person responsible for the sign
that the Council will consider civil penalties for the violation. The written notice shall contain a summary of
all facts the Council intends to consider, and state the date and time at which the Council will consider a
penalty. If the person receiving the notice appears at that date and time, the Council must give the person
reasonable time to present matters in defense or mitigation of the alleged offense. If, in the Council’s
discretion, the alleged violation is supported by the evidence presented to it, it may order the payment of a
civil penalty using the following as guidelines:
1st offense: $ 100.00
2nd offense: $ 600.00
3rd offense: $1,500.00
A person with outstanding unpaid civil penalties shall not be eligible to receive permits or licenses, of any
kind, from the City of Gem Lake until the penalty is paid.
D) Violation of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor. Each day on which the condition giving rise to the
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. None of the other enforcement options described above
shall preclude the City from issuing a citation and prosecuting any violation of these regulations as a
misdemeanor.
Section 19.5 Applicable Standards.
19.5.1 Measurement Standards.
A) Sign Area and Dimensions.
1) For a wall sign which is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise prepared and intended to provide a
background for a sign display, the area and dimensions shall include the entire portion within such
background or frame.
2) For a wall sign comprised of individual letters, figures or elements on a wall or similar surface of
the building or structure, the area and dimensions of the sign shall encompass a regular geometric
shape or a combination of regular geometric shapes which form, or approximate, the perimeter of all
elements in the display, the frame, and any applied background that is not part of the architecture of
the building. When separate elements are organized to form a single sign, but are separated by open
space, the sign area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining the geometric form, or
combination of forms, which comprises all of the display areas, including the space between different
areas. Minor appendages to a particular regular shape, as determined by the Zoning Administrator,
shall not be included in the total area of a sign.
Figures (for illustration): To be inserted later
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 102
3) For a freestanding sign, the sign area shall include the frame, if any, but shall not include a pole or
other structural support unless such pole or structural support is internally illuminated or otherwise
so designed to constitute a display device, or part of a display device. Architectural features that are
either part of the building or part of a freestanding structure, and not an integral part of the sign, and
which may consist of landscaping, building or structural forms complimenting the landscaping in
general.
4) When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any point at the same time, and are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as
the measurement of one of the two faces. When the sign has more than two display surfaces, the
area of the sign shall be the area of largest display surfaces that are visible from any single direction.
B) Sign Height.
1) The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the base of the sign or supportive
structure at its point of attachment to the ground, to the highest point of the sign. A freestanding
sign on a man-made base, including a graded earth mound, shall be measured from the grade of the
nearest pavement or top of any pavement curb.
2) Clearances for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance
between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other
embellishments.
C) Frontages and Frontage Lengths.
1) The length of any primary or secondary building frontage shall be the sum of all wall lengths
parallel, or nearly parallel, to such frontage, excluding any such wall length determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be clearly unrelated to the frontage presence of the building.
2) For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the wall and allowable sign area shall be
calculated separately for each such building frontage.
3) The building frontage for a section of any building (e.g. retail tenant spaces) shall be measured
from the centerline of the party walls defining the building section.
19.5.2 Development Standards.
A) Wall Signs
Wall signs are permitted on buildings located in the Neighborhood General, Neighborhood Mixed-Use, and
Neighborhood Center subzones of the Gateway District. Wall signs, other than those exempted from
regulations as stated above, are not permitted in Residential zoning districts and the Neighborhood Edge
subzone of the Gateway District.
1) The basic allowance for wall signs shall be limited to 2 square feet of sign area for each lineal foot
of building or tenant frontage.
2) Each owner or tenant may have multiple wall signs as long as the total wall sign area does not
exceed the allowances established for wall signs. If multiple signs are used on a building façade, the
display method (i.e. individual letters, box and panel, etc.) shall be the same for the entire façade.
3) Wall signs shall not be greater than eighty (80%) of the length of the tenant space or the length of
the building frontage.
4) Each building frontage or frontage section may be evaluated separately or in combination, but
primary and secondary frontages will not be combined for purposes of determining allowable sign
size.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 103
5) In addition to wall signs otherwise permitted by these regulations, an additional sign may be
permitted up to a maximum of 40% of the wall sign area allowed for the building for the purposes of
identifying owners or tenants that occupy upper floors or do not have outside building frontage.
6) An arcade or gallery may have sign space on it relating to the activities of owners or tenants whose
entrances are under the arcade or gallery. If the sign on the arcade or gallery is illuminated, 100% of
the sign space is deducted from the total available area for wall signs. If the sign space on the arcade
or gallery is not illuminated, 50% is deducted from the area available for wall signs.
7) Projecting signs are permitted in addition to any allowances for wall signs when the projecting
signs are designed and placed for the purpose of identifying the owner or tenant for a pedestrian
walking along the same side of the street as the sign, or under a continuous arcade or gallery.
Projecting signs shall have a maximum area of eight (8) square feet. The bottom of the sign shall be
a minimum of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. The sign may project a maximum of six (6) feet
from the wall of the building, or be centered under any arcade, awning or canopy. Projecting signs
shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet from any other projecting sign.
8) Wall signs shall not be installed on a roof surface or otherwise project above the top of a building
façade.
B) Freestanding Signs
Freestanding signs are permitted in all zoning districts. Such signs may only be erected by an owner or a
tenant of a building located on the property for which the sign is proposed.
1) Residential Zones and Neighborhood Edge subzone. Freestanding signs in residential zoning
areas may be erected up to a cumulative maximum of ten (10) square feet in display area, and up to
six (6) feet in height.
2) All Other Zones. Freestanding signs in the remaining zoning areas of the City may be erected up
to fifty (50) square feet per owner or tenant entrance to a building. Permitted sign area may be
aggregated into fewer and larger signs at the election of the property owner, provided that the size of
any single sign does not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. Freestanding signs shall not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, and signs over fifteen (15) feet in height shall be no closer than
seventy-five feet to any other sign. Instructional or directional signs of up to six (6) square feet in
area may be erected to satisfy a clear instructional or directional purpose without counting against the
total freestanding sign area allowed for the property.
3) Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way line.
4) No portion of a sign shall be in, or project over, a public right-of-way.
5) Signs may be integrated into the design of a permanent canopy, if one is otherwise allowed on the
property, with the sign area on any side of the canopy not exceeding one (1) square foot per lineal
foot of the side.
C) Window signs
Permanent window signs are permitted in the Neighborhood General, Neighborhood Mixed-Use and
Neighborhood Center subzones of the Gateway District. Temporary window signs are permitted in all
districts. Permanent window signs shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the window on
which it is installed; the total of all permanent and temporary window signs may not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the total window area of any building frontage.
D) Illumination; Electronic Message Center and Changeable Copy Signs
Illuminated signs (internal or external) and signs with changeable copy are not permitted in Residential zoning
areas and the Neighborhood Edge subzone of the Gateway District. In districts where illuminated signs or
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 104
electronic signs are permitted, the use of lighting, electronic message center, or dynamic display as an element
of a sign is a conditional use. Application for approval of lighting or electronic features shall be made in the
manner of a conditional use permit, using the procedure stated at Section 17.5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
1) Illumination. Internally illuminated signs are permitted in the Neighborhood Mixed-Use and
Neighborhood Center subzones only. Externally lit signs shall use lighting that is directed downward
and away from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Lights used for external illumination shall be
shielded or screened from any roadway, and shall not be visible from the roadway or sidewalk.
2) Changeable Copy. Changeable copy by non-electronic means may be utilized on any permitted
sign in areas where allowed. The changeable copy area shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the
total permitted area for any sign.
3) Electronic Message Center (EMC) or Dynamic Display signs. EMC or dynamic display signs are
permitted if erected within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way for Highway 61 or County Road E
within the City of Gem Lake. Only one (1) such sign is permitted per property, regardless of the
number of tenants. Motion is permitted for up to eight (8) seconds for any single set of changeable
copy, but the changeable copy may not change or be repeated by flashing more than once every
sixteen (16) seconds. EMCs and dynamic displays must have an automatic dimming capability that
adjusts the brightness to the ambient light at all times of day or night.
4) Any changeable copy area (manual, EMC or dynamic display) may not exceed 40% of the total
freestanding sign area permitted to the owner or tenant.
E) Features Prohibited on Signs
No sign permitted by these regulations, with or without a permit, shall have: moving, rotating or revolving
parts; flashing, rotating or oscillating lights (except for EMCs and dynamic displays where permitted); neon
lights; beacons or searchlights; attached materials such as pennants or streamers; exposed raceways, ballast
boxes or transformers; or other clearly similar features.
F) Signs Prohibited if Not Expressly Permitted
Any type of sign or method of sign construction or display that these regulations do not expressly permit, or
expressly exempt, is hereby prohibited within the City of Gem Lake.
19.5.3 Construction Standards. The construction, erection, safety and maintenance of all signs shall comply with the
Minnesota State Building Code and Electrical Code and all of the following:
A) Signs shall be structurally sound and located so as to pose no reasonable threat to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
B) All permanent freestanding signs over four feet in height shall have self-supporting structures erected on
or permanently attached to concrete foundations. A freestanding sign shall not use guy wires for support.
C) Freestanding signs shall be designed for wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot.
D) Signs should not obscure windows or other architectural features of the building with which they are
associated.
E) Signs shall not be placed in locations that interfere with safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation or public
safety signals and signs. Signs will not be placed in the sight triangles of intersections.
F) No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct and fire escape, required exit, egress window or
door opening.
G) Signs shall be structurally designed in compliance with ANSI and ASCI standards. All signs using
electricity shall be constructed according to the technical standards of a certified testing laboratory.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 105
H) Signs using electricity must directly connect to wiring that is integrated into the building structure or
buried underground; no cables or extension cords should run over the ground or up the side of a structure to
power a sign.
19.5.4 Maintenance Standards. All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following:
A) The property owner or tenant shall maintain the sign in a condition appropriate to the intended use.
B) Signs shall advertise or identify a legal business or other activity currently taking place, or which will take
place in the near future, within the City of Gem Lake. Obsolete signs shall be removed by the property
owner within a reasonable time, no longer than two months, after the sign becomes obsolete. A property
owner or tenant may apply to the City Council for exemption if the sign removal will be unduly difficult to
achieve (example: the sign is part of the building structure).
C) Signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, cleaning and other items required for the upkeep of the sign. There shall be
no accumulation of rubbish or debris, or uncontrolled vegetation, under or near any sign.
Section 19.6. Definitions. The definitions used in this section are now listed in Appendix A of The Consolidated Land Use
Ordinance.
Section 19.7 Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provision of this Ordinance be held to be invalid in
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part
hereof, other than the part held to be invalid.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 106
SECTION 20 - OFF STREET PARKING AREAS
Section 20.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off street parking in accordance
with the utilization of various parcels of land and/or structures.
Section 20.2 Site Plans
When applying for a building permit in all Districts for a new structure, the enlarging of a structure or new enlarged use of a
parcel of land, the application shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension indicating the location of offstreet
parking spaces in compliance with the following requirements.
Section 20.3 General Provisions.
20.3.1 Existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be
reduced in number unless said number exceeds the requirement set forth herein for a similar new use.
20.3.2 Should a building, structure or use in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance be damaged or destroyed
by fire or other cause, it may be re-established except that in doing so any off-street parking or loading which existed
must be retain and should plans be effected for enlarging the floor area, seating capacity or other facilities which would
affect the parking or loading requirements, the parking or loading spaces shall be enlarged accordingly.
20.3.3 Floor Area - The term “Floor Area” shall mean the sum of all floor areas in a building as calculated from the
outside dimensions of the building. It shall not include areas used primarily for non-public purposes such as storage,
incidental repair, office building management or maintenance, toilets, or rest rooms, utilities, or dressing, fitting or
alteration rooms.
20.3.4 Parking Spaces - Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9') feet wide and twenty (20') feet in length
exclusive of an adequately designed system of access drives.
20.3.5 Use of Parking Facilities - Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for the
parking or passenger automobiles and/or one truck not to exceed one and one-half (1 ½) ton capacity for each dwelling
unit except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit. Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not
be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners,
tenants or customers of business or manufacturing establishments except by Conditional or Interim Use Permit.
Required parking facilities accessory to residential structures shall not be used for the storage or repair of commercial
vehicles.
20.3.6 Required off-street parking space in the Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
20.3.7 Joint Parking Facilities - Off street parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures or uses may
be provided collectively in any “district” in which separate parking facilities for each separate building, structure or use
would be required, provided that number of spaces provided shall equal to sum of the separate requirements of each
use.
20.3.8 Use of Parking Area - Required off-street parking space in any District shall not be utilized for open storage of
goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or rent.
Section 20.4 Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas.
20.4.1 Parking Areas - shall be designed so as to provide adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such
driveway access shall not exceed twenty-two (22') feet in width and shall be so located as to cause the least interference
with traffic movement.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 107
20.4.2 Calculating Space - When calculating the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction
of one-half (½) or more shall constitute another space. One parking space shall equal three-hundred (300 sq ft) square
feet or parking and moving area.
20.4.3 Signs - No signs shall be located in any parking area except as necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.
20.4.4 Surfacing - All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with a material
to control dust and drainage. Parking area for less than three (3) vehicle spaces shall be exempt. Plans for surfacing and
drainage shall be subject to approval of the City Council.
20.4.5 Lighting - Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light
away from the adjoining property, and shall comply with Section 18.8.
20.4.6 Curbing and Landscaping - All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property
line shall provide a bumper curb not less than three (3') feet from the side property line or guard of normal bumper
height no less than one (1') foot from the side property line. When said area is for six (6) spaces or more, a curb or fence
not over six (6') feet in height shall be erected along the front yard set-back line with grass or planting occupying the
space between the sidewalk and curb or fence.
20.4.7 Fencing and screening for Off-Street Parking - When a required off-street parking space is placed directly adjacent
to a residence or residential district, a six (6) foot high fence shall be erected along the residential property line. Screen
planting may also be required.
20.4.8 Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Spaces - It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and
owner of the principle use, uses and/or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner the parking space, access
ways, landscaping and required fences.
Section 20.5 Required Off-Street Parking - Shall be as follows:
20.5.1 Single Family Dwellings - At least one (1) parking space for each dwelling unit, plus one (1) additional parking
space for each two (2) roomers accommodated. A garage will fulfill this requirement. However a building permit shall
not be granted to convert a garage to living space unless other acceptable provisions are made to provide the required
parking space.
20.5.2 Two-Family Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit, but not more than two (2) per unit.
20.5.3 Boarding and Rooming Houses - At least two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) persons for which
accommodations are provided for sleeping.
20.5.4 Multiple Dwelling - At least one (1) parking space per dwelling unit plus one (1) additional space for each four
(4) two-bedroom units and one (1) additional space for each two (2) three bedroom units.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 108
SECTION 21 - REGULATION OF GEM LAKE WATERS, WETLANDS AND SHORELANDS
Section 21.1 General Provisions.
21.1.1 Shoreland District
The land use regulations in this Section shall apply to any land in the City of Gem Lake located within a floodplain,
within 1,000 feet of the ordinary high water mark of a public water or public waters wetland, including but not limited
to the body of water known as Gem Lake and its attendant wetlands, or within 300 feet of a stream or river. The
regulations of this Section shall apply in addition to the provisions of the zoning district applicable to the property, the
Flood Hazard ordinance of the city (No. 114), and other ordinances of the City.
21.1.2 Wetland Conservation Act
The City of Gem Lake has delegated its authority under the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 and attendant
rules to the Vadnais Lake Area Watershed Management Association (VLAWMO). All requests for permits, review or
approval required by the Wetland Conservation Act must be submitted to VLAWMO as the acting Local Government
Unit.
21.1.3 Applied in Concert with Other Law
These regulations and requirements shall be in addition to those imposed by Federal and State law, regional and local
water management regulations, and city ordinances, all of which shall jointly apply. Under joint application, the most
restrictive requirements shall apply. 21.2 Shoreland Use Controls.
Section 21.2 Policy
21.2.1 Policy
Intact, vegetated and stable shorelines and streambanks provide valuable functions to Gem Lake and other water
resources in the City including prevention of erosion, reinforcement of soils through root structure, trapping of nutrients
and sediments, and provision of fish and wildlife habitat. Gem Lake is a Natural Environment lake under the criteria
established by the Department of Natural Resources.
21.2.2 Minimum Lot Size and Setback Requirements
All lots created and structures erected in a shoreland district following the enactment of this Section must meet the
criteria established in the underlying zoning district. No variance shall be granted, or other approval given, which allows
the creation of a lot in a shoreland district that is less than 80,000 square feet in area (measured above the ordinary high
water mark of the water body), or less than 200 feet in width. No structure, other than water-oriented accessory
structures managed by this Section, shall be placed within 150 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the water body.
The maximum lot coverage by buildings and impervious surfaces is 25%.
21.2.3 Accessory Structures and Facilities
All accessory structures and facilities, except those that are water-oriented, must meet or exceed structure setback
standards. If allowed by local government controls, each residential lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure
or facility located closer to public waters than the structure setback if all of the following standards are met:
A) The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an
area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point.
B) The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least ten feet.
C) The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of
government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 109
D) The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.
E) The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water
supply or sewage treatment facilities.
F) Any accessory structures or facilities not meeting the above criteria, or any additional accessory structures
or facilities must meet or exceed structure setback standards.
21.2.4 Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for
achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design
requirements:
A) Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width.
B) Landings for stairways and lifts must not exceed 32 square feet in area.
C) Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings.
D. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into
the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
E) Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed
from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
F) Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for persons with physical disabilities are also allowed for
achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of (a) to (e) are
complied with.
21.2.5. Decks. Except as provided in section 21.2.3, decks must meet the structure setback standards. Decks to be added
to structures existing on the date the shoreland structure setbacks were established by ordinance may be allowed without
a variance, if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
A) thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or
exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;
B) the deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing
shoreline setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet,
whichever is more restrictive; and
C) the deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.
21.2.6 Driveways and parking areas. Driveways and parking areas must meet all applicable structure setbacks, and must
be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from the
water body. Access ramps and approach roads are not allowed in the structure setback area surrounding Gem Lake.
21.2.7 Shoreline alteration. Alterations of vegetation and topography in a shoreland district is controlled to prevent
erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping,
and protect wildlife habitat.
A) Removal or alteration of vegetation is limited to the amount necessary to construct an approved structure,
and to maintain the health of the vegetation, provided that no such removal or alteration shall substantially
reduce the screening of structures, vehicles and other facilities as viewed from the water. This provision shall
not restrict the removal of trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards, or the
removal of buckthorn and similar invasive species identified by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 110
B) Any application for new construction in a shoreland district must include a Tree and Vegetation Preservation
Plan which, in addition to the requirements of Section 27, includes an inventory of all vegetation affected by
the construction and a plan for preservation, relocation, or replacement of the vegetation.
C) Use of fertilizer and pesticides in a shoreland district must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into
the water body.
D) No grading, filling, or other topographical alteration shall be allowed within 50 feet of the ordinary high
water mark of the water body, with the exception that the Zoning Administrator may approve the installation
of clean beach-type sand in this area, in accordance with DNR regulations, after review of an installation plan.
E) Any grading or filling anywhere else in a shoreland area involving movement of more than 50 cubic yards
of material requires a grading and filling permit. If the grading or filling is to take place in a wetland, VLAWMO
review and approval must be obtained before the City can issue a permit. In addition to any other requirements,
grading and filling activity in shoreland areas must also meet the following criteria:
1) Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of
bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible.
2) Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and
a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible.
3) Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature
must be used.
4) Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards. The use of bioengineering
is encouraged as an alternative to engineered stabilization techniques. Retaining walls are to be used
only when there is no adequate stabilization alternative.
5) Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope.
6) Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of the water body must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
21.2.8 Nonconforming uses.
In addition to the regulations of this ordinance applicable to nonconforming uses generally, in a Shoreland district the
following shall apply:
A) An extension, enlargement or alteration of an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be
permitted on the side of the structure or facility facing away from the water body.
B) An improvement to an existing lawful non-conforming structure or facility may be allowed to extend parallel
to the shoreline when the improvement is otherwise in compliance with the dimensional and setback
requirements of this Ordinance.
C) Exterior decks attached to an existing lawful non-conforming structure which do not extend any roof or
foundation may be permitted to extend parallel to the shoreline and shall be constructed to be visually
inconspicuous when viewed from the water (under summer leaf-on conditions).
D) Reconstruction of an existing historic structure, any appurtenances thereto, and the grounds shall be allowed
to preserve its historic character if the structure or site is recognized as a historic site on the National Register
of Historic Places.
Section 21.3 Use of Gem Lake
21.3.1 No Motorized Use.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 111
Gem Lake shall not be used by any motorized craft or traffic including, but not limited to, motorized boats,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) excluding equipment used for cleaning, plowing snow or other occasional
maintenance uses.
21.3.2 No Wet Storage of Boats.
Boats shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time. Regular storage of boats
shall be on the shore of and not in Gem Lake with same properly secured and stored out of view from neighboring
properties and Gem Lake while not in use.
21.3.3 Docks.
A) Docks are seasonal and temporary in nature and, therefore, shall not be permanently affixed to the shore or
lake bottom of Gem Lake.
B) Docks shall not be greater than four (4'0") feet in width, two (2'0") feet in height above the water and twenty
(20'0") feet in length from the lake shore.
C) Docks shall not be covered with any roof structure, awnings or any other type of enclosure.
D) Only one (1) dock shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the waterline.
21.3.4 Swimming Rafts.
A) Swimming rafts are seasonal and temporary in nature and therefore shall not be permanently affixed to the
lake bottom.
B) Swimming rafts shall not exceed one hundred (100 sq ft) square feet in total area and shall not be more than
two (2'0) feet higher than the water surface.
C) Swimming rafts shall not be located more than fifty (50') feet from the lakeshore.
D) Swimming rafts shall not be covered with a roof structure, awning or any other type of enclosure.
E) Only one (1) raft shall be allowed for each parcel of real property adjoining the waterline.
F) Swimming rafts shall not be moored in Gem Lake for more than forty eight (48) hours at any one time.
Regular storage of swimming rafts shall be on the shore, properly secured and stored out of view from the
water and from neighboring properties.
21.3.5 Water Appropriation. No person shall appropriate water from Gem Lake without first obtaining a permit from
VLAWMO.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 112
SECTION 22 - SOIL EROSION CONTROL AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section 22.1 Erosion and Sediment Control.
22.1.1 Policy Statement.
It is the policy of the City of Gem Lake to require the preparation and implementation of erosion and sediment control
plans to control runoff and erosion, to retain or control sediment on land during land disturbing activities, and to
prevent the degradation of resources and the loss or damage of property due to erosion and sedimentation.
22.1.2 Regulation.
No person shall commence land disturbing activities, unless granted a variance, without first obtaining a permit from
the City that incorporates and approves an erosion and sediment control plan for the activity, development or
redevelopment. The proposed activity will not result in an increase in sediment off the site during construction and
post-construction activities and be in conformance with the MPCA General Permit Construction for Activities, and as
amended.
22.1.3 Criteria. Erosion and sediment control plans and the land disturbing activity shall comply with the following
criteria:
A) Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with BMPs, and shall be sufficient to retain
sediment on-site.
B) Erosion and sediment control measures shall meet the standard for the General Permit Authorization to
Discharge Stormwater Associated With Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program Permit MNR100001 (NPDES General
Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, August 1 2008, as amended; except
where more specific requirements are provided in paragraphs 3(c) and 3(d) of this Section below.
C) The permittee or applicant must ensure final stabilization of the site in accordance with the NPDES General
Construction Permit requirements. The site will be considered as having achieved final stabilization following
submission of Notice of Termination by the permittee or applicant, and inspection and approval by the City.
D) All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected
velocity of flow from a 10-year frequency storm without erosion.
22.1.4 Exception. No permit or erosion control plan shall be required under this Section for the following land
disturbing activities:
A) Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens, repairs and maintenance work.
B) Construction, installation and maintenance of individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS) other than those
on steep slopes, on riparian lots within a Shoreland District or in a bluff impact zone.
C) Installation of any fence, sign, telephone or electric poles, or other kinds of posts or poles.
D) Emergency activity necessary to protect life or prevent substantial harm to persons or property.
E) Minor wetland impacts that have received a “certificate of exemption or no loss” determination by the LGU
(VLAWMO or RWMWD) administering the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, as amended.
F) All maintenance, repair, resurfacing and reconditioning activities of existing road, bridge, and highway
systems which do not involve land disturbing activities outside of the existing surfaced roadway. All land
disturbing activities not required by this Section to obtain a permit or have an approved erosion and sediment
control plan shall nevertheless be conducted in full compliance with this Section.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 113
Section 22.2 Stormwater Management.
22.2.1 Policy Statement. It is the policy of the City to:
A) Manage new development and drainage alternations by requiring each development or land disturbing
activity to manage its stormwater effectively, either on or off-site.
B) Promote and encourage a reduction in runoff rates, encourage infiltration and promote groundwater
recharge.
C) Maximize groundwater recharge as a means of maintaining drinking water supplies, preserving base flows in
streams, and limiting discharges of stormwater to downstream receiving waters.
D) Assure that property owners control the rate and volume of stormwater runoff originating from their
property so that surface water and groundwater quantity and quality is protected or improved, soil erosion is
minimized, and flooding potential is reduced.
E) Protect and improve natural resources within the watershed to prevent further degradation.
22.2.2 Regulation
A) Rate Control. The proposed activity will not increase the peak stormwater runoff rate from the site, under
pre-development conditions, for anything less than a 24-hour precipitation event with a return frequency of 1-
or 2-, 10- and 100-years. The applicant must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General Permit for
Construction Activities.
B) Volume Control. Stormwater runoff volume retention shall be achieved onsite in the amount equivalent to
the runoff generated from one-half inch of runoff over the impervious surfaces of the development or as
specified under Section 8.0. Volume control credits can be used to control up to one-half (0.5) inch of runoff
as described under Section 22.2.5.
C) Water Quality - Stormwater management must comply with the requirements of the MPCA’s General Permit
for Construction Activities and guidelines set forth in total maximum daily load studies and sustainable lake
management plans. No direct (untreated) discharges of stormwater to natural or improved waterbodies are
allowed.
D) Waste Disposal to Waters - Stormwater management must not result in the discharge of any regulated
substance, hazardous or biological waste, or petroleum product, whether treated or untreated, to best
management practice devices that may have a deleterious effect upon water of the state (surface and
groundwater), unless the discharge is in compliance with Federal, State and local regulations.
22.2.3 Criteria. Stormwater management plans shall comply with the following criteria:
A) A hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory will be used to analyze runoff for the design or
analysis of flows and water levels.
B) Runoff rates for the proposed activities, development or redevelopment within the watershed shall:
1) Not exceed existing runoff rates for the 1 or 2-year, 10-year and 100-year critical duration storm
events;
2) Not accelerate on or off-site water course erosion, downstream nuisance, flooding or damage as
demonstrated by the applicant; and
3) Runoff rates may be restricted to less than the existing rates when necessary for the protection of
public health, safety and general welfare.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 114
C) Stormwater facilities must provide:
1. An identified overflow spillway and downstream route sufficiently stabilized to convey a 100-year
critical storm event;
2. Pond outlets designed to prevent short circuiting of the flow from pond inputs to the outlet;
3. A minimum depth for ponds of three (3) feet and conform to the design specifications of the
Stormwater Manual, 2005.
4. An outlet skimmer to prevent migration of floatables and oils for the 2-year event; and
5. Access for future maintenance that is free of plantings and impediments.
D) Regional ponds and practices can be used to provide for stormwater management based on the following
criteria:
1. Regional ponds are required to be designed based on ultimate conditions for the contributing
subwatershed.
2. Regional ponds are required to be constructed and operational prior to constructing imperviousness
within the contributing drainage area.
E) Design of all Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be consistent with the Minnesota Stormwater Manual,
2005, and as amended and the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.
F) When using infiltration for volume control, infiltration volumes and facility sizes shall be calculated using
the appropriate hydrological soil group classification and infiltration rate, and shall be capable of infiltrating the
required volume within 72 hours or as specified in the MPCA General Permit for Construction Activities.
G) In evaluating the infiltration capacity of a constructed BMP under post-development conditions, the
infiltration rates in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual should be used. Select the design infiltration based on
the least permeable soil horizon within the first five (5) feet below the bottom elevation of the proposed
infiltration facility. Site-specific infiltration measurements completed by a licensed professional (as described in
the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, November 2005, and as amended) may be used in place of the values in
the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, and as approved by the City.
H) All stormwater retention practices designed to meet the volume control regulation must provide
pretreatment of stormwater runoff prior to infiltrating into the groundwater system or discharging downstream.
Pretreatment methods must comply with the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, for the
proposed practice. All highly recommended and recommended design criteria must be met, unless specifically
waived by the Technical Commission of VLAWMO or the Ramsey-Washington Metro Watershed District
(RWMWD), as appropriate.
I) To the maximum extent practicable, volume control shall be fully met onsite (Section 2, Subsection 2b). Site
conditions may make infiltration undesirable or impossible. The applicant must make soil corrections and/or
investigate other locations on the site for feasible infiltration locations. Infiltration practices are not allowed:
1. For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas;
2. Within hydrologic soil group D type soils;
3. Within some Wellhead Protection Areas (Review Wellhead Protection Plans for additional
guidance);
4. Within 50 feet of a septic tank or drain field;
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 115
5. On areas with less than three (3) feet vertical separation from the bottom of the infiltration system
to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or top of bedrock.
If the applicant claims that infiltration is not feasible or allowed onsite, the applicant must provide supporting
documentation and follow Section 2, Subsection 4.
22.2.4 Alternative Compliance Sequencing. For sites where infiltration practices are determined infeasible as described
in Section 22.2.3(i), the following Alternative Compliance Sequencing steps shall be taken in the order shown:
A) Use of alternative volume control practices as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as
amended, sized according to Section 22.2.2(b).
B) Use of on-site filtration practices and biofiltration using an impermeable liner and under drain, sized to filter
a volume of runoff according to Section 22.2.2(b).
C) Use of off-site volume control practices sized according to Section 22.2.2(b). Off-site volume control
practices can be used to provide for stormwater management based on the following criteria:
1. Off-site practices shall be constructed within the same drainage area or sub-watershed as the project
site.
2. Off-site practices are required to be constructed and operational prior to constructing
imperviousness within the contributing drainage area.
D) Use of wet sediment basins sized per the standard described within the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) General Permit for Construction Activities, 2008, and as amended.
22.2.5 Volume Control Credits.
A) Volume control credits will be awarded as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as
amended.
B) Volume control credits must be determined based on the methods outlined within Chapter 11 of the
Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended, for the Adjusted Water Quality Volume.
1. The water quality volume (WQV) shall be calculated by multiplying one (1) inch of runoff over the
proposed impervious surface.
2. Applied credits cannot exceed a WQV greater than 1/2 inch of runoff over the proposed impervious
area.
3. All recommended and highly recommended conditions must be met, unless specifically waived by
VLAWMO staff and the Technical Commission.
4. For Drainage to Stream, Wetland, or Shoreland Buffer Credits, the credits will apply to areas outside
of the minimum buffer requirement as prescribed within these Policies.
5. Grass Channel Credits can be applied to the roadway portion of the proposed site when grass
channels have been designed with water quality adaptations such as water quality berms.
22.2.6 Maintenance and Easement.
A) Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant for (1) access for facility inspections
and maintenance and (2) preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and
facilities, including the overflow route.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 116
B) Land used by stormwater management facilities shall be preserved by dedication and/or perpetual easement
to the City, when required by the City. These easements shall cover those portions of the property which are
adjacent to the facility and which lie below the 100-year flood elevation.
C) A maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the County as part of the City development approval
process. Minimum requirements for the maintenance agreement include:
1. A list of the responsible party(s) (City and facility owner/manager);
2. Contact information;
3. A formalized maintenance schedule, with scheduled activities;
4. A “Failure to Perform” provision laying out remedial actions if the responsible party does not
perform as expected;
5. Maintenance debris handling plans; and
6. Emergency response (environmental, spill, safety).
D) Maintenance is required for all stormwater practices constructed in compliance with these Policies. The City
will conduct periodic inspection of stormwater practices. A minimum of 20% of all stormwater facilities shall
be inspected annually by the City. The City shall provide to the VLAWMO annual inspection reports detailing
inspection activities and proof of maintenance where required.
E) When land used by stormwater management facilities is public land or public right-of-way, easements under
this section will not be required, and a written agreement between the City and applicant may be executed in
lieu of the recorded maintenance agreement.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 117
SECTION 23 - BROADCAST/TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND ANTENNAS
Section 23.1 Purpose and Intent
23.1.1 The purpose of this section is to establish predictable standards for siting and installing of wireless telephone,
radio broadcast, television broadcast and communications antenna towers or supporting structures within the City of
Gem Lake. It is the intent of this section to accommodate the communications needed of the residents and businesses
while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community.
23.1.2 Specifically, the City Council finds the regulations set forth in this section necessary to:
A) Facilitate the provisions for wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City.
B) Restrict the location of towers and antennas to designated areas of the City and impose design standards to
minimize adverse visual effects of towers and antennas.
C) Require evidence of structural integrity and impose setback requirements to avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure.
D) Require applicants for towers and antenna to prove their need and to apply for permits for their
construction.
E) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new antennas and reduce
the number of towers needed to serve the community.
Section 23.2 Zoning Districts for Construction
23.2.1 The following Zoning district preferences shall be followed when selecting potential commercial broadcast/
telecommunications tower sites in the City of Gem Lake:
A) Gateway District “G”
23.2.2 The following Zoning districts shall not be used for commercial broadcast/telecommunications tower/antenna
sites in the City of Gem Lake:
A) Any “RE,” “RX,” “RO,” or “RS” District
B) Any Overlay district
Section 23.3 Performance Standards
23.3.1 All stand-alone tower or antennas and/or supporting structures must be of an enclosed monopole design. No
monopoles with exposed antennas and other appendages are allowed.
23.3.2 A proposal for a new tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the Broadcast/
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower or building within a one (1) mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one of the following reasons:
A) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost.
B) The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or
planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 118
C) Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned
equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer.
D) Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon
an existing or approved tower or building.
23.3.3 Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunications service tower shall be designed structurally, electrically
and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional
users if the tower is over one hundred (100') feet in height or for at leaser one additional user if the tower is over sixty
(60') feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
23.3.4 Structural design, mounting, and installation of any tower or antenna shall be in compliance with the
manufacturer’s specification and as may be necessary or as determined by the City Council. All such designs and
installations shall be verified and approved by a qualified and licensed professional engineer employed by the applicant.
23.3.5 All towers and antennas and related structures shall be designed and built in compliance with all City of Gem
Lake building codes and electrical code requirements, and as applicable shall require permits. Existing towers may
continue in use but may not be structurally altered.
23.3.6 The height and style of the tower and antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function satisfactorily, as
verified by a communications engineer or other appropriate professional. However, no towers erected for broadcast or
Telecommunications service shall exceed 180 feet and no tower and accompanying antenna shall exceed two-hundred
(200') feet.
23.3.7 All obsolete and unused towers and antennas shall be removed within six (6) months of cessation or operation
at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the City Council. The City reserves the right to remove any unused tower
or antenna at its expense then back charge the property owner to recover costs.
23.3.8 Damaged existing towers and antennas may be rebuilt to the same physical dimensions and at the same location.
Repairs and rebuilding shall be complete within one (1) year after receiving the building permit from the City. However,
if the tower is destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, so that repairs would be forty (40%) percent or more
of a new tower, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this Ordinance.
23.3.9 No advertising message shall be affixed to any tower and or antenna structure.
23.3.10 No tower or antenna shall be illuminated by artificial means and must not display strobe lights, unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal or state authority for that particular tower.
When incorporated into the approved design, the tower may support light fixtures used to illuminate parking lights, ball
fields, or similar areas.
23.3.11 Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through use of color and
camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as
the Federal Aviation Administration. Antenna support structures shall be painted light blue, gray, or silver or have a
galvanized finish to reduce visual impact.
23.3.12 Towers located closer to a property line than the distance equal to the tot eh height of the tower shall be designed
and engineered to collapse progressively within the distance between the tower and property line. The applicant for any
tower shall submit written documentation explaining tower construction and possible failure and provide assurance that
blowing or falling ice from tower/antenna can be contained on the subject property. At a minimum, the tower shall
comply with the minimum setback requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located.
23.3.13 A tower shall be located on a parcel of land so as to have the least impact on adjoining properties and any
negative impact of the tower shall be confined onto the property on which it is located, to the greatest extent possible.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 119
23.3.14 The tower location shall provide the maximum amount of screening for off-site views of the tower and/or
antenna and related structure. Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
23.3.15 All utility buildings, structures, and equipment accessory to the tower or antenna must be architecturally designed
to blend in with surrounding environment and must meet the minimum design requirements of the Zoning District in
which they are located.
23.3.16 No change in the use or ownership of an approved tower or antenna may be made without the written consent
of the City Council.
21.3.17 Co-location of antennas upon overhead power line poles or street light poles is encouraged provide the said
antenna meets all applicable federal state spacing requirements and inference regulation.
Section 23.4 Proof of Non-Interference
23.4.1 Each application for construction of a commercial Broadcast or Wireless telecommunication facility shall include
either a certified statement that the construction of the tower/antenna, including reception and transmission functions,
will not interfere with the radio, television, or other service enjoyed by adjacent residential and non-residential
properties. If interference is found after the facility has been built has been erected, the applicant has to solve any
problems his equipment has caused, at his cost.
Section 23.5 Tower Setbacks
23.5.1 Where adjacent parcels are zoned for commercial or industrial uses, setbacks equivalent to those established for
the principle structure shall be provided for any tower/antenna. Setbacks equal to the height of the tower shall be
established on sites that are adjacent to parcels developed or able to be developed for residential use.
Section 23.6 Permit Applications and Plan Review
23.6.1 Conditional Use Permit. Applicants for a tower/antenna Conditional Use Permit must file a Conditional Use
Permit application with the City of Gem Lake and pay any and all associated fees.
23.6.2 Planning Commission/City Council review.
All applications for a Broadcast/Telecommunications tower must first be sent to the Planning Commission which shall
review the application and may recommend to the City Council approval or denial. The City Council will hold the
necessary Public hearing(s) on this matter and will then approve or deny the request. The applicant is responsible for
supplying a certified list of the property owners within three-hundred (350') feet of the proposed tower/antenna site
and pay all costs for notifying all such parties of the public hearing(s) needed.
Section 23.7 Exceptions
23.7.1 The following towers and/or antennas supporting structures and antennas are not subject to the restrictions of
Section 21 of this Ordinance:
A) Towers and/or antennas identified as “Accessory and Secondary Antennas” in this Ordinance are exempt.
All Amateur Radio “Accessory and Secondary” antennas and/or towers must be installed in accordance with
instructions furnished by the manufacturer of the tower/antenna.
B) Towers and antennas that are located entirely with a structure that complies with the height, bulk and density
and area requirements of the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance and are not visible from the exterior of the
structure are also exempt.
C) Towers/antennas for radio/telecommunications equipment owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake
are also exempt.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 120
SECTION 24 – WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
Section 24.1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and
operation of residential wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be governed within the city.
24.2. Zoning Allowance.
A Residential WECS may be installed as an accessory use in all zoning districts, provided that the system complies with
all terms and conditions of this Ordinance.
24.3. License Required.
A Residential WECS with a blade diameter under 6 feet and installed so that the total extended height does not exceed
10 feet over the tallest structure on a property shall not require a City license. For all other WECS, a license must be
obtained from the City of Gem Lake prior to installation of the system. The City Council shall designate a member of
City staff as the officer responsible for accepting and reviewing applications for Residential WECS licenses. The City
Council shall establish fees by separate resolution for review of an initial application and for renewal applications.
24.3.1. Initial Application.
Any person wishing to install a Residential WECS requiring a license shall complete an application on a form
provided by the City, pay the required application fee, and submit the application fee, and attach the following
additional materials:
A) A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the location of all WECS components on the property; the
locations of property boundaries; the location of all structures and above-ground utilities located on
the property, and the location of any public rights-of-way or utility easements on the property. The
plan shall also indicate the height of the tallest structure, tree or object lying within 30 feet from the
base of the tower.
B) Documentation that a current insurance policy extends coverage to the proposed Residential
WECS, whether under existing property insurance or a separate policy.
C) A copy of the WECS manufacturer’s documentation stating rated generation capacity, standards
certifications (such as Underwriters’ Laboratories certification) for each WECS component, installation
instructions, standard drawings or schematics for the equipment, warranties, manufacturer’s warnings,
and emergency procedures.
24.3.2. Renewal Application. A person with a licensed WECS previously installed upon their property shall
submit a renewal application on a form provided by the City, pay the required application fee, and provide the
following:
A) A revised site plan and elevations reflecting the current location and height of trees, structures and
utilities on the property in which the tower is located; and
B) If any of the documents required by Section 24.3.1 (b) or (c) have been replaced by new documents
or revised, current copies of those documents.
24.3.3. Review of Applications.
The officer designated by the City Council shall review the license applications and attached supporting material
for compliance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. If the reviewing officer believes the proposed
or existing WECS complies, the officer shall issue the license.
24.3.4. Term of license.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 121
A Residential WECS license shall remain in effect for five (5) years following issuance, unless the City Council
shall earlier revoke the license for failure to comply with the terms of this Ordinance.
24.3.5. Revocation.
If the City learns of a violation of this Ordinance, it shall provide a notice to the property owner of the alleged
violation and the date and time of a hearing before the City Council to consider the violation. The City Council
shall hold a hearing, at which it will receive evidence of the violation and take testimony from any interested
parties, including the property owner. Following the hearing, if the Council determines that the WECS is in
violation of the standards in this Ordinance, it may revoke the WECS license immediately, give the owner a
reasonable period of time in which to correct the violation without revocation, or choose to take no action on
the WECS license. If a WECS license is revoked, the WECS and tower must be dismantled and removed from
the property within 90 days of revocation.
24.4. Code compliance.
WECS installation is not exempt from the State Building Code and similar safety codes, and all permits required for the
construction and/or installation of WECS components must be obtained from the City’s Building Official prior to
commencing work to install the WECS.
24.4.1. Compliance with state building code. Standard drawings of the structural components of the wind energy
conversion system and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along with engineering
data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural design provisions of the state building
code. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified by a Minnesota licensed engineer.
24.4.2. Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS electrical equipment and connections shall be
designed and installed in adherence to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
24.5. Standards for Siting, Installation and Operation of WECS.
24.5.1. Height. The height of a WECS must comply with FAA regulation part 77 "Objects Affecting Navigable
Air Space" and/or MNDOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015 "Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation".
24.5.2. Setback. WECS towers shall be set back from the closest property line at least one foot for every one
foot of the system’s total extended height. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be located
within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback.
24.5.3. Rotor clearance. At installation, the bottom of the WECS blade diameter shall have a minimum of 5
feet of clearance over any structure (including above-ground utilities) or tree within a 200-foot radius of the
WECS tower. The property owner is responsible for ensuring that trees and other vegetation do not encroach
on the minimum rotor clearance after the system is installed.
24.5.4. Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with control equipment to prevent dangerous operation in
high wind and to allow the turbine to be slowed or stopped in an emergency.
24.5.5. Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers must comply with one of the following
provisions:
A) Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of the ground.
B) A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
C) Towers capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least six feet
high.
24.5.6. Component certification. Each electrical component of the WECS must be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. The overall WECS system must either be certified or pending certification by the Small Wind
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 122
Certification Council as compliant with the American Wind Energy Association’s Small Wind Turbine
Performance and Safety Standard.
24.5.7. Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in
conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
24.5.8. Signs. Each WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two square feet, posted at the base of the tower
and said sign shall contain the following information.
A) High voltage warning, if a component of the WECS is “high voltage” under the National Electrical
Code.
B) Manufacturer's name.
C) Emergency phone number.
D) Emergency shutdown procedures.
No other signage is permitted on the tower or turbine components of the WECS. A manufacturer’s name or
logo printed on a component is not considered “signage” for the purposes of this Ordinance.
24.5.9. Lighting. WECS shall not be illuminated from the ground, or have affixed or attached any lights,
reflectors, flasher or any other illumination, except for those required by FAA regulations part 77 "Objects
Affecting Navigable Air Space" and FAA Advisory circular 70/7460-1F, September 1978 "Obstruction
Marking and Lighting".
24.5.10. Noise emission. Noises emanating from the operation of WECS shall be in compliance with and
regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as
amended.
24.5.11. Utility company interconnection. If the WECS is interconnected with a local electrical utility company,
the connection shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.
24.6. Test Towers.
A tower to support anemometers and other test equipment to determine the feasibility of installing a WECS on the
property may be installed as an accessory use in all zoning districts. A license is not required to erect a test tower, but
the City must be notified of the installation and provided with a site plan and elevations similar to that required in
Section 24.3.1(a). The test tower must comply with all applicable siting, installation and operation requirements in
Section 24.5, though a test tower may use guy wires for support. If required by the State Building Code, a building
permit must be obtained before commencing work to erect the test tower. A test tower may stand on a property for a
maximum of twenty-four months in any three-year period.
24.7. Inspection.
The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any WECS license to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located.
If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall take
expeditious action to correct the situation.
24.8. Abandonment.
If any WECS or tower is not used for six successive months, the City shall give notice to the property owner that the
WECS must be put back in service within six months from the date of notice. If the WECS is not put back into
service within that time, the WECS and tower shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from
the property at the expense of the property owner.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 123
SECTION 25 - SUBDIVISION
Section 25.1 Purpose
25.1 In order to safeguard the best interests of the City of Gem Lake and to assist the subdivider in harmonizing his
interests with those of the City at large, the following section is adopted so that the adherence to the same will bring
results beneficial to both parties. It is the purpose of this section to make certain regulations and requirements for the
platting of land within the City of Gem Lake, pursuant to the authority contained in Minnesota Statutes, which
regulations the City Council deems necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of this community.
Section 25.2 Jurisdiction
25.2.1 The regulations herein governing plats and the subdivision of land shall apply within the corporate limits of the
City of Gem Lake, MN.
Section 25.3 Interpretation
25.3.1 The interpretation and application of the provisions of this section shall be minimum requirements
adopted for the protection of public health, safety and general welfare.
Section 25.4 Requirements
25.4.1 This section requires that all land division in the City of Gem Lake be accomplished thru subdivision of
property as described in this section.
25.4.2 No subdivision of property in the City of Gem Lake shall be recorded in the Ramsey County Recorder’s Office
or have any validity unless it is:
A) part of a Platted Subdivision, or
B) part of a Minor Subdivision described by a plat approved by the City, or
C) a single lot, existing on the effective date of this section, described by metes and bounds, which
description shall be accompanied by a registered lot survey, or
D) a parcel 20 acres or more in size with at least 500 feet or more of frontage.
25.4.3 No building permits shall be considered for issuance by the City of Gem Lake for constructing any building,
structure or improvement on the land on any lot in the subdivision as defined herein, until all requirements of this
section have been met.
Section 25.5 Park Land Dedication Requirements
25.5.1 As a pre-requisite to plat or Planned Unit Development approval, all developers shall dedicate land for parks,
playgrounds, public open spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City of Gem Lake’s park fund
as provided by this section of this section. The form of the contribution, cash or land (or any combination), shall be as
determined by the City Council in an amount equal to ten (10.0%) percent of the total acreage in the development or
ten (10.0%) percent of the pre-development land value.
25.5.2 Subdivision of land which has been previously platted and officially recorded and which contains less than one
(1) acre shall be exempt from dedication requirements.
25.5.3 Land to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds and public open spaces shall be reasonably suitable for its intended
use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of
proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology, hydrology, tree cover, access and
location. The City Council, at its discretion, may reject proffered land and mandate monetary contribution.
25.5.4 The Gem Lake Planning Commission shall review all park land dedication proposals including the location of
land and the amount of land to be conveyed or dedicated within a proposed development or subdivision. Upon
review, the Gem Lake Planning Commission shall recommend the land dedication and cash contribution
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 124
requirements for proposed developments or subdivisions to the City Council. The exact amount of land or cash
considerations to be dedicated shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
25.5.5 Land areas conveyed or dedicated to the City of Gem Lake, as a park or recreation area, shall not be used in
calculating the density requirements of the this ordinance for the proposed development or subdivision, and shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for Planned Unit Developments.
25.5.6 Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided for in a proposed development,
subdivision or Planned Unit Development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future
residents of the subdivision or PUD , such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the City Council against
the requirement for dedication for park and recreation purposes, providing the City Council finds it is in the public
interest to do so and that the following standards are met:
A) The yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space required to be maintained by the zoning and
building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open spaces, and
B) That the public ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written
agreements, and
C) That the public open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which
run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract and which cannot be eliminated
without the consent of the City Council, and
D) That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreations purposes,
taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, hydrological conditions, geology, access and
location of private open space lands, and
E) That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the
recreational element of the comprehensive plan, and are approved by the City Council, and
F) That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall not exceed forty (40.0%) percent of the park
dedication requirements for the development.
25.5.7 The City of Gem Lake shall maintain a separate fund into which all cash contributions received in lieu of
conveyance or dedication of land for park and playground, public open space or trail purposes shall be deposited and
shall make, from time to time, appropriations from such fund for acquisition of land for park and playground
purposes, for developing existing park and playground sites, for public open space and trails, or for debt retirement in
connection with land previously acquired for parks and playgrounds which benefit the residents of the City.
25.5.8 If a developer or subdivider is unwilling or unable to make a commitment to the City of Gem Lake as to the
type of buildings that will be constructed on lots in the proposed plat, then the land and cash requirement will be a
reasonable amount as determined by the City Council.
25.5.9 Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City of Gem Lake shall not be considered in the
park land and/or cash contribution to the City.
Section 25.6 Minor Subdivisions
25.6.1 When a subdivision is requested, if either or both of the following conditions exist, the Zoning Administrator
may bring the request and the completed Subdivision Application form to the attention of the City Council without
going through the complete subdivision process outlined in this section:
A) The proposed subdivision will result in three (3) or fewer fully conforming lots in an area where
conditions are well defined. Only once shall a subdivision of 3 lots or less be allowed in any one (1) parcel of
property. All lots proposed shall have frontage on a street as required by this Ordinance.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 125
B) In the case of a request to divide an existing lot, where the division is to permit the adding of a parcel of
land to an abutting lot, or to create two (2) lots, and the newly created property line will not cause the other
remaining portion of the lot or any structure to be in violation with this Ordinance.
25.6.2 The applicant will be required to submit a plat prepared by a registered land surveyor showing the original lot
and the proposed subdivision. The newly created parcels also shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance. A
preliminary site plan for the proposed subdivided area showing building sites, driveway access points, drainage plans
and utility easements shall also be included.
25.6.3 The required filing fee for this Minor Subdivision shall be as established and, from time to time, amended by
the City Council as part of the Gem Lake Fee Schedule.
25.6.4 Prior to approval of a Minor Subdivision the City Council reserves the right to require any or all sections of this
Ordinance to be applied.
25.6.5 The Minor Subdivision created by these proceedings shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds
within sixty (60) days after the date of approval by the City Council. If not recorded within this time period, the
approval of this subdivision by the City shall be considered void.
Section 25.7. Severability
25.7.1 It is the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this section are severable and that if any
court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this section or application thereof to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this section not specifically included in said judgment.
Section 25.8. Conflict and Interaction of Ordinances
25.8.1 Whenever there is a conflict between minimum standards or dimensions specified herein and those contained
in other official regulations, resolutions, Codes or Ordinances of the City, the most restrictive standards shall apply.
Section 25.9 Rules and Definitions
25.9.1 The language set forth in the text of this section shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of
construction.
A) The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
B) The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present.
C) The word “shall” is mandatory while the word “may” is permissive.
D) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
E) Whenever a word or term defined herein appears in the text of this section, its meaning shall be
construed as set forth in such definition thereof.
F) All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.
Section 25.10 Filing and Review Procedures of Plans
25.10.1 Sketch Plan.
In order to insure that all applicants are informed on the procedural requirements and minimum standards of this
section and the requirements or limitations imposed by other City Codes, Ordinances or Plans, the applicant shall
submit three (3) copies of a Sketch Plan to the Zoning Administrator. (see Section 25.12 for details of what is to be
included in a Sketch Plan) The applicant also shall arrange a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator,
the Planning Commission and the City Engineer to review and discuss the proposed development.
25.10.2 Preliminary Plan
25.10.2.1 FILING - the subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator the following:
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 126
A) A completed Subdivision Application form
B) Ten (10) copies of the Preliminary Plan and at least one reduced (8 ½ X 11 or 8 ½ X 14)
Preliminary Plat.
C) The required fees. The base fee for a subdivision application shall be established by the city
council from time to time and published with all other City fees and charges. This fee is nonrefundable.
In addition to the base fee, the subdivider shall deposit funds with the City for payment
of expenses incurred through staff time and from all outside sources including, but not limited to,
engineers, attorneys, and outside consultants employed specifically for review and processing the
application. The deposit shall be based on the city clerk’s estimate of staff and consultant time
required, but in no case shall the deposit exceed one percent (1%) of the current-year market value of
the land to be subdivided, as determined by the Ramsey County Assessor. Any amount over the
base fee not expended by the city will be refunded within thirty (30) days of final action on the
application (i.e. final plat approval or application denial). Expenses in excess of the filing fee and
deposit that the City incurs shall be borne by the subdivider and paid prior to final approval.
D) Any applications for Variances from the provisions of this section or applications for Variances
or Special Uses as provided for in the other Gem Lake Ordinances and the required fee(s) for such
action.
E) A list of all property owners located within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject property,
obtained from and certified by Ramsey County or the City of Gem Lake.
F) An executed Cost Sharing Agreement indicating the applicants understanding that he/she agrees
to reimburse the City for all expenses incurred through staff time and from all outside sources
including, but not limited to, engineers, attorneys, and outside consultants employed specifically for
review and processing the application.
25.10.2.2 Action on Requests. The Zoning Administrator shall upon receipt of the Preliminary Plan:
A) Determine whether the Preliminary Plan includes the data required by this section. The plan shall
be considered as being officially submitted when all the information required is supplied and all
requirements of this section are complied with.
B) Send a copy of the Subdivision Application and one copy of the Preliminary Plan to each member
of the Planning Commission and one copy to the City Engineer.
C) The Zoning Administrator also shall refer copies of the Preliminary Plan to the Park Advisory
committee, Watershed Districts, County, State, or other public jurisdictions for their timely review
and comment, where appropriate and when required.
D) The proposed plan shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning Commission
meeting.
E) The City Engineer shall in a timely manner submit his report to the Planning Commission. This
report shall be on the feasibility of street location and construction and on any drainage or other
problems that might be encountered. The absence of a report from the City Engineer shall in no way
invalidate the approval or disapproval by the City of the Preliminary Plan.
F) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Preliminary Plan and shall
have notice of such hearing published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. The subdivider shall certify that all owners of property within 350 feet of the property being
subdivided have been notified by mail of the Public Hearing.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 127
G) Upon completion of the Public Hearing, the Planning Commission shall prepare and submit its
report, five (5) copies of the Preliminary Plan, its recommendation for approval or disapproval, and
recommendations for conditions associated with approval to the City Council in a timely manner that
allows the City Council to take action within the time limits established by law. If the report of the
Planning Commission has not been received so as to provide for compliance with time limits
established by law, the City Council may act without such a report.
H) The City Council shall, within the time limits established by law, approve with or without
conditions or disapprove the Application for Subdivision Preliminary Plat with said action being
formally recorded in the minutes of a properly convened meeting. Further, any disapproval of the
Application for Subdivision Preliminary Plat shall be noticed in writing to the applicant.
I) Any modification or waiver of time limits established by law shall only be made in writing to the
City by the applicant except for extensions by the City provided for by law.
25.10.3 Final Plat. Within six (6) months following approval of the Preliminary Plan by the City Council, unless the
subdivider has requested an extension of that time from the City Council, the following shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator:
25.10.3.1 Filing
A) Eight (8) copies of the Final Plat, including one reproducible copy are required. This Final Plat
shall incorporate all changes to and conditions associated with the Preliminary Plan required by the
City Council. Otherwise, it shall conform to the Preliminary Plan. The Final Plat may constitute only
that portion of the Preliminary Plan that the subdivider proposes to record and develop at this time.
If the Final Plat is not submitted within six (6) months, the approval of the Preliminary Plan shall be
considered void.
B) An up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property record report and such other
evidence as the City Council may require showing title or control of the property in the subdivision
by the applicant.
25.10.3.2 Action On Requests - the Zoning Administrator shall upon receipt of the Final Plat:
A) Acknowledge receipt of the Final Plat to the applicant
B) Send three (3) copies of the Final Plat to the Planning Commission
C) The report of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the City Council in a timely manner
that allows the City Council to take action within the time limits established by law after filing of the
Final Plat. The report shall state whether the proposed improvements conform to the engineering
standards and specifications established in this section. It shall also state whether the Final Plat
conforms to the Preliminary Plan as approved by the City Council pursuant to Section 11.2.2 h).
D) The City Council shall act on the Final Plat within the time limits established by law. It shall not
approve a Final Plat unless it:
1) Conforms to the Preliminary Plan with all changes and conditions associated with the
Preliminary Plan approval by the City.
2) Meets the design and engineering standards set forth in this section,
3) Conforms to the plans of the City, as approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
4) All fees required to be paid to the City in connection with this Plat have been paid.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 128
E) If the Final Plat is approved by the City Council, the subdivider shall record it with the County
Register of Deeds within sixty (60) days after the date of approval. If not recorded within this time
period, the approval of the Final Plat shall be considered void.
F) The subdivider shall immediately upon completion of recording, furnish to the City Clerk two (2)
prints of the Final Plat showing evidence of recording.
25.10.4 Data Requirements for Plans and Plats
25.10.4.1 Sketch Plan. Sketch Plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
A) Plat Boundary
B) North arrow
C) Scale
D) Street layout on and adjacent to plat
E) Designation of land use and current proposed zoning
F) Significant topographical or physical features
G) Preliminary lot locations, numbers and layout
25.10.4.2 Preliminary Plan. The subdivider shall prepare and submit a Preliminary Plan, together with any
necessary supplementary information. The Preliminary Plan shall contain the information set forth in the
sections that follow.
25.10.4.2.1 General Requirements
A) Proposed name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate or too closely resemble names
of existing subdivisions in Ramsey County.
B) Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter section or quarterquarter
section line comprising a legal description of the property.
C) Names and addresses of all persons having property interest, the developer, designer and
surveyor together with the surveyor’s registration number.
D) Graphic scale of plat, not less than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet.
E) Date and north arrow.
25.10.4.2.2 Existing Conditions
A) Boundary lines and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly indicated.
B) Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the subdivision.
C) Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other public
ways, showing type, width and condition of improvements, if any; railroad and utility rightsof-
way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements
and section and corporate lines within the plat and to a distance of three-hundred and fifty
(350) feet beyond the tract.
D) Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities
within the tract and to a distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract, Such data as
grades, invert elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants also shall be
shown.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 129
E) Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided and subdivided land, within three hundred fifty
(350) feet, identified by name and ownership, including all contiguous land owned or
controlled by the subdivider.
F) Topographical data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet.
Water courses, wetlands, rock out-crops, power transmission poles and lines and other
significant features shall also be shown.
G) In plats where public water and sewer are not available, the subdivider shall file a report
prepared by a registered civil engineer on the feasibility of individual on-site sewer and waste
systems on each lot, and shall include soils boring analysis and percolation tests to verify
conclusions.
25.10.4.2.3 Proposed Design Features
A) Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients, typical
cross sections, and proposed names of streets in conformance with City and County street
identification policies. The name of any street heretofore used in the City of Gem Lake or its
environs shall not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an already
named street, in which event the same name shall be used.
B) Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains.
C) Locations, dimensions and purposes of all easements.
D) Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks.
E) Minimum front and side street building setback lines.
F) When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line.
G) Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to be dedicated
or reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres.
H) Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of an existing
community system whenever feasible. Service connections shall be stubbed into the property
line and all necessary fire hydrants also shall be provided. Extensions of the public water
supply system shall be designed so as to provide public water in accordance with the
standards of the City of Gem Lake. In areas where public water supply is not available,
individual wells shall be provided on each lot, properly placed in relation to individual
sewage treatment facilities on the same and adjoining lots. Well plans must comply with the
Minnesota State Well Code as may be amended, and shall be submitted for the approval of
the City Engineer.
I) Sewage Disposal, Public. Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed in
accordance with the standards and ordinances of the State of MN, Ramsey County and the
City of Gem Lake.
J) Sewage Disposal, Private. All on-site septic systems shall be installed in accordance with
the standards and ordinances of the State of MN, Ramsey County and the City of Gem
Lake.
25.10.4.2.4 Supplementary Information
A) Proposed restrictive covenants
B) An accurate soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a qualified person.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 130
C) Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings with number of proposed
dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the development
on traffic, fire hazards and congestion of population.
D) If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas,
including dimensions shall be shown, such proposed zoning plan shall be for information
only and shall not vest any rights in the applicant.
E) Provisions for surface water disposal, ponding, drainage and flood control.
F) Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the
subdivision, it shall be required that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of
the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and
the future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be required to relate well with
existing or potential adjacent subdivisions.
G) Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots that are subject to
potential re-platting, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical way in which the lots could
possibly be re-subdivided in the future.
H) Proof that a plan for soil erosion and sediment control, both during construction and
after development, has been completed. The plan shall include gradients of waterways,
design of velocity and erosion control measures, design of sediment control measures, and
landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system along with any such requirements as
may be required of the applicant by watershed districts or other such public agencies
established to regulate sediment and erosion control.
I) A vegetation preservation and protection plan that shows those trees proposed to be
removed, those to remain, the types and location of trees and other vegetation that are to be
planted, and which indicates compliance with all attendant local ordinances.
J) When the City of Gem Lake agrees to install improvements in a development, the
developer shall furnish the City a Financial Statement satisfactory to the City. When then
City has not undertaken to install improvements, the City may, at the City’s option, require
the developer to furnish a Financial Statement satisfactory to the City.
K) Such other information as may be required.
25.10.5 Final Plat.
The owner or subdivider shall submit a Final Plat together with any necessary supplementary information. The Final
Plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes,
Ramsey County regulations and the Final Plat shall contain the following information:
25.10.5.1 General Requirements
A) Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any
existing subdivision.
B) Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including descriptive boundaries of
the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions that must
mathematically close. The allowable error closure of any portion of a final plat shall be one (1) foot in
seventy-five hundred (7500) feet.
C) The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations of such
monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments on the nearest established
street lines, including true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 131
D) Locations of lots, streets, public highways, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in
feet and decimals of feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other
information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown. Dimensions shall be
shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines.
E) Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks are to be numbered, with numbers shown clearly in the
center of the block.
F) The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to be dedicated.
G) Location and width of all easements to be dedicated.
H) Name, address and registration number of the surveyor making the plat.
I) Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale), date and north arrow.
J) Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for installation and maintenance of
utilities and drainage facilities are served over, under and along strips marked “utility easements.”
K) Statement dedicating all streets and other public areas not previously dedicated as follows: Streets
and other public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so
dedicated.
25.10.5.2 Certification Requirements
A) Certification by a registered surveyor in the form required by Section 505.03, Minnesota Statutes,
as amended.
B) Execution by all owners of any interest in the land or any lenders of a mortgage thereon of the
certificate required by Section 505.03, Minnesota Statutes, as amended, and where certificate shall
include a dedication of the utility easements and other public areas in such form as approved by the
City Council.
C) Certifications showing that all taxes currently due on the property to be subdivided have been
paid in full.
D) An approval and review block to be filled in with the signature of the Mayor and City Clerk. The
form of this approval and review block is as follows:
Approved by the City of Gem Lake, Ramsey County, Minnesota
This ___Day of _______________________, 20
Signed: ________________________________
Mayor
Attest:_________________________________
City Clerk
Section 25.11 Design Standards
25.11.1 Blocks
25.11.1.1 Block Length.
In general, intersecting streets, determining block lengths, shall be provided at such intervals so as to serve
cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions should not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1800) feet nor be less than four hundred (400)
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 132
feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks
longer than twelve hundred (1200) feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block may be required
near the center of the block.
25.11.1.2 Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of
appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered
most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries.
25.11.2 Lots
25.11.2.1 Area.
The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that established by this Ordinance in the
appropriate Section in effect at the time of adoption of the Final Plat.
25.11.2.2 Corner lots.
Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit appropriate building setback from both
streets as required in this Ordinance.
25.11.2.3 Side lot lines.
Other than for good reason, side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to street lines or radial to
curved street lines.
25.11.2.4 Frontage.
Every lot must have minimum frontage on a City approved existing or platted street or road other than an
alley, as required in this Ordinance.
25.11.2.5 Setback lines.
Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use and shall not be less than the
setback required in this Ordinance.
25.11.2.6 Water courses.
Lots abutting a water course, wetland, ponding area or stream shall have additional depth and width, and
other restrictions as required in this Ordinance.
25.11.2.7 Features.
In the subdividing of land, due regard shall be shown for natural features, such as tree growth, water courses,
historic spots or similar conditions that if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed
development.
25.11.2.8 Lot remnants.
All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to
adjacent lots rather than being allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
25.11.2.9 Political boundaries.
No singular plat shall extend over a political boundary or school district line without documented notification
to affected units of government.
25.11.2.10 Frontage on two streets.
Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2) roughly parallel streets, shall be avoided except where lots
back on an arterial street or highways, or where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 133
unreasonable. Such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least twenty (20) feet in order to
allow space for screen planting along the back lot line.
25.11.2.11 Turn around egress.
When proposed residential lots abut a collector or arterial street, they should be platted in such a manner as
to encourage turn around egress on each lot.
25.11.3 Streets
25.11.3.1 Streets, Continuous.
Except for cul-de-sacs, streets shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent
subdivisions, or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a reasonable
projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. The arrangements of thoroughfares and collector streets
shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to
run-off of storm water, to public convenience and safety and in appropriate relation to proposed uses of the
area to be served.
25.11.3.2 Local streets, authorized private ways and Dead-end streets.
Local streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. Dead-end streets are
prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be permitted where topography or other physical conditions justify their use.
Cul-de-sacs shall include a terminal turn- around with a turn-around radius of not less than sixty (60) feet.
25.11.3.3 Alleys.
Alleys are not permitted in subdivisions in the City of Gem Lake.
25.11.3.4 Street plans for Future Subdivisions.
Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the
subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided/subdivided portion shall
accompany the plat.
25.11.3.5 Temporary Cul-de-sac.
In those instances where a street is terminated pending future extension in conjunction with future
subdivision, a temporary turn around facility shall be provided at the closed end.
25.11.3.6 Street Intersections.
Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except
where topography or other conditions justify variations. Under normal conditions, the minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be eighty (80) degrees. Street intersection jogs with an offset of less than one
hundred twenty five (125) feet shall be avoided.
25.11.3.7 Sidewalks.
The Planning Commission, when it deems appropriate and necessary, may require that sidewalks be provided
on one or both sides of the paved surface, and shall prescribe the minimum width of such sidewalks. In all
cases where sidewalks are specified, they shall provide handicapped access.
25.11.3.8 Half streets.
Dedication of half streets shall not be considered for approval except where it is essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations or where
it will be practical to require dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
25.11.3.9 Private Streets.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 134
Private streets existing as of the date of this Ordinance are permitted. Future private streets are permitted, but
only when approved by the City. The City may accept private streets as public streets, but only when such
streets have been upgraded to the standards set by this Ordinance.
25.11.3.10 Street Grades.
The grades of all streets shall not be less than 0.3 percent and should not exceed the following:
A) Collector Street Six (6%) percent
B) Minor Street Eight (8%) percent
25.11.3.11 Curb Radius.
The minimum curb radii for thoroughfares, collector streets, local streets, and alleys shall be as follows:
A) All Streets Ten (10') feet
25.11.3.12 Reserve Strips.
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under conditions accepted by the City
Council.
25.11.3.13 Street Right-of-Way Width.
For all public streets hereafter dedicated and accepted, the minimum right-of-way widths of streets shall be as
shown in the City of Gem Lake Comprehensive Municipal Plan and where not shown therein, the minimum
right-of-way width for streets, arterial highways or pedestrian ways included in any subdivision shall not be
less than the minimum dimensions for each classification as follows:
A) Principal Arterial Highway (As required by MNDOT)
B) Intermediate Arterial Highway 100 feet
C) Minor Arterial Highway 80 feet
D) Collector Street 70 feet
E) Minor Street 60 feet
F) Authorized Private Way 40 feet
G) Private Driveway 33 feet
H) Pedestrian Way 10 feet
25.11.4 Easements
25.11.4.1 Width and Location.
Necessary easements of appropriate width for utilities (including extension of main water and sewer lines)
shall be provided (and shown on the plat), preferably along lot lines or as necessary across lots.
25.11.4.2 Continuous Utility Easement Locations.
Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. These easements, when
approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the approval of the City Council.
25.11.4 .3 Guy Wires.
Additional easements for pole guys should be provided, where appropriate, at the outside of turns. Where
possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the existing angle so that pole guys will fall along-side lot lines.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 135
25.11.5 Erosion and Sediment Control
25.11.5.1 The development of this subdivision shall conform to the natural limitation presented by
topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
25.11.5.2 Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of
construction. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to and maintained throughout
development when necessary to control erosion.
25.11.5.3 Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation
controls can be provided as construction progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at
any one (1) period of time.
25.11.5.4 When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time, as specified in
the development agreement.
25.11.5.5 Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for re-spreading over the
developed area. Topsoil shall be restored or provided to a depth of four (4) inches and shall be of a quality at
least equal to the soil quality prior to development.
25.11.5.6 Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever practical.
25.11.5.7 Run-off water shall be diverted to a sediment basin before being allowed to enter the natural
drainage system.
25.11.5.8 The erosion and sediment control plan shall be subject to review and approval of the applicable
Watershed District and the City Engineer. The City may request a report from the Ramsey Soil and Water
Conservation District regarding soil erosion control measures. The City may require a soil erosion cash
deposit to guarantee erosion control measures are taken.
25.11.6 Storm Drainage
25.11.6.1 All subdivision designs shall incorporate adequate provisions for storm water run-off subject to
review and approval of the applicable Watershed District and the City Engineer.
25.11.6.2 The grade and drainage requirements for each plat shall be approved by the applicable Watershed
District and the City Engineer at the expense of the applicant for the subdivision. Every plat presented for
final signatures shall be accompanied by certifications by the City Engineer that the grade and drainage
requirements have been met. In an area not having municipal storm sewer trunks, the applicant shall be
responsible for providing a storm water disposal plan that will operate without damage to properties outside
the platted areas.
25.11.6.3 No plat shall be approved by the City Council before the storm water disposal plan is approved by
both the City Engineer and the Watershed District.
25.11.6.4 The use of dry wells for the purpose of storm water disposal is prohibited in the City of Gem Lake.
25.11.7 Protected Areas
25.11.7.1 Where land proposed for subdivision is found to be environmentally sensitive by the City, due to
the existence of wetlands, drainage ways, water courses, floodable areas or steep slopes, the design of said
subdivisions shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to insure against adverse environmental
impact.
25.11.7.2 Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive areas, the City shall determine
whether said protection will be accomplished through lot enlargement and redesign or dedication of these
sensitive areas in the form of outlots.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 136
25.11.7.3 Measures of protection shall include design solutions that allow for construction and grading
involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive areas. Where these areas are to be incorporated into lots within
the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to demonstrate that the proposed design will not
require construction of slopes over eighteen (18) percent or result in significant alteration in the natural
drainage system such that adverse impact cannot be continued within the plat boundary.
Section 25.12 Required Basic Improvements
25.12.1 General Provisions
25.12.1.1 Before a Final Plat is returned to the subdivider by the City, the subdivider of the land covered by
said plat shall pay all fees required and execute and submit to the City Council a developer’s agreement that
shall be binding on his or their heirs or personal representatives. This agreement shall declare that the
subdivider will start no private construction on the lands within said plat, nor will the subdivider file or cause
to be filed any application for building permits for such construction until all improvements required by this
Ordinance have been made or arranged for in the manner and conforming to the requirements set forth on
the Final Plat.
25.12.1.2 Prior to the delivery of the approved Final Plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the City Treasurer
an amount equal to a minimum of one hundred twenty five (125) percent of the City Engineer’s estimated
cost of the required improvements within the plat, either in a cash escrow fund, performance and indemnity
bond, or letter of credit. The surety involved in said financial guarantees shall be approved by the City. The
cash escrow, letter of credit or performance and indemnity bond shall be conditioned upon:
A) The making and installing of all of the improvements required by the terms and conditions set
forth by the City within one (1) year.
B) Satisfactory completion of the work the subdivider has agreed to in the developer’s agreement
referred to in Section 14.1.1.
C) The payment by the subdivider to the City of all expenses incurred by the City in connection with
this subdivision proposal, shall include not be limited to: expenses for engineering, fiscal, legal,
construction and administration. In instances where a cash escrow is submitted in lieu of a letter of
credit or performance and indemnity bond, there shall be a cash escrow agreement that shall provide
that in the event the required improvements are not completed in one year, all amounts held under
the cash escrow agreement shall be automatically turned over and delivered to the City and applied
by the City to the cost of completing the required improvements. If the funds available within the
said cash escrow agreement are not sufficient to complete the required improvements, the necessary
additional cost to the City shall be assessed against the subdivision. Any balance remaining in the
cash escrow fund after such improvements have been made and all expenses therefore have been
paid, shall be returned to the subdivider. In instances where a letter of credit is used in lieu of a cash
escrow or performance and indemnity bond, the said letter of credit shall be in a form satisfactory to
the City, and the terms thereof shall substantially comply with all requirements as set forth in
Minnesota Statutes as amended, which statutes relate to Surety Bonds.
25.12.1.3 The City of Gem Lake shall where appropriate, require of a subdivider submission of a
Warranty/Maintenance Bond in the amount equal to the original cost of the improvements, which shall be in
force for one year following the final acceptance of any required improvements and shall guarantee
satisfactory performance of the said improvements.
25.12.1.4 Reproducible “as built drawings” as required by the City Engineer, shall be furnished to the City by
the subdivider giving details on all required improvements. Such “as built drawings” shall be certified to be
true and accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of the improvements.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 137
25.12.1.5 All the required improvements to be installed under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
approved by and subject to the inspection of the City Engineer. All of the City’s expenses incurred as the
result of the required improvements shall be paid either directly, indirectly or by reimbursement to the City by
the subdivider.
25.12.2 Monuments for Final Plat
25.12.2.1 Official monuments, as designated and adopted by the Ramsey County Surveyors Office and
approved by the Ramsey County District Court for use as judicial monuments, shall be set at each corner or
angle on the outside boundary of the Final Plat or in accordance with a plan as approved by the City
Engineer. The boundary line of the property to be included with the plat is to be fully dimensioned; all angles
of the boundary excepting the closing angle to be indicated; all monuments and surveyor’s irons to be
indicated, each angle point or the boundary perimeter to be so monumented.
25.12.2.2 Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at each lot and at each intersection of street center lines. All
United States, State, County or other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent
to the property shall be preserved in the precise position they were and shall be recorded on the plat. All lot
and block dimensions shall be recorded on the plat and all necessary angles pertaining to the lots and blocks
shall be shown, as an aid to future surveys. No ditto marks will be permitted when indicating dimensions.
25.12.2.3 To insure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place following the final grading of a plat, a
second monument shall be required. Proof of the second monumentation shall be in the form of a surveyor’s
certificate and this requirement shall additionally be a condition for the Certification of Occupancy.
25.12.3 Street Improvements
25.12.3.1 The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, in accordance with the provisions for
construction as outlined in the section of this Ordinance, titled Design Standards.
25.12.3.2 All street shall be improved in accordance with the City of Gem Lake standards and specifications
for street construction or as required by the City Council.
25.12.3.3 All streets to be surfaced shall be of an overall width in accordance with the standards and
specifications for construction as approved by the City Council. The portions of the right-of-way outside the
area surfaced shall be sodded or riprapped by the developer if deemed necessary by the City.
25.12.3.4 Where required, curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications for street construction as set forth and approved by the City Council.
25.12.4 Trees and Boulevard Sodding
25.12.4.1 Where street trees do not exist, trees having a trunk diameter of not less than two (2) inches,
measured twelve (12)inches above the ground, shall be planted on both sides of all streets in the subdivision
in locations approved by the Planning Commission, but no more than sixty (60) feet apart. Trees of equal
standard shall be planted in the required front yards at an average minimum density of one (1) tree per forty
(40) feet of right-of-way.
25.12.4.2 Tree species shall be as approved by the Planning Commission and must survive one full growing
season or be replaced at the subdivider’s expense.
25.12.4.3Boulevards shall be sodded as required by the Planning Commission in conformance with generally
accepted standards and specifications.
25.12.5 Street Signs, Lighting and Driveways
25.12.5.1 Street signs, of suitable design approved by the City Council, shall be installed at each street
intersection.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 138
25.12.5.2 Driveway approaches and sidewalks of standard design or pedestrian pathways, as may be required
by the City Council, shall be installed.
25.12.5.3 Street lighting fixtures, as may be required and approved by the City Council, shall be installed.
25.12.6 Sanitary Sewer and Water Distribution Improvements
25.12.6.1 Sanitary sewers and water facilities shall be installed in accordance with standards and specifications
as required by the City Council and subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
25.12.6.2Where City sewer and water facilities are not available for extension into the proposed subdivision,
the Council may permit the use of individual water and sewer systems in accordance with all appropriate state
and local regulations.
25.12.7 Public Utilities
25.12.7.1 All new electric distribution lines (excluding main line feeders and high voltage transmission lines),
telephone service lines, Cable TV and other services constructed within the confines of and providing service
to customers in a newly platted residential area shall be buried underground, unless the City Council
specifically shall find, after study and recommendation of the Planning Commission that:
A) The placing of utilities underground would not be compatible with the development planned;
B) Topographical, soil or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or
impractical.
25.12.7.2 Where telephone, Cable TV, electric and/or gas service lines are to be placed underground entirely,
conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways, in such a manner so as not to
conflict with other underground services.
25.12.7.3 All drainage and other underground utility installations that cross privately owned property shall be
protected by easements.
25.12.7.4 All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line easements when
carried on overhead poles. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council require, that the
type of overhead pole used be of a quality and durability aesthetically in conformance with the nature of the
residential development.
25.12.7.5 The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall submit
to the Zoning Administrator a written record from the utilities showing that the necessary arrangements with
the utility involved for installation of said facilities have been made.
25.12.8 Election of City to Install Improvements
25.12.8.1 In accordance with the policy of the City of Gem Lake, it is the subdivider’s responsibility to install
all required improvements except that the City reserves the right to elect to install all or any part of the
improvements required under the provisions of this Ordinance in lieu of requiring the subdivider to install
such improvements.
25.12.9 Railroad Crossings
25.12.9.1 No street dedications will be accepted that require a crossing of a railroad right-of-way unless
sufficient land, as determined by the City Council, is dedicated to insure a safe view.
Section 25.13 Variances from This Section
25.13.1 The City Council may grant a variance in any particular case where the applicant can show that by reason of
exceptional topography or other physical conditions the strict compliance to this section could cause an exceptional
and undue hardship on the enjoyment of substantial property right. Such relief may be granted provided there is no
detriment to the public welfare and no impairment of intended purpose of this section.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 139
25.13.2 An application for any such Variance shall be made on an official application form available from the Zoning
Administrator and shall be submitted at the same time as the Preliminary Plan is filed for consideration. Such
application shall be accompanied by the required fee(s). Such application shall state fully all facts relied upon by the
applicant and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or additional data that will aid the City in the analysis of the
proposed project.
25.13.3 Upon receiving such application, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the application, along with all related
information, to the Planning Commission for consideration at a duly convened public hearing, a report and
recommendation to be sent to the City Council.
25.13.4 The applicant or a representative of the applicant shall appear before the Planning Commission at its next
regular meeting in order to answer questions concerning the proposed Variance.
25.13.5 The Planning Commission shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning the Variance or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning
said Variance, where said information is declared necessary to insure preservation or health, safety and general welfare.
25.13.6 The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend to the City Council in writing such
actions or conditions relating to the request as it may deem necessary to carry out the intent and the purpose of this
section and shall do so in a timely manner that allows the City Council to take action within the time limits established
by law.
25.13.7 If the report of the Planning Commission has not been received so as to provide for compliance with time
limits established by law, the City Council may act without such a report.
25.13.8 Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall place the
matter on the agenda for the next regular meeting. The Council shall within the time limits established by law make a
written finding of fact and impose any conditions it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. A Variance to this Ordinance shall require a four/fifths (4/5ths) vote of the full City Council. The Zoning
Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant of the Council’s decision in writing.
Section 25.14 Violations and Penalty
25.14.1 Sale of Lots from Unrecorded Plats
25.14.1.1 It shall be unlawful to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in
conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located with the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance unless said plan, plat or replat shall have first been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Ramsey County.
25.14.2 Misrepresentation as To Construction, Supervision or Inspection of Improvements
25.14.2.1 It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning an addition or subdivision of land
within the City of Gem Lake to represent that any improvements upon any of the streets, or avenues of said
addition or subdivision or any sewer or water system in said addition or subdivision has been constructed
according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council, or has been supervised or inspected
by the City, when such improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.
25.14.3 Penalty
25.14.3.1 Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor prescribed under State Law. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 140
SECTION 26 - LANDSCAPING
Section 26.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to clearly express the City of Gem Lake’s intent for all properties in the City to be landscaped
and to have the landscaping maintained with care. Properties shall be landscaped to improve the environmental performance
of all properties in the City as well as to meet the aesthetic needs of the general public.
26.1.1 Landscaping Goals.
All landscaping must be designed to protect, preserve, and promote the aesthetic appeal and overall value of the
property. The quantity and quality of the landscape design should be compatible with the described use for each
parcel in a zoning area and the intended use of the property. The preservation of desirable vegetation is a goal which
should be addressed prior to any new construction, land filling, land changes or expansion of existing use areas.
26.1.2 Landscape standards.
The landscape standards set forth in the Ordinance will promote harmonious development in the City, increase the
desirability of residences, encourage investment or occupation in the City, optimize use and value of land and
improvements, increase the stability and value of property, and add to the conditions affecting the peace, health and
welfare of the City.
Landscaping standards are essential to ensure compatible relationships between land uses within a community. All
uses allowed as either permitted or conditional uses within the City’s various zoning areas shall conform to the
following general provisions and performance standards.
26.1.3 Landscaping Maintenance.
It is also important that all landscaped areas shall be properly maintained. Minimum maintenance standards for all
landscaped areas are described in Section 18 of this Ordinance.
Section 26.2 Definitions the definitions used in this section are now listed in Appendix A of The Consolidated Land Use
Ordinance.
Section 26.3 Landscaping Requirements for New Construction in Residential Districts
25.3.1 Where to install landscaping.
All front yards, boulevards and side yards of a residential structure in any zoning area in the City shall have sod or
landscaping with mulch cover properly installed. This installation shall occur within sixty (60) days after the home is
constructed upon the lot, but no later than two hundred forty (240) days after first grading, excavating, or otherwise
disturbing the land in furtherance of construction. If home construction is completed after the end of growing
season, such landscaping shall be installed within sixty (60) days of the start of the next growing season. In rear yards,
grass or mulch cover is still required, but the requirement may be met by seeding or other measures reasonably
expected to provide a grassy area in lieu of installing sod. Silt fences and other methods to prevent soil erosion, as
described in the Zoning Ordinance, shall be installed and maintained on any remaining portions of the lot that are not
sodded or properly landscaped until a stable ground cover is established.
All areas disturbed by grading which surround the principal building and accessory buildings which are not driveways,
sidewalks or patios shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees or other ornamental landscape materials.
26.3.2 Trees to be planted.
Three (3) new trees per acre shall be installed concurrently with sodding and seeding of the required yards. At least
one (1) overstory tree and either one (1) ornamental tree or coniferous/evergreen tree is required for each lot. Each
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 141
acre may have two (2) overstory trees as long as they are not of identical species. Existing significant trees that are
retained on each lot may be used as a credit in lieu of planting new trees, but each acre must have at least two (2) trees.
26.3.3 Landscaping required after land filling or reclamation.
If land filling or land reclamation is done in a residential area, the requirements of 16.15 4.1 for landscaping following
construction shall be followed, using the date of permit expiration in place of the date of construction completion.
Section 26.4 Landscaping Requirements for New Construction in Non-Residential Districts
26.4.1 Where landscaping is necessary.
For all non-residential districts, at least twenty five percent (25%) of the land area shall be landscaped with grass,
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All front yards, boulevards and side yards around a structure in all nonresidential
districts in the City shall have sod or landscaping with mulch cover properly installed. This installation
shall occur within sixty (60) days after the structure is constructed upon the lot, but no later than two hundred forty
(240) days after first grading, excavating, or otherwise disturbing the land in furtherance of construction. If
construction is completed after the end of growing season, such landscaping shall be installed within sixty (60) days of
the start of the next growing season. All areas around the structure must be finished, but seeding of large areas
around the structures is allowed in lieu of sod placement. Silt fences and other methods to prevent soil erosion shall
be installed and maintained on the remaining portions of the lot that are not sodded or properly landscaped until a
stable ground cover is established.
26.4.2 Parking Area Landscaping.
Any parking areas in a non-residential zone that contain one hundred (100) parking stalls or less shall include at least
one unpaved landscaped island along the driving aisles that serve as primary circulation to the site. In addition, at
least one landscaped island shall be provided for every two hundred and twenty five (225) feet of contiguous parking
stalls.
All parking areas containing over one hundred (100) parking stalls shall include unpaved landscaped islands for every
two hundred and twenty-five (225) feet of contiguous parking stalls. The islands shall be distributed evenly
throughout the planned parking area space and be positioned in a way to promote effective traffic flow through the
parking area.
All landscaped islands in parking areas shall contain a minimum of one hundred and eighty (180) square feet of area
and shall be provided with deciduous shade trees, ornamental or evergreen trees, plus ground cover, mulch and/or
shrubbery in addition to then minimum landscape requirements of this Ordinance. Interior parking landscape area
trees shall be provided at the rate of one (1) tree for each fifteen (15) surface parking spaces provided or a fraction
thereof. Parking area landscaping shall be contained in planting beds bordered by a raised concrete curb or equivalent
approved by the Planning Commission.
26.4.3 Landscaping required in land filling or reclamation.
If land filling or land reclamation is done in a non-residential area, the requirements of 16.15.1 for landscaping
following construction shall be followed, using the date of permit expiration in place of the date of construction
completion.
26.4.4 Minimum Standards in non-residential districts.
In order to achieve landscaping which is appropriate in scale with the size of the building and site, these minimum
standards shall apply to all non-residential districts:
A. One (1) tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of total building floor area, or one (1) tree for
every fifty (50) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the trees
required shall be coniferous.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 142
B. One (1) ornamental tree may be substituted for every 0.6 overstory deciduous shade tree. In no case shall
ornamental trees exceed fifty percent (50%) of the required number of trees.
C. One (1) large shrub for every three hundred (300) square feet of building or for every thirty (30) feet of site
perimeter, whichever is greater.
26.4.5 Credit for Existing Trees.
The total number of new overstory trees required on a property may be reduced by the retention of existing overstory
trees, provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The trees fulfill the minimum requirements of section 27 of this Ordinance as to size and species. The
City Forester shall recommend to the Planning Commission the amount of credit for such existing trees
based upon their location and distribution in the lot.
B. Proper precautions to protect trees during building development shall be indicated on site grading plans
submitted for plan review. The landscape performance security shall include provisions to ensure that these
precautions are followed.
26.4.6 Irrigation System Required.
As a non-residential area is developed, an underground irrigation system shall be required in all landscaped areas.
Section 26.5 General Requirements for All Districts
26.5.1 Trees and Shrubs.
The following nursery stock sizes shall be required at the time of planting. All measurements shall conform to the
standards set forth in the current edition of the USA Standards for Nursery Stock. Larger plants may be used or
specified at any time.
Overstory Trees 2-1/2 inches in diameter
Ornamental Trees 1-1/2 inch in diameter
Evergreen Trees 6 feet tall
Large Shrubs 36 inches tall
Medium Shrubs 24 inches tall
Small Shrubs 12 inches tall
Evergreen Shrubs 24 inches in diameter
Upright Evergreen Shrubs 36 inches tall
Trunk diameter shall be measured six (6) inches above the ground level for four (4) inch or less caliper trees
and measured twelve (12) inches above the ground for four (4) inch caliper or larger trees.
26.5.2 Topsoil and Planting Soil.
When topsoil or planting soil is required for landscaping, the soil shall have a pH range of 5.00 to 8.00, unless
otherwise specified. All soil shall be free of sticks, stones and other debris.
26.5.3 Planting Schedule.
All landscaping plans shall contain a planting schedule which identified all plants proposed to be installed, along with
existing plants. Plants shall be identified by a planting schedule which includes:
A. Quantity to be installed
B. Common name
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 143
C. Botanical name
D. Plant size
E. Root type (B & B, container, bare root)
26.5.4 Location of Plants.
No plants, except flowers, ground cover or vines, shall be placed within two (2) feet of any building, driveway or
parking area unless specifically noted and approved on the landscape plan.
26.5.5 Installation of Trees.
The property owner shall be responsible for keeping new trees in a plumb position. When staking or guying is
required, it shall occur so as not to create any hazards or unsightly obstacles. All wires shall be encased in hose to
prevent tree damage.
Section 26.6 Native Landscapes
26.6.1 Native Landscape Alternative.
A native landscape alternative to the requirements of this Ordinance is allowed in all zoning districts. Landscape
plans, or portions thereof, approved as “native” are exempt from the other requirements of this Ordinance. An
applicant proposing a “native landscape” shall submit a landscape plan depicting the current state of the natural area,
its location on the property, and where any restoration of native area will be done. The plan must describe all features
which make the planned restoration or retention of the area “native” as opposed to simply undisturbed. The plan
shall also show fire breaks between the planting area and any structure.
26.6.2 Approval.
A “native landscape” plan for restoration shall be approved if the proposed “native” area is composed of at least 80%
native grasses and forbs, native plants, or a combination thereof. A plan proposing to preserve or leave undisturbed
an area of the property may be approved as “native” landscaping if the specified area is composed of at least 50%
native grasses and forbs, native plants, or a combination thereof.
26.6.3 Maintenance of Native Landscaping.
Once approved, native grass areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner without any noxious weeds, and
mowed at least once per year.
Section 26.7 Landscaping of Existing Uses
Existing uses shall comply with the landscaping requirements listed in Sections 26.5 and 26.6 4 through 6 of this
Ordinance at the time any alterations are made on the buildings and premises.
Section 26.8 Screening Requirements in Non-Residential Districts
26.8.1 Parking Area Screening.
Any off street parking area containing more than six (6) parking spaces, any part of which is within thirty (30) feet of
an adjoining residence or residential area or across the street from any residence or residential area, and any driveway
to a parking area containing at least six (6) spaces within fifteen (15) feet of an adjoining residential zone shall be
completely screened to a height of at least three and one-half (3-1/2) feet above the parking grade. Such screening
shall be accomplished through the use of earth berming, plant materials, or a combination of both, but not walls or
fencing.
26.8.2 Trash areas and Accessory Structures.
In all non-residential districts, all trash and trash handling equipment shall be stored within the principal structure,
within an attached structure accessible from within the principal structure, or totally screened from eye level view
from public streets and adjacent residential or non-residential zoned properties. If accessory structures are proposed,
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 144
they shall be constructed of the same building materials as the principal structure and be readily served through
swinging doors. Design shall be approved by the Fire Department.
26.8.3 Mechanical utilities screening.
The ground level view of all mechanical utilities including roof top equipment shall be completely screened from
contiguous properties and adjacent street, or designed to be compatible with the architectural treatment of the
principal structure.
26.8.4 Loading and service area screening.
The external loading and service areas accessory to buildings shall be completely screened from the ground level view
from contiguous residential or non-residential properties and adjacent streets, except at access points.
Section 26.9 Additional Screening Requirements
26.9.1 Residential districts.
In all residential districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, garbage, fuel or materials not currently in use for
construction shall be stored indoors or totally screened from the eye level view from public streets and adjacent
properties.
26.9.2 All zoning districts.
In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment, utility meters, storage, service area and similar features shall be
completely screened from the eye level view from adjacent properties and public streets, or designed to be compatible
with the architectural treatment of the principal structure.
Section 26.10 Screening Methods
26.10.1 Screening Wall or Fence.
A fence or wall may be used for screening when plant materials are provided along the outside of the fence or wall.
26.10.2 Earth Berms.
An earth berm shall be allowed for screening, when used in combination with plant material. A minimum of twenty
five percent (25%) of the required screening must be provided by the plant material.
Final slopes on berms steeper than 3:1 will not be permitted without special approval or treatment such as terracing or
retaining walls.
Earth berms used to screen parking lots and other open areas shall be of sufficient height to achieve screening but not
to have slopes exceeding 3:1. A minimum of a two (2) foot berm is required.
26.10.3 Planting Screens.
All required screening or buffering shall be located on the lot occupied by the use, building, facility or structures to be
screened. No screening or buffering shall be located on any public right-of-way or within eight (8) feet of the traveled
portion of any street or highway.
A planting screen shall consist of healthy, fully hardy plant materials and shall be designed to provide a minimum year
round opaqueness of eight percent (80%) at the time of maturity. The plant material shall be of sufficient height to
achieve the required screening.
Composition of plant material for screening shall be composed of these minimum standards:
A. Not less than thirty-three percent (33%) coniferous
B. Not less than twenty-five percent (25%) deciduous
C. Not more than thirty-five percent (35%) shrubs
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 145
D. Not more than forty-five percent (45%) of one species
Planting screens shall be maintained in a neat and healthy condition. Plants which have died shall be promptly
replaced.
Section 26.11 Landscaping Plans
26.11.1 Content of Plans.
A landscaping plan for any construction or land disturbance site shall be indicated either on the site plan and building
plan, or on a separate to-scale plan drawing. The landscape plan shall address the matters raised by Sections 26.5 and
26.6, as well as visually depicting conformance with the performance standards of this Ordinance. Where streetscape
plans or other landscape guidance from the Zoning Ordinance are applicable to the proposal, the landscape plan shall
incorporate and visually depict compliance with those standards. When a landscaping plan is required by this
Ordinance, the applicant shall submit a number of copies equal to the number of copies of site plans required for the
permit or authorization (e.g. CUP, building permit) sought.
26.11.2 Submission - residential districts.
If the construction is proposed as part of a subdivision, planned unit development, or other application requiring
Planning Commission review, the landscape plan shall be submitted with the applicant’s other materials for the permit
or other entitlement. In other cases, the City’s building official shall ensure that such a plan exists before issuing a
building permit.
26.11.3 Submission - non-residential districts.
In non-residential districts, a detailed landscaping site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission by the
subdivider, developer, builder or property owner as part of the application for zoning entitlement or other permit.
This plan must be approved at the same time as the site plan and building plan and the landscaping plan must be
approved before any building, demolition, grading or filling permit is issued and construction is started. In cases
where Planning Commission review is not required to issue a building permit, such as additions to or remodeling of
existing structures, the City’s building official shall ensure that such a plan exists before issuing a building permit.
26.11.4 Land filling or reclamation.
Each request for a land filling or land reclamation permit in all zoning districts shall also include a landscaping plan.
This plan shall be approved by the Planning Commission before a filling permit is issued and filling is started.
Section 26.12 Performance Surety for Landscaping in Non-Residential Districts
26.12.1 Requirements.
All landscape plans for construction in a non-residential district shall be accompanied by an owner supplied
performance security which shall provide the City with cash, corporate surety bond, approved letter of credit or other
surety satisfactory to the City to guarantee the proper installation and vigorous growth of all landscape elements and
screening required.
26.12.2 Time period surety to remain in effect.
Said surety shall remain in effect for two (2) full growing seasons. The first year the amount of the surety shall be
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated costs of plant material, installation and tree preservation.
The second year the surety shall be reduced to equal twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated costs of plant
material, installation and tree preservation.
26.12.3 Requirements for lots with irrigation systems.
Lots or sites provided with an irrigation system covering one hundred percent (100%) of the area improved with
landscaping need only provide surety for one (1) full growing season.
Section 26.13 Maintenance of Landscaping In All Districts
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 146
26.13.1 Responsibility for replacing dead materials.
The property owner shall be responsible for replacement of any dead trees, shrubs, ground covers and sodding shown
on a landscaping plan. If any of these plant materials are not maintained or replaced, said plant materials will be
replaced by the City and the cost thereof will be taken from any posted surety or, if a surety does not cover all costs,
assessed to the property. In residential districts the City’s replacement costs will be assessed to the property.
26.13.2 Responsibility for maintenance.
The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the landscaping on every lot and parcel in the City in good
condition. Every occupied and unoccupied lot and parcel shall be maintained to limit the growth of weeds or
poisonous or harmful vegetation. Weeds shall include all weeds, grass, brush, wildings, second growth, rank
vegetation or other vegetation that is not growing in its proper place, having a greater height of ten (10) inches or
spread more than ten (10) inches. Grass must be mowed and shall not be allowed to grow more than ten (10) inches.
Moving shall occur only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. Every property owner shall keep all yard
spaces around a residence or non-residential in a manner such that the appearance will not detract from the
neighborhood
Vegetation blocking visibility on corners or along the edge of roads or street and unreasonably impeding the view of
motor vehicles traveling along public roadways is expressly forbidden and vegetation that grows to cause this problem
must be trimmed or removed.
Section 26.14 Penalty
26.14.1 Any person violating or refusing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, may be punished in accordance with the statutory penalties assigned to
misdemeanor offenses, as those may be changed from time to time. The costs of prosecution may also be added.
Section 26.15 Severability
26.15.1 It is the intention of the City Council that several provisions of this Section are severable. If any Court of
competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this Section or application thereof to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect any other provisions of this Section not specifically included in such judgment.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 147
SECTION 27 – TREE PRESERVATION
Section 27.1 Purpose
27.1.1 The purpose of this Section is to preserve and protect the unique natural environment of the City of Gem Lake
and provide for minimal tree loss and mitigation of tree removal in wooded areas of the City. It also provides for
protection of natural barriers provided by trees or shrubs along the borders of our city, along major roads and
between differing land uses.
27.1.2 Tree cover and natural barriers are beneficial in terms of aesthetics, screening, cooling, wildlife habitat
protection, watershed control, air quality enhancements, erosion control and preservation and enhancement of
property values. Land alteration that causes destruction of trees or shrubs diminishes and impairs the public health,
safety and general welfare. The intention of this Section is to provide regulations relating to the cutting and removal of
trees in areas where the natural vegetation or topography are to be altered.
Section 27.2. Severability
27.2.1 It is the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this Section are severable and that if any
court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this Section or application thereof to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect any other provisions or this Section not specifically included in such judgment.
Section 27.3 Interaction Between This Section and Other Sections
27.3.1 In the event of conflicting requirements imposed by this Section or by other Ordinances of the City of Gem
Lake, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
Section 27.4 Wording of This Section
27.4.1 Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; the singular includes the plural; and the
plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and the "may" is permissive. The masculine gender
includes the feminine.
Section 27.5 Definitions. The definitions used in this section are now listed in Appendix A of The Consolidated Land Use
Ordinance.
Section 27.6 Protection Standards.
27.6.1 No land alteration shall occur until the City finds that the planned land alteration complies with the following:
27.6.1.1 Maximum Possible Preservation.
All land alteration shall be conducted so that the maximum amount of woodland and natural screening and
barriers are preserved by the clustering of structures wherever possible, or by the use of other appropriate
methods. Measures shall be taken to protect and preserve all trees and shrubs in the preservation area as
described.
27.6.1.1 Protection of Root Zones.
Grading, contouring, paving and any excavation or trenching shall not detrimentally affect the aeration or
permeability of the root zone in the preservation area.
Section 27.7 Data Submission.
A) The applicant shall submit data to the City, at the time of a preliminary plat submission or whenever land alteration
(as described in this Ordinance) is planned, that outlines the conformance to this Ordinance. This submission shall
include:
1. The name and address of the person preparing the plan and applying for a permit to do this alteration, and
2. The name and address of the person who owns the land that is to be altered, and
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 148
3. The estimated period of time within which this land alteration will be conducted, and
4. A topographical map of the land on which the proposed land alteration is to occur having a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet and showing the ground elevation contours at two foot intervals. The map shall also
show:
a. The land as it exists prior to the proposed land alteration including, a minimum one-hundred (100')
feet of the abutting properties; and
b. The proposed ground elevation contours at 2 foot intervals on the land when the proposed land
alteration is complete, and
c. A re-grading, drainage and planting plan, if appropriate.
B) A statement relating to the proposed use of the land including the type of building or structure situated thereon or
to be constructed, and
C) A tree inventory, certified by a registered land surveyor, landscape architect or forester depicting the size, species,
condition and location of each significant tree by species, diameter and condition, and
D) Identification of significant trees that will be lost due to the proposed land alteration and those which will be
preserved, and
E) Identification of all significant trees within 30 feet of the grading limit, and
F) Identification of all natural barriers of trees or shrubs.
Section 27.8 Removal Thresholds
27.8.1 Although the applicant must retain the maximum amount of woodland possible, the City recognizes that a
certain amount of significant trees and tree cover removal is an inevitable consequence of the urban development
process.
27.8.2 Therefore, in the following Zoning areas or Zoning Districts listed in Column I, a percentage of the woodland
may be removed without any obligation for reforestation, but only up to and including the threshold percentage of
Woodland listed in Column II. If the land alteration results in woodland removal that exceeds the percentage listed in
Column II, then the applicant shall be responsible to replace the trees in accordance with Section 27.9 of this
Ordinance.
27.8.3 Natural borders may not be removed or altered without the written permission of the City.
27.8.4 Intensive vegetation clearance within the shore land area and on steep slopes is prohibited.
27.8.5 Table of Zoning District and Tree Removal Threshold
Tree removal in excess of the thresholds shown requires Planning Commission and City Council approval and
reforestation.
Column I
Zoning Area or District
Column II
Removal Threshold
Single Family Estate – RE – Residential 25%
Single Family Executive – RX – Residential 25%
Single Family (1 Acre) – RO – Residential 25%
Single Family – RS – Residential 25%
Gateway – G - Commercial 25%
Open Space/Recreational Overlay – OS/R 10%
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 149
Shore Land – All Districts 10%
Natural Barrier – All Districts 0%
Section 27.9 Reforestation
27.9.1 Tree Removal Beyond the Removal Threshold.
27.9.1.1 If the land alteration results in tree removal beyond the tree removal threshold in Section 27.8 of this
Ordinance, or as defined in Section 27.6 of this Ordinance, or a natural barrier is to be altered or removed,
the applicant shall be required to submit a reforestation plan. The reforestation plan must be submitted and
approved by the City Forester prior to final plat approval, if a subdivision is being done, or before the work
of land alteration is begun. The reforestation plan shall include:
A) Location of proposed reforestation, and
1. Species and size of proposed plantings, and
B) Quantity of proposed plantings.
27.9.2 Reforestation Plan
27.9.2.1 The reforestation plan shall comply with the following criteria:
A) Tree replacement will be predicated on the total number of diameter inches of significant trees
removed beyond the threshold limits.
B) Actual replacement quantities shall be adjusted based on the type of trees removed in accordance
with the following guidelines:
1. Class A - Conifer or Softwood- predominantly Poplar, Box Elder, Cottonwood, Aspen
and Conifers: 75 %
2. Class B - Mixed Hardwoods - predominantly species other than Oak including, but not
limited to, Cherry, Birch, Walnut, Elm, Ironwood, Maple, Basswood, Ash: 100 %
3. Class C - Hardwood - Predominantly mature Oaks: 125%
27.9.3 Where trees are to be located.
27.9.3.1 Trees to be provided as part of a reforestation plan shall be located adjacent to the development or
proposed structures in areas such as yard setbacks, on outlots or common areas, at the project entrance area,
in buffer zones between different land uses or roads, or at other locations as directed by the City.
Reforestation shall occur in such a way as to replace trees removed with desirable trees of the same or similar
species and/or densities. These trees must be planted based on the frequency and density as determined by
the City Forester.
27.9.4 Sizes and type of replacement trees.
27.9.4.1 Replacement trees must be no less than the following sizes:
A) Deciduous trees
1. No less than two and one-half (2½") inches in diameter on steep slopes, or
2. No less than three (3") inches on all other grades.
B) Coniferous trees
1. No less than six (6') feet high on steep slopes, or
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 150
2. No less than seven (7') feet high on all other grades.
Section 27.10 Construction Damage to Significant Trees in or Near the Preservation Area.
27.10.1 Significant trees which are within thirty (30) feet of the proposed grading limit shall be surveyed by the
applicant. Any significant tree that the applicant commits to preserve that is subsequently damaged, during or as the
result of construction, shall be replaced by the applicant on a one for one diameter inch basis.
Section 27.11 Agreement to Replace Trees
27.11.1 The developer or applicant, prior to the approval of, or issuance of a permit for any land alteration in
connection with which trees are required to be replaced by the provisions in this Ordinance, shall enter into such
written agreements or arrangements with the City of Gem Lake in such form and substance as shall be approved by
the City, whereby the applicant shall undertake to comply with the provisions and conditions imposed by this
Ordinance and in connection with any such approval or issuance of a permit and shall further provide that the
applicant shall indemnify the City against any loss, cost or expense, including an amount as and for reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in enforcing the terms of such agreement or agreements; and
27.11.2 Provide security for the performance of its obligations pursuant to such agreement or agreements. The
security may consist of a bond, letter of credit, cash, or escrow deposit, all in such form and substance as shall be
approved by the City.
A) The amount of this security shall be $ 1,000 or 150% of the estimated cost to furnish and plant the
replacement trees (estimated cost) whichever is greater. The estimated cost shall be at least as much as the
reasonable amount charged by nurseries for furnishing and planting of replacement trees. The estimated cost
shall be subject to approval by the City, and in the event the estimated cost is not approved, the City shall
have the right, in its sole discretion, to determine the escrow amount.
Section 27.12 Collector and Arterial Roads and Trunk and Lateral Utility Construction
27.12.1 When This Section Applies.
This section shall only apply to collector and arterial road and trunk and lateral utility construction projects. All
interior roads and utility services will be required to adhere to applicable zoning district thresholds.
27.12.2 Road and Utility Construction.
Significant trees shall not be destroyed or removed within the right-of-way unless such destruction or removal is
absolutely necessary because of engineering, safety, sight distances, or maintenance requirements and acceptable
alternate means of construction or alternate routes are not possible. Such reasons must be submitted for review by the
City.
27.12.3 Reforestation.
If the road or utility construction destroys or removes fifty (50%) percent or less of the significant trees or tree cover
in the right-of-way, then the person or entity conducting the construction shall not be responsible for reforestation. If,
however, more than fifty (50%) percent of the significant trees or tree cover within the easement or right-of-way are
destroyed or removed, the person conducting the construction shall be responsible for the following:
A) Filing a landscape bond pursuant to Section 27.11; and
B) Replacement of trees that exceed the fifty (50%) percent threshold shall be in accordance with Section
27.9 of this Ordinance. The replacement trees shall be planted on the adjoining setback areas, assuming the
adjoining landowners consent. Otherwise, the replacement trees shall be planted at locations as determined by
the City.
Section 27.13 Exceptions to This Ordinance
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 151
27.13.1 The requirements of this Ordinance shall not apply to the removal of trees which are dead, diseased, seriously
damaged by storm, or other acts of nature.
Section 27.14 Tree Replacement
27.14.1 Replacement trees shall be planted not later than 12 months after the date the land alteration has commenced.
If the applicant is prevented from performing within this time limit, because of unforeseen circumstances beyond the
applicant’s control, the City Forester may extend the time for performance. The applicant shall inform the City
Forester when all replacement trees have been planted, at which time the City Forester shall inspect the site.
27.14.2 Replacement trees shall consist of "certified nursery stock" as defined by Minnesota Statues Section 18.46 or
other trees ("wilding trees") so long as the wilding trees comply with the following standards. A wilding tree measured
in diameter inches shall not exceed the maximum height as shown below:
TABLE 27.14.3
Diameter Of Tree In Inches Maximum Height Of Trees In Feet
Two (2.0") Inches Eighteen (18') Feet
Two and One-Half (2.5") Inches Eighteen (18') Feet
Three (3") Inches Twenty (20') Feet
Three and One-Half (3.5") Inches Twenty (20') Feet
Four (4") Inches Twenty-Four (24') Feet
Five (5") Inches Twenty-Eight (28') Feet
27.14.4 The lowest branch of a wilding tree shall be at a height above the surface of the ground not more than onehalf
of the total height of the tree. (Example, a 16 foot tree must have a branch within 8 feet of the surface of the
surrounding ground.)
27.14.5 Trees planted in place of missing, dead or un-healthy replacement trees shall consist of only "certified nursery
stock" as defined by Minnesota Statues, Section 18.46.
Section 27.15 Release and Retention of Performance Security
27.15.1 Release of Performance Security
27.15.1.1 The performance security shall remain in effect for not less than one (1) year after the date that the
last replacement tree has been planted. The City may release the performance security at that time unless the
City Forester, upon inspection, finds that any of the replacement trees have died or are unhealthy, or if there
was any encroachment upon the protective fencing surrounding any tree to be saved.
28.15.1.2 If the applicant supplies proof of a nursery guarantee which is approved by the City Forester, then
the performance security posted by the applicant shall be released upon planting of the last guaranteed tree.
The nursery guarantee shall remove liability from the applicant and responsibility will be placed upon the
nursery or current land owner.
27.15.2 Retention of All or Portion of Performance Security. The City may retain the portion of the performance
security equal to the cost of removing dead or unhealthy trees and replanting replacement trees.
Section 27.16 Penalty
27.16.1 Any person violating or refusing to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and prosecuted and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine established in the City of Gem
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 152
Lake fee schedule, as amended, or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. The costs of prosecution
may also be added.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 153
SECTION 28 – ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
Section 28.1 State Law Adopted
28.1.1 The City of Gem Lake hereby adopts the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, § 116D.04 and 116D.045, and
Minnesota Rules Chapter 4410, as those laws and rules may be amended or altered from time to time, and makes
those provisions a part of this section as if fully set out herein.
Section 28.2 Application.
Section 28.2.1 The provisions of this section shall apply to all land use applications submitted to the City, including
but not limited to zoning amendments, planned unit development applications, subdivision applications, shoreland
and wetland permits, variances, conditional use permits, and nonconforming use permits. The intent of this
ordinance is to standardize the City’s process for determining when to require review by Environmental Assessment
Worksheet (“EAW”) or Environmental Impact Statement (“EIS”).
Section 28.3 Determination of Need for Environmental Review.
28.3.1 The City Planner shall be the person responsible for the administration of this section, and the rules adopted by
reference by this section.
28.3.2 The City Planner shall be responsible for determining whether an action for which a permit is required is an
action for which an EAW is mandatory under Minn. R. 4410.4300 and/or an EIS is mandatory under Minn. R.
4410.4400. The planner shall also determine those proposed actions for which a discretionary EAW may be required
under Minn. R. 4410.1000, Subp. 3, and shall notify the Planning Commission and the City Council of these proposed
actions.
28.3.3 If the City Planner identifies a proposal as potentially requiring a discretionary EAW, or if the City receives a
petition for EAW determination from the Environmental Quality Board, the decision to require an EAW must be
made by the City Council. The planner’s notice or EQB petition shall be referred to the Planning Commission, which
shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council’s decision on whether or not to require an EAW
shall take place no later than 30 days from receipt of the planner’s notice or petition from the EQB. Notice of the
council’s decision shall be sent to the proposer within five (5) days of the decision. Copies of this notice shall also be
sent to the EQB and petitioners’ representative if the determination was triggered by a citizen petition.
28.3.4 If the City Planner identifies a proposal as requiring mandatory environmental review, the planner may require
that review process to begin immediately.
Section 28.4 Procedures on Determination that EAW is Required.
28.4.1 If an EAW is required, the proposer of the project shall submit an “Application for Environmental Review”
along with the completed data portions of the EAW. The applicant shall agree in writing, as a part of the application,
to reimburse the City prior to the issuance of any permits for all reasonable costs, including legal and consultants’ fees,
incurred in preparation and review of the EAW. The proposer shall make a deposit of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) with the City Treasurer to be held in escrow for the payment of these costs. Any unexpended funds
remaining after final consideration of the EAW by the City Council shall be returned to the proposer within thirty (30)
days of the Council’s decision.
28.4.2 The City Planner shall promptly review the application for completeness and accuracy. If the city planner
determines that the submittal is incomplete, the submittal shall be returned to the proposer for completion of the
missing data. If the city planner determines that the submittal is complete, the proposer shall be notified of the
acceptance of the submittal within five days. The City shall have 30 days from notification to add supplementary
material to the EAW, if necessary, and to approve the EAW for distribution.
28.4.3 Upon completion of the EAW for distribution by the city planner, the City Clerk shall provide mailed notice of
the availability of the EAW and date of the meeting at which the Planning Commission will consider the matter to all
property owners within at least seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of the boundaries of the property which is the
subject of the EAW. Said notice shall be mailed at minimum ten (10) days before the date of the Planning
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 154
Commission meeting during which the EAW will be considered. Failure of a property owner to receive notice shall
not invalidate any such proceedings on the EAW or the underlying land use proposal.
28.4.4 The City Clerk shall also send the notices, copies and other material required by Minn. R. 4410.1500 within five
(5) days of the planner’s approval of the EAW.
28.4.5 The City Clerk shall receive and collect all written comments on an EAW submitted during the 30-day EAW
review and comment period. The planning commission and city council may take public comment on the EAW
during the 30-day period, provided that notice of the comment time is published and mailed to the proposer at least
ten (10) days prior to the date the commission or council plans to take public comment.
28.4.6 When reviewing an EAW or EIS, city staff and the Planning Commission may suggest design alterations which
would lessen the environmental impact of the action. The City Council may require these design alterations to be
made as a condition for approving the land use proposal when it finds that the design alterations are necessary to
lessen the environmental impact of the action.
28.4.7 The Planning Commission shall review the EAW and all public commentary after the close of the comment
period, and make a recommendation to the City Council regarding the need for an EIS. The City Council shall meet
no less than 3 days and no more than 30 days after the close of the comment period to decide whether an EIS is
needed for the land use proposal. Both the Planning Commission and the City Council shall use the standards and
procedures set forth in Minn. R. 4410.1700 to guide their recommendations and decisions.
Section 28.5 Procedure when an EIS is required.
28.5.1 The City shall apply and follow the guidance of Minn. Stat. § 116D.045 and Minn. R. 4410.2000 – 4410.3000 in
the preparation and review of a required EIS.
Section 28.6 Prohibition on Approvals During Environmental Review.
28.6.1 No permit for an action for which an EAW or an EIS is required shall be issued until all costs of preparation
and review which are to be paid by the applicant are paid, and all information required is supplied in adequate detail
and until the environmental review process has been completed as provided in this article, and pursuant to any written
agreements entered into by the applicant for the permit or permits and the City Council.
Section 28.7 Severability.
28.7.1 It is the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of this section are separate and that it any
court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect other provisions of this section not specifically included in such judgment.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 155
SECTION 29 – STORM SEWER USE
Section 29.1 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Gem
Lake through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this section are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
Section 29.2 Applicability
This section shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped
lands unless explicitly exempted by the City of Gem Lake.
Section 29.3 Responsibility for Administration
The City of Gem Lake shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the City of Gem Lake may be delegated in writing by the Gem Lake City Administrator of the
City of Gem Lake to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City of Gem Lake.
Section 29.4 Compatibility with Other Regulations
This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other section, ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of
law. The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other section, ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other section, ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more
restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
Section 29.5 Severability
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph
of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this ordinance.
Section 29.6 Ultimate Responsibility
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section are minimum standards; therefore
this section does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
Section 29.7 Discharge Prohibitions
29.7.1 Prohibition of Illegal Discharges
29.7.1.1 No person shall directly or indirectly discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to directly or
indirectly discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than storm water.
29.7.1.2 The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:
a. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section: water
line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated
ground water infiltration, uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 156
sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl
space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian
habitats and wetlands, de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
b. Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City of Gem
Lake as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c. Discharges associated with dye testing; however this activity requires a verbal notification to the
City of Gem Lake prior to the time of the test.
d. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger
is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drain system.
29.7.2 Prohibition of Illicit Connections
29.7.2.1 The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain
system is prohibited.
29.7.2.2 This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
29.7.2.3 A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
29.7.2.4 Improper connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary,
to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City
of Gem Lake.
29.7.2.5 Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may
be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written notice of violation from the City of Gem Lake requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge
point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City of Gem
Lake.
Section 29.8 Watercourse Protection
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes and/or contains a stormwater inlet or catch basin,
or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse and/or stormwater inlet or catch basin
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the
use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
Section 29.9 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharge
Submission of Notice of Coverage/Authorization to the City of Gem Lake
29.9.1 Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply
with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
City of Gem Lake prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 157
29.9.2 The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge storm
water associated with industrial or construction activity shall submit a copy of the coverage notification or notification
of permit authorization to the City of Gem Lake.
29.9.3 The copy of the coverage notification or notification of permit authorization may be delivered to the City of
Gem Lake either in person or by mailing it to:
City of Gem Lake
4200 Otter Lake Road
Gem Lake, MN 55110
29.9.4 A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging storm water associated with
industrial or construction activity without having submitted a copy of the coverage notification or notification of
permit authorization to do so to the City of Gem Lake.
Section 29.10. Compliance Monitoring
29.10.1 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
The City of Gem Lake shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this section as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.
29.10.1.1 If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the City of Gem Lake.
29.10.1.2 Facility operators shall allow the City of Gem Lake ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions
of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by
state and federal law.
29.10.1.3The City of Gem Lake shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the City of Gem Lake to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
storm water discharge.
29.10.1.4 The City of Gem Lake has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger. Sampling and monitoring activities and equipment, including
installation, maintenance, and removal shall be at the discharger’s own expense. All devices used to measure
storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
29.10.1.5 Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City of Gem
Lake and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
29.10.1.6 Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Gem Lake access to a permitted facility is a violation of
a storm water discharge permit and of this section. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES
permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial or construction activity commits an offense if
the person denies the City of Gem Lake reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
29.10.2 Search Warrants
If the City of Gem Lake has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged,
and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 158
welfare of the community, then the City of Gem Lake may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
Section 29.11 Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Storm Water Pollutants by the Use of Best Management
Practices.
The owner or operator of any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States shall provide, at their own
expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural Best Management Practices.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of storm water associated with industrial or construction activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a Storm Water Management Plan
(SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
Section 29.12 Notification of Spills
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release
of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the
storm drain system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release, at their own expense. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City of Gem Lake in person or by
phone or email no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the City of Gem Lake within two (2) business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Failure to provide notification of a release as
provided above is a violation of this section.
Section 29.13. Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties
29.13.1 Violations
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the
enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City of Gem Lake is
authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City of Gem Lake is authorized to seek costs of the
abatement as outlined in Section 20.
29.13.2 Warning Notice
When the City of Gem Lake finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this section,
or any order issued hereunder, the City of Gem Lake may serve upon that person a written Warning Notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate
the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the
matter in response to the Warning Notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the Warning Notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the City
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 159
of Gem Lake to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
Warning Notice.
29.13.3 Notice of Violation
Whenever the City of Gem Lake finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
Section, the City of Gem Lake may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice may require without limitation, at their own expense:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of
any affected property; and
e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline
within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the
violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Section 29.14 Costs
In addition to the other penalties provided herein, the City of Gem Lake may recover engineering fees, court costs,
court reporter's fees, attorney fees, and other expenses of litigation or enforcement by an appropriate action against
the person or entity found to have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued
hereunder.
Section 29.15 Suspension of MS4 Access
29.15.1 Emergency Cease and Desist Orders
When the City of Gem Lake finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United
States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the City of Gem Lake may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
a. Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
b. Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
29.15.2 Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this Subsection shall immediately comply and
stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily
with the emergency order, the City of Gem Lake may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including
immediate termination of a facility’s water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The City of
Gem Lake may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City
of Gem Lake that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against
the discharger under this ordinance. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 160
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City of Gem Lake within five (5) days of receipt of the
emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the violator.
29.15.3 Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations.
The City of Gem Lake may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City of Gem Lake may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to
persons.
29.15.4 Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge.
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this section may have their MS4 access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City of Gem Lake will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City of Gem Lake for a reconsideration and hearing.
29.15.5 A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premise terminated pursuant to this
Section, without the prior approval of the City of Gem Lake.
Section 29.16 Civil Penalties
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise
fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the City of Gem Lake shall
deem appropriate, after the City of Gem Lake has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Gem
Lake may impose a penalty not to exceed $ 1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the
violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
Section 29.17 Criminal Penalties
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not to exceed ninety (90) days
or both.
Section 29.18 Appeal of Notice of Violation
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the City of Gem Lake. The notice of
appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the Notice of Violation, except in the instance where
a Cease and Desist Order is issued as described in Section 13, then the notice of appeal must be received within ten
(10) days from the date of the Cease and Desist Order. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or
his/her designee shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
Section 29.19 Enforcement Measures after Appeal
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the
event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the City
of Gem Lake, then representatives of the City of Gem Lake shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government
agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
Section 29.20 Cost of Abatement of the Violation
Within forty-five (45) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 161
the assessment within thirty (30) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the
decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of Gem Lake by
reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of
eight (8) percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the
violation.
Section 29.21 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this Section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Section 29.22 Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state
or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. The
City of Gem Lake may recover all attorney’s fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Section 29.23 Effective Date
This section shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Updated November 7, 2017 131 Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance – Page 162
SECTION 30 - ADOPTION AND ENACTMENT
Section 30.1 The Ordinance changes contained herein will take effect immediately upon adoption by the City Council and
publication of a summary of this document, but not later than thirty (30) days from the date below.
Section 30.2 The Legend of this Ordinance shall be updated to reflect the date and changes made.
Section 30.3 This Ordinance, previously identified as Ordinance No. 43K shall now be known as Ordinance No. 131, City of
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance, which replaces and supersedes all previous versions of same.
Section 30.4 This City of Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance was unanimously adopted with amendments defined in
Ordinance No. 131, Appendix A, by the City Council of the City of Gem Lake on the 21st day of November in the year 2017
and ordered for summary publication in the City’s official newspaper.
CITY OF GEM LAKE ATTEST:
Robert Uzpen
Updated: Updated:

Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 1
APPENDIX ‘A’
131 CONSOLIDATED LAND USE ORDINACE
CITY OF GEM LAKE
Consolidated/Combined Definitions – various ordinances & sections
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL - An approval provided by the Zoning Administrator for a Zoning Compliance Permit
when no action is required by the City Council on a development plan supplied in accordance with Section 9.8 of this Ordinance.
Note - No Conditional Uses or Variances may be requested to use this approval process.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE - A use or structure or portion of a structure subordinate to and serving the principal
use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto.
ALLEY - A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting the property.
ALTERATION OR ALTER - When used in connection with public waters or wetlands, is any activity that will change or
diminish the course, current or cross-section of public waters or wetlands.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY - A use in which animals are reared or kept in order to sell, consume or donate the animals or their
products, such as meat, fur or eggs.
ANTENNA - A device used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications, television or radio signals which is located on the
exterior of or outside of any building or structure. Such antennas include, but are not limited to, broadcast radio or television,
wireless communications, cellular, personal communications systems or any other dispatch type system, microwave or satellite
dish, short-wave receiving or Amateur Radio transmit/receive, and other Accessory and Secondary use antennas.
ANTENNAS, ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE - Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVRO
antennas three (3) meters or less in diameter, short wave radio receiving antennas, those antennas necessary for the operation of
a Federally licensed Amateur Radio station, and towers/antennas for radio systems operated by the City of Gem Lake.
APARTMENT/CONDOMINIUM - A structure with more than two dwelling units on a single lot. Note - This is Building
Template 9 for the Gateway District.
APPLICANT - The owner of land, or the owner of a leasehold interest therein, or the owner’s authorized representative, or a
governmental entity proposing an action or development requiring City development review and approval or the issuance of a
permit for the development of land.
APPLICATION - Any application for a development permit or development approval pursuant to this Ordinance and which
application was not complete and filed on or before the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
AQUACULTURE - A use in which food fish, shellfish or other marine foods, aquatic plants or aquatic animals are cultured
or grown in a body of water in order to sell, consume or donate them or the products they produce.
ARCADE - Continuous, occupied cover (such as a balcony) over the entrance or entrances to a building.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY - Employees or designees of the City of Gem Lake designated to enforce
this ordinance.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 2
AUTO ORIENTED LAYOUT - Alternative layout standard for Single-Use Buildings and Retail/Office Buildings designed
and intended for occupancy by automotive service business using drive –thru bays, service bays, or a combination thereof.
Note - This is Building Template 15 for the Gateway District.
BASEMENT - That portion of a building that is partly or completely below ground level.
BASEMENT, LOOK OUT - A Look-Out basement has the walls extended sufficiently above ground level so that some of
the basement windows are completely above ground level. For purposes of this definition, the exposed windows must be at least
three (3') feet in height with the bottom of the window not less than one (1') foot above ground level before that basement shall
be considered a Look Out type.
BASEMENT, WALK OUT - A Walk Out basement (also known as a Daylight Basement) is used on a sloping lot where
typically the rear and/or one of the two sides are above grade and part of the basement is above ground level. Occupants can
walk out at that point without use of stairs, ramps, lifts and the like.
BASEMENT, WALK UP - A basement which has an exterior exit via a stairwell or ramp. Some designs cover the stairwell
with angled basement doors to prevent rainwater from accumulating in the stairwell.
BED AND BREAKFAST (B & B) - A residential building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods not more than one week, meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but
not to exceed eight (8) persons.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) - Techniques proven to be effective in controlling runoff, erosion and
sedimentation including those documented in the Minnesota Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control Planning
Handbook (BWSR, 1988); Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas (MPCA, 2000); the Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP
Manual (Metropolitan Council 2001); Minnesota Stormwater Manual (MPCA, 2005); and other sources as approved by the
VLAWMO: as such documents may be amended, revised or supplemented.
BIOENGINEERING - The use of live plantings in constructed features to stabilize streambanks and shorelines.
BLADE DIAMETER - The diameter of the circle created by the tips of the turbine blades when a WECS is in operation.
BOARDING HOUSE - A residential building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement
for definite periods not less than one week, meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed
eight (8) persons.
BUILDABLE AREA - A contiguous area of real property within a lot deemed suitable by best engineering practices for
construction of a principal use structure with no part of said area of real property within delineated wetlands, rights-of-way, setbacks
, or easements.
BUILDING - Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel, and when
said structures are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate
building.
BUILDING, COLLAR - Structures accompanying a commercial use with large parking requirements, intended to maintain
storefronts and entrances on the public street.
Note - This is Building Template 14b for the Gateway district.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 3
BUILDING, LINER - A building that conceals from street view a Single-Use Building for which it is impractical to design
compliant front of side facades (such as a warehouse .or a parking garage. Liners may have retail or office uses on the ground
floor and office and residential uses on the upper floor.
Note - This is Building Template 14a for the Gateway district.
BUILDING, MIXED USE - A structure with vertical mixture of uses. The upper floors may be used of office or residential
uses and the ground floor may be used for office or retail.
Note - This is Building Template 12 for the Gateway district.
BUILDING HEIGHT - (see Height, Building)
BUILDING LINE - A line parallel to a street, road or private way or the ordinary high-water level of a water body at any level
of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or any part of the building is set back from the said right-of-way
or ordinary high water level.
BUILDING, RETAIL/OFFICE - A building designed for occupancy by retail and office uses where the building is intended
for subdivision into tenant spaces with no residential component.
Note - This is Building Template 13 for the Gateway district.
BUILDING, SINGLE USE - A building designed for occupancy by retail, service or office uses on the ground floor with an
optional mezzanine. May also be used as a template for placing a standalone parking structure in a proposed development.
Note - This is Building Template 14 for the Gateway district.
BUILDING SETBACK - The maximum horizontal distance between the building and the lot line.
BUILDING TYPE TEMPLATES - Figures 6 through 15 are the Building Type Templates of the Gateway District. These
templates contain all regulatory information governing the dimensions of lots and the dimensions, setbacks, height, placement
and use of buildings in the Gateway District. The Terms and concepts used with the Building Templates are further defined in
Sect 9.5.2 of the Gateway District section of the City of Gem Lake Zoning Ordinance.
BUNGALOW COURT - Four or more smaller, standalone homes around a shared central court or walk on a single lot, with
pedestrian access to the street. Note - This is Building Template 10 for the Gateway district.
CANOPY - A freestanding permanent roof-like shelter no attached to or requiring support from an adjacent structure.
CARPORT - An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
CHANGEABLE COPY - The letters, symbols, logos or other graphics which make up a sign’s communicative message, if
they are placed on the sign by electronic or electrical means (a message center or dynamic display) or which can be replaced
manually through use of letters and symbols in a panel mount or track system.
CITY ARCHITECT - The City Architect is appointed to review all applications requiring evaluation of the Design Standards
in Section 10.7 of the Gateway District. If deficiencies are noted, the City Architect shall describe the deficiency and suggest at
least one complying alternative.
CITY COUNCIL - The City of Gem Lake City Council.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 4
CITY FORESTER - A forester appointed by the City of Gem Lake.
CLEAN WATER ACT - The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
CLUSTERING - A grouping of residential or other structures arranged without regard to normal lot lines and set-backs but
with the express intent of preserving open spaces and natural resources for community use, establishing a sense of community
among owners/residents and reducing the cost and impact of infrastructure development and service delivery.
COLDFRAME - An unheated outdoor structure with a frame of wood or similar material and a top of glass or clear plastic,
used for protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
COLLAR BUILDING - Structures accompanying a commercial use with large parking requirements, intended to maintain
storefronts and entrances on the public street. This is Building Template 14b for the Gateway district.
COMMERCIAL BROADCAST SERVICES - Licensed commercial radio or television services transmitting signals for
reception by the general public.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES - Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
COMMUNITY GARDEN - An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow plants and harvest
food crops for personal or group use, consumption or donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for
cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group, and may include common areas
maintained and used by group members.
CONIFEROUS/EVERGREEN TREE - A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least thirty (30') feet in height, with a single
trunk, fully branched to the ground, having foliage on the outermost portion of the branches year round.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY - Disturbance to the land, including but not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition, which results in a change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative),
or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and the movement of
sediment into surface waters or drainage systems. Activities are subject to NPDES Construction Permits.
CONTIGUOUS - Areas of real property actually in contact with one another or touching along a boundary and also touching
or connected throughout in an unbroken sequence. Real property separated by a body of water or designated wetland shall not
be considered contiguous regardless of whether the real property under the body of water or wetland has common ownership.
The routing of a driveway through a parcel of real property shall not be considered as separating same so as to make the portions
created by the driveway not contiguous.
CONDOMINIUM, RESIDENTIAL - the absolute ownership of an apartment or a residential unit (generally in a multiunit
building) based on a legal description of the airspace of the unit actually occupies, plus an undivided interest in the ownership
of the common elements, which are joined with the other condominium unit owners all as provided by state law.
CONDOMINIUM, OFFICE - the absolute ownership of an office or a commercial unit (generally in a multi-unit building)
based on a legal description of the airspace of the unit actually occupies, plus an undivided interest in the ownership of the
common elements, which are joined with the other office condominium unit owners all as provided by state law.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 5
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE - An area under a tree equal to one and one-half (1'6") feet of radius for every one (1") inch of tree
diameter (e.g A 20" tree has a critical root zone of 30' radius or 60' diameter).
DEAD STORAGE - The permanent pool volume of a water basin, or the volume below the runout elevation of a water basin.
DECIDUOUS TREE - A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twenty (20') feet in height, with a single trunk, un-branched
for several feet above the ground, having a defined crown which loses leaves annually.
DETACHED HOUSE, SINGLE FAMILY - One dwelling on one lot, detached from other adjoining lots. Note - This is
Building Template 6 for the Gateway District
DETENTION BASIN - Any natural or manmade depression for the temporary storage of runoff.
DEVELOPMENT - The construction of any public improvement project, infrastructure, structure, street, or road, or the
subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT (OR MASTER) PLAN - A development (or Master) plan supplied by the applicant for a project that
contains all of the up-dates and changes identified in the Preliminary Plan. See Section 9.7.1. Step No. 4 for details.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT- An agreement supplied to the City by the applicant to describe the development that
will be completed and the time table for completion.
DEWATERING - The removal of water for construction activity.
DRAIN OR DRAINAGE - Any method for removing or diverting water from waterbodies, including excavation of an open
ditch, installation of subsurface drainage tile, filling, diking or pumping.
DWELLING - A building or one (1) or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied exclusively for residential
purposes by a person, but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins,
motor homes or trailer coaches.
DWELLING, ATTACHED - A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling.
DWELLING, DETACHED - A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. (See also, Detached
House, Single Family)
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY - A structure containing two (2) dwelling unit, neither of which is an accessory apartment, each
of which is totally separated from the other by an un-pierced wall extending from the ground to roof, or an un-pierced ceiling
and floor extending from the exterior to both dwelling units.
DYNAMIC DISPLAY - Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any
method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is
in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of the design. This includes a display that incorporates a
technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign
face or its components, such as light-emitting diode (LED) displays, plasma displays, liquid-crystal displays (LCD) or other
technology used in commercially available video monitors.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 6
EASEMENT - A grant by an owner of land for the use of that land or a specific portion thereof for a specific limited purpose
by a person or persons. The purpose generally shall be for public utility facilities such as underground utilities, including but not
limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.
ENCROACHMENT - A porch, deck, balcony, patio or similar unenclosed space, or an awning, that extends into space that
is otherwise reserved for setbacks or public right-of-way. Permitted encroachments are indicated on the Building Type
Templates.
ENERGY DISSIPATION - Methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion including but not limited to concrete aprons,
riprap, splash guards, and gabions.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN - A plan of BMPs or equivalent measures that includes all proposed
alterations to real property and the methods to be employed before undertaking the proposed alterations to control runoff and
erosion and to retain or control sediment on land during the period of land disturbing activities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of public utilities or municipal departments
of underground or overhead telephone, gas, electrical, communication, water and/ or sewer. Radio and television broadcast,
cellular and PCS transmission/reception support structures shall not be considered an essential service.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURES - Structures including, but not limited to, buildings such as telephone exchanges,
substations, wells, pumping stations and elevated tanks.
EXCAVATION - The artificial removal of soil or other earth material.
EXTRAORDINARY MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR REDUNDANT BMP - A stormwater management practice
to control erosion and sedimentation and nutrient loading during and for two (2) years after construction using redundant Best
Management Practices.
FAMILY - An individual, or two or more persons each related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single
housekeeping unit; or a group of persons not so related, maintaining a common household and using common cooking and
kitchen facilities.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - a residence or portion of a residence licensed by the Department of Human Services under
chapter 9502 for no more than ten children at one time of which no more than six are under school age, and must meet Group
R, Division 3 occupancy requirements.
FILL - The deposit of soil or other earth material by artificial means.
FILTRATION PRACTICE - A stormwater control that captures, temporarily stores, and routes stormwater runoff through
a filter bed to improve water quality, as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, 2005, and as amended.
FINAL PLAT AND MASTER PLAN SUBMISSION - The development data re-submitted to the City after the Preliminary
Plan for a project to be approved by the City. It should contain the Final Subdivision Plat and the Final Master Plan for the
project with all changes and other data requested thru the Preliminary Plan procedure.
FINAL STABILIZATION - means that either:
a) All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare
areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the native background vegetative cover for the large area has
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 7
been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures (such as the use of rip-rap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed; or
b) For individual lots in residential construction by either:
(i) The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified above; or
(ii) The homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior
to occupation of the home by the homeowner and informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of,
final stabilization.
c) For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land) final
stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed
that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface waters and
drainage systems, and areas which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final
stabilization criteria in (a) or (b) above.
FLOODPLAIN - The area adjacent to a waterbody that is inundated during a 100-year flood.
FLOOR AREA - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building including interior balconies,
mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, but not excepting that area primarily devoted to window display,
storage, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized for dead storage, heating and
utility rooms, inside off street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made from outside of exterior walls.
FOOTPRINT, BUILDING - The building footprint is the area occupied by the horizontal projection of the building’s first
floor, excluding the floor area of the attached garages and porches and or decks built as allowed encroachments into setbacks.
FREESTANDING - Any sign affixed in or upon the ground, supported by one or more structural members, with air space
between the ground and the sign face.
GALLERY - Continuous, unoccupied cover (such as an awning) over the entrance or entrances to a building.
GARAGE - A structure intended for the parking and storage of passenger cars and light-duty trucks. A garage may be attached
to a building or a separate structure, where allowed by Building Type Template.
GARAGE - PRIVATE - A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building, including a carport which is used
primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated capacity not in excess of seven thousand (7,000)
pounds.
GRADING - Changing the natural or existing topography of the land.
GREEN SPACE - An area of real property on a lot which is similar to Open Space, but the general intent is to promote natural
areas. Green Space includes, but is not limited to, wetlands, prairies and grasslands, pastures, forests and wooded areas, mixed
forest and grasslands, landscaped areas exclusive of impervious surfaces within the landscaped areas, or any other naturally
occurring land form.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE - The replenishment of groundwater storage through infiltration of surface runoff into
subsurface aquifers.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 8
HEIGHT, BUILDING - A distance to be measured from the ground level six (6'0") feet from the front door of a structure
to the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, weather vanes, cupolas, antennas and the like.
HOBBY ACTIVITIES - Any activity or interest pursued for pleasure or relaxation and not as a main occupation and meeting
all the following requirements: when normally engaged in only by the persons residing in the dwelling where the hobby is
pursued; when evidence of the hobby is not visible from the street or if visible is not offensive or such to lower neighborhood
property values; when pursuit of the hobby does not interfere with enjoyment of neighboring property by its owners.
HOME OCCUPATION - Any gainful occupation of non-residential nature conducted entirely within the dwelling or
accessory building and carried on only by the inhabitants and no more than one (1) non-resident thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. No articles may be sold or offered for sale except
as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediate family residing therein. Home occupations shall not include
the repair of internal combustion engines (other than small engine repair), body shops, machine shops, welding shops,
contracting or landscape type businesses requiring on site storage of commercial equipment or other objectionable uses as
determined by the City Council. The home occupation shall not be conducted in more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor
area of the dwelling or four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less. There shall be no outside display of goods or storage
of equipment or material used in the “Home Occupation.”
HOOPHOUSE - A structure made of PVC piping or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a halfround
or hoop shape.
HOUSING, LIFE CYCLE - Housing available for people at all stages of their lives. This housing may be owned or rented
single family detached housing or condominiums and townhouses. Most people when they move from one housing type to
another, due to changing needs and circumstances, want to stay in the same community if possible. Life-cycle housing needs to
meet the changing needs of people as their incomes and circumstances change.
HYDRIC SOILS - A soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding or ponding long enough during the growing
season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE - Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted
in Section 29.7 of the Consolidated Land Use Ordinance.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS - An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
i. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illegal discharge to enter the
storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
ii. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - means a constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil
and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples
include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 9
INCENTIVES - The City Council may establish incentives which can be applied to encourage certain types of land use or
preservation activity within the Gateway District. These incentives may be set by adopting a separate City Ordinance which
identifies clearly the item or items the Council seeks to encourage, the allowances which the Council is willing to offer applicants,
and sufficient criteria to all the Zoning Administrator and the City Consultants to evaluate and score applications seeking to
apply for these incentives and allowances. See Section 9.2.4 for an example.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (ISTS) - A facility for receiving and treating of sewage which is not a
part of or connected to a public sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY - Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Storm Water Permits.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE - A stormwater retention method for the purpose of reducing the volume of stormwater
runoff by transmitting a flow of water into the ground through the soils, as described in the Minnesota Stormwater Manual,
2005, and as amended.
INFRASTRUCTURE - The system of public works for a county, state, or municipality including, but not limited to, structures,
roads, bridges, culverts, sidewalks; stormwater management facilities, conveyance systems and pipes; pump stations, sanitary
sewers and interceptors, hydraulic structures, permanent erosion control and stream bank protection measures, water lines, gas
lines, electrical lines and associated facilities, and phone lines and supporting facilities.
INSTRUCTIONAL or DIRECTIONAL - A sign clearly intended for instructional purposes (example: signs identifying the
different grades of gas at a gasoline pump), or intended to guide traffic entering, exiting, and traveling to particular locations on
the property.
KENNEL, PERSONAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house up to three (3) domestic animals of
various types which are owned by the occupants of the premises and which is located on and maintained by the occupant of the
premises in residential districts for personal use only.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house more than three (3) domestic
animals of various types which is owned by a person, group of persons, corporation or other legal entity who own and/or harbor
said animals in the City of Gem Lake for other than personal use. This type of kennel relates to land use matters covered by the
Zoning or Land Use Ordinance. It is defined and may only be operated within the Conditional or Interim Use regulations of
the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
LAND ALTERATION - Any modification, tree cutting or removal, grading, clearing, filling or other change to anyparcel of
land including a woodland, shore land or natural barrier within a five (5) year period which may initially or cumulatively result
in:
1. The movement of more than four-hundred (400) cubic yards of earth where significant trees are present; or
2. Any alteration of land of:
A. more than one (1') foot from the natural contour of the ground; or
B. any contiguous four-hundred fifty (450 sf) square feet of ground where significant trees are located; or
C. any cutting, removal or killing of trees equal to or greater than twenty (20%) percent of the significant
trees on any parcel of land; or
3. Any cutting, removal or killing of trees equal to or greater than twenty (20%) percent of the significant trees on any
parcel of land; or
4. Any destruction or disruption of tree cover equal to or greater than twenty-five (25%) percent of the total tree cover
on any parcel of land; or
5. Any changes in the Natural Barriers provided by trees or shrubs along the borders of the City, along major roads
or between differing land uses, or
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 10
6. Any intensive vegetation clearance (clear cutting) within a shore land area or on steep slopes; or
7. Any other significant change in the natural character or topography of the land.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY - Any change of the land surface to include removing vegetative cover, excavation, fill,
grading, stockpiling soil, and the construction of any structure that may cause or contribute to erosion or the movement of
sediment into water bodies. The use of land for new and continuing agricultural activities shall not constitute a land disturbing
activity under these Policies.
LANDSCAPING - Improvement and alteration of exposed ground through the establishment of lawns, gardens, planting of
trees, flowers and shrubs, grading, and other such methods using natural materials.
LINER BUILDING - A building that conceals from street view a Single-Use Building for which it is impractical to design
compliant front of side facades (such as a warehouse or a parking garage). Liners may have retail or office uses on the ground
floor and office and residential uses on the upper floor.
NOTE - This is Building Template 14a for the Gateway district.
LIVE/WORK UNIT - Integrated row house style dwelling unit and ground floor working space of at least 3 units arrayed
side-by-side along the primary frontage. Note - This is Building Template 11 for the Gateway district.
LOT - A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or use by a use permitted in this Ordinance.
LOT OF RECORD - Any lot which is one (1) unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed, or one (1) unit of an Auditor’s
Subdivision or a Registered Land Survey, or a parcel of land not so platted, subdivided or registered, for which a Deed, Auditor’s
Subdivision or Registered Land Survey has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles for Ramsey
County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. An out lot is not a Lot of Record.
LOT AREA - The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
LOT AREA PER FAMILY - The number of square feet of lot area required per dwelling unit.
LOT, CORNER - A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of
deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
LOT DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot.
LOT IMPROVEMENT - Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which it is
situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
LOT LINE - A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends into the public rightof-
way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Ordinance.
LOT LINE, FRONT - That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated street, road or private way, and in the case
of a corner lot it shall be the longest dimension on such a street, road or private way. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal,
the front line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the City.
LOT LINE, REAR - That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in
length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and
at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 11
LOT LINE, SIDE - Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT, OPEN SALES OR RENTAL LOT - Any land used or occupied for the purposes of buying, selling, or rental for use
away from the premises, any goods, materials or merchandise and for the storing of same in the open prior to sale or rental.
LOT, OPEN STORAGE - Any land used or occupied for storing in the open any materials, equipment, vehicles of any kind
or articles of any nature.
LOT, INTERIOR - A lot, other than a corner lot, including through lots.
LOT, THROUGH - A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not
a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this Ordinance.
LOT WIDTH - The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within the first thirty (30) feet
of the lot depth commencing at the front lot line. If the lot is on a cul-de-sac or other curved roadway the lot width shall be
measured at the front building line.
MASS RATIO - When used on a Building Type Template, the percentages listed in the Mass table defines the maximum area
allowed in the horizontal projection of one floor in relation to the area of horizontal projection of the building footprint and
attached garage.
MEAN - the mid-point of two extremes.
MIXED USE BUILDING - A structure with q vertical mixture of uses. The upper floors may be used of office or residential
uses and the ground floor may be used for office or retail.
NOTE - This is Building Template 12 for the Gateway district.
MOBILE HOME - Any type of structure or vehicle which can be readily adapted to or does provide facilities for a person or
persons to eat or sleep which is mounted on wheels, has provisions for wheels or may be loaded on any ordinary flat-bed truck,
such as a camper, house trailer, converted bus or truck, tent or small building.
MOTOR SERVICE STATION - A place where gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for
operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles.
MPCA GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT - General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated
With Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program
Permit MN R100001 (NPDES General Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollutant Control Agency, August 1,
2008, and as amended.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) - The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned
and operated by the City of Gem Lake and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and that is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
MURAL - A picture on the exterior surface of a structure. A mural is only a sign for purposes of these regulations if it is related
by language, logo or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 12
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) - means the program for issuing,
modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318,
402, and 405) and United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345 and Minnesota Rule
Chapter 7090.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT - A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
NATURAL BARRIER - Screening provided by a tree or shrubbery barrier that acts as a visual or noise barrier from roads,
railroads and differing land uses, said barrier not to exceed thirty (30') feet in barrier depth. When a Natural Barrier is part of a
Woodland, the Natural Barrier shall be considered the first thirty (30') feet of the Woodland.
NON-DEGRADATION - Section 303 (Title 33 of United States Code [U.S.C.] 1313) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) requires
states and authorized tribes to adopt water quality standards for waters of the U.S. within their applicable jurisdictions to maintain
their chemical, physical and biological integrity. No significant increase in stormwater runoff or pollutant loads from 2005/2006
numerical standards is permitted.
NON-POINT SOURCE - Nutrient and pollution sources not discharged from a single point e.g. runoff from agricultural
fields, feedlots or urban landscapes.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE - Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm
water.
NORMAL WATER LEVEL - For a reservoir with a fixed overflow, means the lowest crest level of that overflow. For a
reservoir whose outflow is controlled wholly or partly by movable gates, siphons or other means, it is the maximum level to
which water may rise under normal operating conditions, exclusive of any provision for flood surcharge. For a closed depression
wetland, it is the maximum level to which the water may rise under normal precipitation conditions exclusive of any provision
for flood surcharge.
NOXIOUS MATERIAL(S) - Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of
causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. NURP – The Nationwide Urban Runoff
Program developed by the Environmental Protection Agency to study stormwater runoff from urban development.
OFFICES - Structures, or portions of structures, in which commercial activities take place but where goods are not produced,
sold or repaired. These include: Banks, general offices, governmental offices, insurance offices, real estate offices, travel agency
or transportation ticket offices, telephone exchange, utility office, professional offices and similar uses which are operated by
the owner or his tenants.
OFFICE, SHOWROOM - A building in which at least twenty (20%) percent of the floor space is devoted to office activities,
the remainder being used for either display, storage, or research and testing.
OPEN HOURS (ALSO “OPERATION”) - The time within the day in which a business invites customers, clients or the
general public to the property or business location in order to conduct the purpose of the business. These hours will not begin
earlier than 7 A.M., and will not extend beyond 8 P.M. unless approved by conditional use permit (see Figure 17).
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 13
OPEN SPACE - An area of real property on a lot which is not covered by impervious surfaces, structures, unpaved storage, or
designated parking areas (see Green Space).
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL - as defined by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, means the boundary
of water basins, watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands, and:
1. The ordinary high water level is an elevation delineating the highest water level that has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly the point where the natural vegetation
changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial;
2. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel; and
3. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
OUTLOT - a lot or parcel of land created by subdivision, but not for construction, intended for transfer of ownership,
dedication or for use as a private right-of-way. An out lot can be designated non-buildable or buildable if replatted in full
compliance with all the requirements of this and the Subdivision ordinance without the use of a variance.
OWNER - Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having
sufficient proprietary interest in the land under this Ordinance.
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS - Public land and open spaces in the City of Gem Lake dedicated or reserved for recreational
purposes.
PARTIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - A plan provided with an application for a building permit to materially alter or expand
an existing legally conforming structure within the Gateway District. This plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator,
and contain all or part of the data requested in Section 9.8. It may be given an Administrative Approval if it does not need any
Conditional Uses or Variances.
PASTURE - An area or portion of a single parcel of real property upon which agricultural animals are allowed to range and
graze and which is suitably fenced to contain such animals.
PATIO - a paved outdoor area.
PEDESTRIAN WAY - A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for
pedestrians that may be used for the installation of utility lines.
PERSON - Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and
acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
PERFORMANCE BOND - A bond with good and sufficient sureties, approved by the City Council, which is conditioned
upon satisfactory implementation of an approved plan and which names the City as obligee.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD - Qualitative or quantitative criterion established to control for the benefit of public health,
safety and welfare such things as noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated or inherent in particular or ordinary uses of land or buildings.
PLAN REVIEW - A review process of potential projects by designated authorities including, but not limited to, the Zoning
Administrator, City Planner, Plan Review Board, Planning Commission, Building Inspector, City Engineer, cityappointed/
contracted architect and/or engineer, or any other individual or group authorized by the City to review plans in an
official capacity.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 14
PLANNING COMMISSION - A panel of persons appointed by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Gem Lake charged
with reviewing all matters related to land use development within the City; reviewing, modifying and developing the
Comprehensive Municipal Plan and such local controls as may be necessary to achieve the goals of the Comprehensive Municipal
Plan; and, making recommendations to the City Council as to approval and adoption of such matters.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) - A tract of land which is developed as a unit under single or unified
ownership control and which includes two or more buildings grouped or clustered in and around a common open space area in
accordance with a pre-arranged site plan.
POLLUTANT - Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION - The land use on a site that exists immediately prior to a proposed alteration. All
pre-development Runoff Curve Numbers must reference the Minnesota Hydrology Guide.
PRELIMINARY PLAN - This development plan is one component of the steps of describing what the applicant plans to do
for this project in the Gateway District. The Preliminary Plan with all of its details is used to identify exactly what will be done
in this development. It is submitted to the Zoning Administrator who distributes it to the parties who will be reviewing this
document.
PREMISES - Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent
sidewalks and parking strips.
PRESERVATION AREA - A delineated area which designates trees and vegetation which will be preserved during the
construction and land alteration process.
PRIVATE CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION FACILITIES - Child Care Facilities currently licensed by the State of
Minnesota and Educational Facilities with:
a) An enrollment with an age not to exceed twelve (12) years:
b) A total enrollment of not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150);
c) A maximum of one-hundred twenty (120) “full-day equivalent” students with a full-day* defined as ten (10) hours.
* The “full-day equivalent” shall be calculated by adding together the total number of students present during each hour
of the “full-day” of school. This total shall not exceed 1,200, which is 120 students times 10 hours.
PROJECTING SIGN - A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall, parapet, arcade or gallery of a building with
the display surface of the sign perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the wall.
PUBLIC FACILITIES - Parks, playgrounds and similar uses owned and operated by the City of Gem Lake; or, libraries and
other City of Gem Lake owned facilities.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT - Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking
area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City of Gem Lake does or may ultimately assume responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or that may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 15
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE - Any parcel or area of land or water including, but not limited to: wetlands, prairies and grasslands,
pastures, forests and wooded areas, mixed forest & grasslands, or any other naturally occurring land form that is essentially
unimproved and which may be devoted to use for the purpose of:
a) the preservation of natural areas and resources,
b) outdoor recreation (active & passive),
c) support of public health and safety, or,
d) maintaining a high quality of life
PUBLIC UTILITY - Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, data, or
telephone services to the general public. For the purposes of this Ordinance, commercial broadcast services and commercial
wireless telecommunications services shall not be considered public utility uses and are defined separately.
PUBLIC WATERS - Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.005, subdivision 15.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT (RESIDENTIAL) - Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides, sand boxes, poles for
net games, unoccupied boats and trailers, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar equipment.
REDEVELOPMENT - The rebuilding, repair, or alteration of a structure, land surface, road or street, or facility.
RESIDENTIAL WECS - A WECS with a rated generating capacity of 40 kilowatts (kW) or less which is intended primarily
for producing electrical power used on-site.
RETAIL/OFFICE BUILDING - A building designed for occupancy by retail and office uses where the building is intended
for subdivision into tenant spaces with no residential component.
NOTE - This is Building Template 13 for the Gateway district.
RETENTION - The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into receiving water; examples include systems which
discharge through percolation, exfiltration, and evaporation processes and which generally have residence times less than three
days.
RUNOFF - Rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
SKETCH PLAN - An informal plan that is used as the first step for a proposal for developing of land areas in the Gateway
District of the City of Gem Lake. See Section 9.7.1, Step No. 1 for details.
SEDIMENT - The solid mineral or organic material that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its
original location by erosion and has been deposited at another location.
SEDIMENTATION - The process or action of depositing sediment.
SETBACK - The distance between a building, structure or other improvement and a lot line or designated right-of-way.
SHED - a roofed demountable structure not to exceed two-hundred fifty (250 s.f. ft2) square feet in total area. A shed shall be
considered an Accessory Structure.
SHED - A structure on a property that is not a primary building nor a structure intended to house parked cars or trucks.
Generally a smaller building intended for the storage of home maintenance equipment and other personal belongings. When
allowed, a shed with a footprint of 200 square feet or less may be built and maintained without a permit from the City.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 16
SHORE LAND - That area surrounding Gem Lake or any other recognized wetland and extending horizontally seventy-five
(75') feet back from the mean high water line.
SHORELINE - The ordinary water level of the body of water known as Gem Lake and any lake, pond, or flowage in the City
of Gem Lake as determined by a federal, state, regional or local regulatory agency with the authority to make such determinations,
along with all wetlands attendant to each body of water.
SIGHT TRIANGLE - A triangle beginning at the corner of two intersecting street rights-of-way, shaped by two lines extending
30 feet along the edge of each right-of-way and the line connecting the two resulting points.
SIGN - Any name, figure, character, outline, display, announcement, or device, or structure supporting the same, or any other
device of similar nature designed to attract attention outdoors, and shall include all parts, portions, units and materials composing
the same, together with the frame, background, and supports or anchoring thereof. A sign shall not include any architectural or
landscape features that may also attract attention.
SIGN FACE - An exterior display surface of a sign including non-structural trim exclusive of the supporting structure.
SIGNIFICANT TREE - A healthy deciduous tree measuring eight (8") inches or greater in diameter, at a point four and one
half feet above grade, or a healthy coniferous tree measuring ten (10') feet in height or greater.
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED HOUSE - One dwelling on one lot, detached from other adjoining lots, Building Template
6 for the Gateway District
SINGLE USE BUILDING - A building designed for occupancy by retail, service or office uses on the ground floor with an
optional mezzanine. May also be used as a template for placing a standalone parking structure in a proposed development. This
is Building Template 14 for the Gateway district.
SITE PLAN - The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the
lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways, open spaces, walkways, means of ingress
and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening devices and other information that reasonably
may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
SKETCH PLAN - An informal plan that is used as the first step for a proposal for developing of land areas in the Gateway
District of the City of Gem Lake. See Section 9.7.1 Step No. 1 for details.
SOIL TREATMENT SYSTEM - A system where sewage effluent is treated and disposed of into the soil by percolation and
filtration, and includes trenches, seepage beds, drain fields, at-grade systems, and mound systems.
STABILIZED - Exposed soil is considered to be stabilized when it has been adequately covered through temporary measures
(e.g. mulch, staked sod, riprap, erosion control blanket, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring), or permanent
vegetation has been established over 70% of the surface.
STABLE, PERSONAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house up to two (2) horses which is located
on and maintained by the occupant of lands in residential districts for personal use only.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 17
STABLE, COMMERCIAL - Any confinement or structure designed to contain and house more than two (2) agricultural
animals as described in Section 3.8.1 of this ordinance which is owned by a person, group of persons, corporation or other legal
entity who own and/or harbor said animals in the City of Gem Lake for other than personal use. This type of stable relates to a
land use matter covered by the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance. It is defined and may only be operated within the Conditional
or Interim Use regulations of the Zoning or Land Use Ordinance of the City of Gem Lake.
STEEP SLOPES - A slope with greater than a thirty-three (33%) percent change in elevation or a 3:1 grade (3 parts horizontal
to 1 part vertical).
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM - Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including
but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORM WATER - Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORM WATER FACILITY – Any facility including retention and detention ponds, wetlands, reservoirs, impoundments,
infiltration practices, filtration practices, conveyance systems, and connecting infrastructure that are constructed for or serve the
purpose of stormwater management.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN - A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities
to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Storm Water, Storm Water Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the
Maximum Extent Practicable.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) - A site-specific, written document that: identifies
potential sources of stormwater pollution at the construction site; describes practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater
discharges from the construction site; and identifies procedures the operator will implement to comply with the terms and
conditions of a construction general permit.
STREET - A public or private right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet in width which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR - A street that carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC - A local street or private right-of-way with only one outlet and providing an area for turning a
vehicle with a radius of not less than one-hundred twenty (120) feet.
STREET WIDTH - The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street or private way.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something
having a location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing advertising signs, billboards, or
fences.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 18
STRUCTURE, NON-CONFORMING - Any structure which is legally existing upon the effective date of this Ordinance,
which would not conform to the applicable regulations if the structure were to be erected under the provisions of this ordinance.
SUBDIVISION - The division of an area, parcel, or tract of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer
of ownership or building development that will require the creation of streets and roads, except for those resulting from court
orders, or the adjustment of lot lines by the relocation of a common boundary. The term includes re-subdivision and when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of sub-dividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBWATERSHED - A portion of land contributing runoff to a particular point of discharge.
SUBZONES - The Gateway District is composed of four subzones. The Gateway District Sub-Zone Map identifies these
subzones and where they are located.
SURFACE WATER - All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, spring, rivers, drainage systems, waterways,
watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private.
TANGENT - A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve at the point where the line meets the curve.
TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign which is installed for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, not illuminated, and not installed
upon a foundation.
THOROUGHFARE - A street for fast or heavy traffic used primarily as a traffic artery between relatively large or congested
areas.
THOROUGHFARE TYPES - Figures 2 and 3m in the Gateway Section (Section 9) describe the details of the Thoroughfare
Types to be provided in the Gateway District. These figures provide details on streets, sidewalks and other pedestrian or bicycle
ways within dedicated right-of-ways in this district.
TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT - The highest point reached above natural grade by the tallest part of the WECS (e.g. the
tip of the turbine blade at its highest point of travel).
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) - A Total Maximum Daily Load, or TMDL, is a regulation designed to
improve water quality by controlling the amount of a pollutant entering a water body.
TOWER OR ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE - Any mast, pole spire, lattice structure or similar structure including
any lines, cables, wires or braces supporting the structure intended for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological
device or similar apparatus above grade. Towers may be ground or roof mounted. The term “tower” includes any antenna
attached to the tower.
TOWNHOME - townhome is a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached dwelling units in
which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides not more than three stories in height
with a separate means of ingress and egress.
TOWNHOME/ROWHOUSE - An individual structure on a parcel with a rear yard and individual (standalone or tuck under)
garage access from an alley, occupied by one primary residence in an array of at least three such structures side-by-side along the
common frontage.
Note - This is Building Template 8 for the Gateway District.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 19
TWINHOUSE- A structure with two dwelling units sharing a common wall or stacked one over the other.
Note - This is Building Template 7 for the Gateway District
ULTIMATE CONDITIONS - The physical, topographic, and hydrologic characteristics of a sub watershed upon completion
of the maximum level of expected development.
USE - The Purpose or activity for which the land, structure, or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which
it is occupied or maintained and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this
Ordinance. Uses shall be classified as Principal or Accessory and as Permitted, Conditional, Interim and Prohibited.
USE, CONDITIONAL - Either a public or private use as listed which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified as a permitted use in a particular district. This includes those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions,
or uses specifically designated in each zoning district, which for the respective conduct or performance in such designated
districts may require reasonable, but special, unusual, or extraordinary limitations peculiar to the use and for the protection,
promotion, and preservation of the general public welfare, health, and safety as well as the integrity of the City’s Comprehensive
Municipal Plan. Consideration of each case of Conditional Use shall be given to impact of such use on neighboring real property
and of the public need for the particular conditional use at the particular location.
USE, INTERIM - a time limited use that is personal to the user or occupant and which does not run with the land.
Consideration of each case of Conditional Use shall be given to impact of such use on neighboring real property and of the
public need for the particular conditional use at the particular location.
USE, NONCONFORMING - A use of land, buildings or structures lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance
which does not comply with all the regulations of this Ordinance or any use of land, building or structure lawfully existing prior
to the adoption of an amendment which would not comply with all of the regulations.
USE, PERMITTED - A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms to all
requirements, regulations, and performance standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL - The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.
UTILIZE BASIN - Documented stormwater management structures designated strictly for treating and retaining stormwater.
VILLA - A building which contains a row of two (2), three (3) or four (4) single-family attached dwellings, each being connected
to the adjoining units in each story by walls that are fire-rated and are without openings. Each unit shall have independent access
to the exterior of the building, in the ground story, and each unit is located on a separate lot. Each common wall shall serve as
a common/zero lot line.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL VEHICLE - A motor vehicle exceeding one and one-half ton or equivalent in load capacity or
a motor vehicle not displaying passenger car or RV license plates.
VEHICLE, MOTOR VEHICLE - Any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon railroad tracks and any vehicle
propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle, but excepting snowmobiles and mobile homes.
VEHICLE, JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE - Any motor vehicle which is either abandoned, wrecked, partially dismantled
or legally inoperative, or which is not currently licensed for operation within the State of Minnesota.
WALL SIGN - Any sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in a plane parallel or approximately parallel
to the plane of said wall.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 20
WASTEWATER - Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility.
WATER BODY - a body of water (such as a lake or pond) or a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed
basin that holds water.
WATERS OF THE STATE - All stream, lakes, ponds, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. Streams include
both intermittent and perennial.
WATERCOURSE - a channel or depression through which water flows continuously or intermittently, such as rivers, streams,
or creeks.
WATERSHED - the area drained by a natural or artificial drainage system, bounded peripherally by a ridge or stretch of high
land dividing drainage areas.
WAY, AUTHORIZED PRIVATE - a road with a right-of-way not less than forty (40) feet wide across private land designed
and built for vehicular traffic between a public street and two or more private residences. This road shall have been authorized
or approved by the City Council, to be built and maintained by private interests. Authorized private ways are allowed only in
residential districts.
WETLAND - Any wetland as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.005, subdivision 19.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) - An electrical generating facility consisting of a turbine, tower, and
associated control and conversion electronics.
WINDOW SIGN - Any sign viewable through and/or/affixed in any manner to a window or exterior glass door such that it is
intended to be viewable from the street, including signs located inside a building but primarily visible outside of the building.
WOODLAND - An area of at least one-half (½) acre in size of land, utility easements, or rights-of-way, with at least twenty
(20) significant trees on the parcel or with tree cover over at least thirty-five (35%) percent of the total land area.
YARD - A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to
the sky except as expressly permitted in this Ordinance. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to
a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT - A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and extending from the
abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such a lot is located. In
the case of a corner lot abutting one or more major roads, both yards shall be considered front yards. A major road is any road
that is of a collector designation or greater.
YARD, REAR - A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and extending toward the
front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, SIDE - A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Updated November 7, 2017 Appendix ‘A’
Gem Lake Consolidated Land Use Ordinance Definitions
Page 21
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR - Any person(s) duly appointed by resolution of the Gem Lake City Council for the purpose
of interpreting and enforcing the several local land use and development controls including, but not limited to, local controls
known as the Consolidated Land Use Ordinance.
ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT - This permit is granted after determination that all steps of the planning process are
completed and authorizes the commencement of the project.
ZONING DISTRICT - An area or areas within the limits of the City for which the regulations and requirements governing
use are uniform.












