
Granite Falls, MN Code of Ordinances


GRANITE FALLS, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 192, passed 11-19-2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




CITY OFFICIALS
OF
GRANITE FALLS, MINNESOTA



 


CITY COUNCIL





Mayor
 
David Smiglewski


Council member
 
Joe Fagnano


Council member
 
DuWayne Galow


Council member
 
Steve Norduane


Council member
 
Sarina Otaibi


Council member
 
Scott Peterson


Council member
 
Brad Peterson


 
 
 









TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



   10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties



 



   10.99   General penalty and enforcement



   Appendix A:  Notice of Code Violation



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Granite Falls City Code”, for which designation “code of
ordinances”, “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.
Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may
be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code”.
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as
if written “and/or”, whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term. A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The City of Granite Falls, Minnesota, and the area within
the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as amended
by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time. The term
CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and
its authorized representatives.



      CITY MANAGER.  The person duly appointed by the City Council,
and acting in that capacity.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Yellow Medicine County and/or Chippewa County.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER
as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(2003 Code, § 1.02)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME
OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection. The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a
reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting
any Minnesota Basic Code provisions, all future amendments to any state or
federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in
this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been
in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear
intention expressed in the code to the contrary.



   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting
any Minnesota Basic Code provisions, all future supplements are hereby
adopted as if they had been in existence at the time this code was enacted,
unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Manager shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Manager or City Council
shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified.
All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Manager and any city official or employee designated
by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code
may, with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property
or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises,
inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Manager, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue
the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable
cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular
property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Manager or any other authorized city
officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds



for termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the
property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Manager
to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the
Manager’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



§ 10.98  SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in
this code and the enforcement powers granted in § 10.20, the City Council is
authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the members of
the Council, supplemental administrative penalties. The resolution may not
prescribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses designated by M.S. §
169.999, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective
and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary
on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions
of the code, other than those penalties established in the code or in
statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time
by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to
be effective, an administrative penalty for a particular violation must be
established before the violation occurred.



   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in
a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the
person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may
request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation
directly to the City Finance Director within 14 days of the notice of the
violation. A sample notice is contained in the Appendix to this chapter. In
the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation,
the time for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not
requested by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the
administrative penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to
the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation
resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged
violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged violation within the
time specified in the notice, that the payment of the administrative penalty
will be waived.



   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may
request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment
of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine
to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.
Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall
be no appeal from the decision of the Council.



   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative
penalty is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation
creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its
attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this
code. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in
the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an administrative
penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any
requested correction of the situation resulting in the violation is
completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty
offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not
more than $300.



   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to
time, in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or
in § 10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this code, the Council, or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct or abate the violation.



APPENDIX A:  NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION



To:  (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)



From:  (Name and title of city official giving the notice)



Re:  Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title
of section)



Date:  (Date of notice)



 



   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §        
        of the City Code relating to                       
                                                   
                                                   
      .



 



   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative
penalty in the amount of $        for this violation.



   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not
pay it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.



   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the
due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay
the administrative penalty.



   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by      
                (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right
to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct
or abate the violation.



   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council
to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment.  Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.



   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate
criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any
city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law
or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.



   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or
money order to the City Finance Director.



Signed:                                              
               



      (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATION



      31.   BOARDS, DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS



      32.   FEES FOR EMERGENCY PROTECTION SERVICES



      33.   LODGING TAX



      34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL ADMINISTRATION



Section



   30.01   Authority and purpose



   30.02   Council procedure at regular meetings



   30.03   Term of office of elected officers



   30.04   Special meetings of Council



   30.05   Right to administrative appeal



   30.06   Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings



   30.07   Facsimile signatures



   30.08   Accounts, claims or demands



   30.09   Interim emergency succession



   30.10   Salaries of Mayor and Council members



   30.11   Worker’s compensation



   30.12   Franchises



   30.13   Filing petition for local improvements



   30.14   Performance bonds



   30.15   Trust or escrow account for fire or explosion losses



   30.16   Employee residency



   30.17   Criminal history background; applicants for city employment



§ 30.01  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to authority granted by Charter, this chapter of the city code
is enacted so as to set down for enforcement the government and good order of
the city by and through the Council.



(2003 Code, § 2.01)



§ 30.02  COUNCIL PROCEDURE AT REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The City Manager shall prepare the following items:



      (1)   An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;



      (2)   A report from the City Manager on administrative
activities of the preceding month;



      (3)   A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified
accounts claiming payment for goods or services rendered the city during the
preceding month, the list to be called the “Claim Report” and bearing
headings “Claimant”, “Purpose” and “Amount”;



      (4)   A copy of all minutes to be considered; and



      (5)   Copies of other proposals, communications or other
documents as the City Manager deems necessary or proper for advance
consideration by the Council.



   (B)   The City Manager shall forthwith cause to be mailed or
delivered to each member of the Council copies of all the documents. The
Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, 4th Edition and the attached
details shall govern all Council meetings as to procedural matters not set
forth in the Charter or city code.



   (C)    The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Agenda additions;



      (3)   Consent agenda, to include:



         (a)   Minutes from previous Council meetings;



         (b)   Approval of bills;



         (c)   Department reports;



         (d)   Correspondence;



         (e)   Meetings and events;



         (f)   Such other items as desired;



      (4)   Boards, commission, committee reports and updates by
City Manager;



      (5)   City Council action.



         (a)   Motions (if any);



         (b)   Resolutions (if any);



         (c)   Ordinances (if any);



      (6)   Information and discussion;



      (7)   Next agenda; and



      (8)   Adjournment.



   (D)   Matters inappropriate for consideration at a meeting, or not
in the order specified, shall not be considered except: with the unanimous
consent of the members of the Council; or scheduled public hearings or bid
lettings at the time stated in the notice.



   (E)   All claims for payment must be filed at or before 12:00 noon
on the Friday preceding the regular Council meeting at which it is to be
considered.



(2003 Code, § 2.02)  (Ord. 189, passed 8-6-2018)



§ 30.03  TERM OF OFFICE OF ELECTED OFFICERS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any provisions of the City Charter to the
contrary, pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.02 and 412.022, as they may be amended
from time to time, the terms of office of all elected officers of the city,
to include all Councilmembers and the Mayor, shall be four years.



   (B)   Members shall be elected in even-numbered years only, with the
Mayor and one-half of the Councilmembers elected at one election and the
remaining one-half of the Councilmembers elected at the next year’s
election. Prior to the next general election following the effective date of
this section, Councilmembers and/or the Mayor shall be elected for a
transitional term to be established by resolution of the Council.



(2003 Code, § 2.025)  (Ord. 46, passed 12-23-1994)



§ 30.04  SPECIAL MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.



   (A)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
by any two other members of the Council by a writing filed with the City
Manager stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting.



   (B)   Notice of a special meeting shall be given by the City Manager
to each member of the Council by mailing a copy of the filing to all members
who did not sign or issue the call at least three days prior to the time
stated therein, or by personal service at least 72 hours prior to the
projected time of meeting. Special meetings may be held without prior written
notice to the Council when all Council members are present at the meeting or
consent thereto in writing. Any such consent shall be filed with the City
Manager prior to the beginning of the meeting.



   (C)   Any special meeting attended by all Council members shall be a
valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before the
meeting. Meetings of the Council which are adjourned from time to time shall
not be subject to the foregoing notice requirements; nor shall special
meetings which, in the judgment of the Council, require immediate
consideration to meet an emergency require the notice, but may be called by
telephone communication or any other expeditious means. Notice to the public
and to news media shall be given as required by statute.



(2003 Code, § 2.026)  (Ord. 61, passed 5-31-1996)



§ 30.05  RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   (A)   If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative
decision of the City Manager or any other city official, for which
administrative decision there is not otherwise spelled out under city code or
by city contract or other applicable law or provision, a grievance or
appellate procedure, or if any person shall be aggrieved, by any
administrative decision of any board or commission not having within its
structure an appellate procedure, the aggrieved person is entitled to a full
hearing before the Council upon serving the Mayor and City Manager a written
request therefore within 30 days after the date of the administrative
decision.



   (B)   The hearing shall be scheduled by the City Manager at the next
regularly scheduled City Council meeting, provided that the Council meeting
is scheduled to occur at least five days after the date the appeal is filed.
In the event that the appeal or request for hearing is filed less than five
days before the next regularly scheduled Council meeting, the hearing shall
then occur at the following regularly scheduled Council meeting, unless
otherwise mutually agreed by the aggrieved party and the applicable city
representative(s).



   (C)   The request shall contain a general statement setting forth
the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At the
hearing, the appellant may present any evidence that appellant deems
pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a
verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor, or other officer presiding at
the meeting, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with the aforesaid
time requirements and on his or her own motion or the motion of the
appellant, the City Manager, or a member of the Council adjourn the hearing
to a more convenient time or place and the time or place shall be fixed and
determined before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity or formal notice
of reconvening.



(2003 Code, § 2.03)  (Ord. 122, passed 1-5-2004)



§ 30.06  RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.



   The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure
to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held
before the Council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine
questions therein presented. The rules of procedure shall be effective 30
days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings.



(2003 Code, § 2.04)



§ 30.07  FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.



   The Mayor, City Manager and Finance Director are hereby authorized to
request a depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when the
instrument bears a facsimile of his or her signature, and to charge the same
to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively
as though it were his or her manually written signature. The authority is
granted only for the purpose of permitting the officers an economy of time
and effort.



(2003 Code, § 2.05)



§ 30.08  ACCOUNTS, CLAIMS OR DEMANDS.



   (A)   Generally. Except as to an annual salary, fees of jurors or
witnesses fixed by law, or wages or salaries of employees which have been
fixed on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis by the Council and which
by law are authorized to be paid on a payroll basis, any account, claim or
demand against the city which can be itemized in the ordinary course of
business, the Council shall not audit or allow the claim until the person
claiming payment, or his or her agent, reduces it to writing, in items, and
signs a declaration to the effect that the account, claim or demand is just
and correct and that no part of it has been paid.



   (B)   Discretionary exception. The Council may, in its discretion,
allow a claim prepared by the Finance Director prior to the declaration by
the claimant if the declaration is made on the check by which the claim is
paid.



   (C)   Form of declaration. The declaration provided for in division
(A) above is sufficient in the following form: “I declare under the
penalties of law that this account, claim or demand is just and correct and
that no part of it has been paid. Signature of Claimant”.



   (D)   Form and effect of declaration on check. The declaration
provided for in division (B) above shall be printed on the reverse side of
the check, above the space for endorsement thereof by the payee, as follows:
“The undersigned payee, in endorsing this check declares that the same is
received in payment of a just and correct claim against the city, and that no
part of it has heretofore been paid.” When endorsed by the payee named in
the check, the statement shall operate and shall be deemed sufficient as the
required declaration of claim.



   (E)   Signing checks. All checks shall be signed by the Mayor, City
Manager and Finance Director.



(2003 Code, § 2.06)



§ 30.09  INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.



   (A)   Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack
or a natural disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is
found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly elected and
lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government
and the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by
providing a method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices.



   (B)   Succession to local offices.



      (1)   In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States
or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the Mayor, Council
and City Manager shall be forthwith notified by any one of the persons and by
any means available to gather at the City Hall.



      (2)   In the event that safety or convenience dictate, an
alternative place of meeting may be designated.



      (3)   Those gathered shall proceed as follows:



         (a)   By majority vote of those persons present,
regardless of number, they shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary to preside
and keep minutes, respectively;



         (b)   They shall review and record the specific facts
relating to the nuclear attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or
damage to property already done, or the imminence thereof;



         (c)   They may, based on the facts, declare a state of
emergency;



         (d)   By majority vote of those persons present,
regardless of number, they shall fill all positions on the Council,
(including the office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not
be served or who are unable to be present; and



         (e)   The interim successors shall serve until a time as
the duly elected official is again available and returns to his or her
position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated
and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.



   (C)   Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency
Council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices, and appoint
other key government officials to serve during the emergency.



(2003 Code, § 2.20)



§ 30.10  SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   Salaries of the Mayor and Council are hereby fixed as follows, which
amounts are deemed reasonable.



   (A)   The annual salary for the Mayor shall be set by resolution
from time to time.



   (B)   The annual salary of each Councilperson shall be set by
resolution from time to time.



   (C)   The salaries provided for herein shall be effective January 1,
1997, and thereafter as noted.



   (D)   Benefits:



      (1)   The Mayor and Council members shall be reimbursed for
necessary disbursements in the performance of their duties; and



      (2)   The Mayor and Council members shall be reimbursed the
sum of $40 for a half day and $80 for a full day, plus travel expenses, when
they are absent from their normal employment due to the performance of their
duties to attend out of own meetings, conferences, training seminars or
related activities and events on behalf of the city.



(2003 Code, § 2.21)  (Ord. 69, passed 1-1-1997; Ord. 111, passed 2-14-2003)



§ 30.11  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Contractors. The city shall not enter into any contract for
doing public work before receiving from all other contracting parties
acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker’s compensation insurance
coverage requirement of state statutes.



   (B)   City officers. All officers of the city elected or appointed
for a regular term of office or to complete the unexpired portion of any such
regular term shall be included in the definition of “employee” as defined
in the state statutes relating to coverage for purposes of worker’s
compensation entitlement.



(2003 Code, § 2.22)  (Ord. 26, passed 4-26-1991)



§ 30.12  FRANCHISES.



   (A)   Definition. The term FRANCHISE, as used in this section, shall
be construed to mean any special privileges granted to any person in, over,
upon or under any of the streets or public places of the city, whether the
privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the state, or shall
hereafter be granted by the city or by the state.



   (B)   Franchise ordinances.



      (1)   The Council may grant franchises by ordinance.



      (2)   Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior
right of the public to the use of streets and public places.



      (3)   All persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the
streets or public places, inconsistent with the public’s right in those
places, or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon or under any
street or public place any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures for the
purpose of constructing or operating railways, telegraphing or transmitting
electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the
city or its inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities,
water, light, heat, power, gas or any other utility, or for any other
purpose, shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make
use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place the
fixtures in those places.



   (C)   Power of regulation reserved. The city shall have the right
and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person, of any
franchise however acquired, and whether the franchise has been heretofore
granted by it or by the state.



   (D)   Conditions in every franchise. All conditions specified in
this section shall be a part of every franchise, even though they may not be
expressly contained in the franchise.



      (1)   The grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its
part all the terms of this section and will comply with all pertinent
provisions of any City Charter and city code, as the same may from time to
time be amended.



      (2)   The grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to
exercise any power to fix fares, rates and charges; but that the fares, rates
and charges shall at all times be just, fair and reasonable for the services
rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed,
unless regulated by an agency of the state, in the manner following.



         (a)   A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one
which will, with efficient management, normally yield, above all operating
expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested.



         (b)   If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be
arrived at by direct negotiation with the Council.



         (c)   If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement,
the Council shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any
existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative,
the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the
two of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three
of them shall constitute a board of arbitration. The board shall report its
findings as soon as possible and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by
majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court
of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties.



      (3)   The Council shall have the right to require reasonable
extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such
rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper
service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public.



      (4)   The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account
of the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no
right to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire
the public utility exercising the franchise, any return on account of the
franchise or its value.



      (5)   No sale or lease of the franchise shall be effective
until the assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an instrument,
duly executed, reciting the facts of the sale or lease, accepting the terms
of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the
grantee thereunder.



      (6)   Every grant in the franchise contained of permission for
the erection of poles, masts or other fixtures in the streets and for the
attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or
conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the
streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures
whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the Council shall have
the power to require the alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting
thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary for the safety, health
or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the power
to require the removal of poles, masts and other fixtures bearing wires and
the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever purpose used.



      (7)   Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the
city the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute.



      (8)   The franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the
city fees to raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of
utility operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money
based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in
the city.



   (E)   Further provisions of franchises. The enumeration and
specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise
or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed as impairing the
right of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension
thereof other and further conditions and restrictions as the Council may deem
proper to protect the city’s interests, nor shall anything contained in
this section limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing
franchises.



(2003 Code, § 2.73)



§ 30.13  FILING PETITION FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   No local improvement for which a petition is submitted shall be
designed and constructed in the year in which the petition is received unless
the petition is on file with the City Clerk prior to October 1 of the
calendar year preceding the calendar year of the requested construction.



(2003 Code, § 2.74)



§ 30.14  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   (A)   Requirements. Any surety bond referred to in any city code
provision is required to be a bond of a surety company duly authorized to do
business in this state; provided, however, that a certified check for the
full amount of the bid, made out to the city, may be substituted for a surety
bond. All bonds shall run to the city; shall be conditioned upon the
observance of all city code provisions and regulations relating to the
activity for which a bond is required, as well as upon the conditions set out
in the section requiring a bond, and shall cover the principal and all
persons acting under him or her; provided two personal sureties may be
accepted if each surety attaches to the bond his or her affidavit showing
ownership of unencumbered real estate in Yellow Medicine or Chippewa County
worth twice the amount of the bond, and additional proof of value as will
satisfy the Council.



   (B)   Filing and approval. All the bonds shall be ineffective until
filed with the City Clerk; except that the bond of the City Clerk shall be
filed with the Mayor. Neither the City Clerk nor the Mayor shall accept any
bond for filing until it has been approved by the City Attorney.



(2003 Code, § 2.75)



§ 30.15  TRUST OR ESCROW ACCOUNT FOR FIRE OR EXPLOSION LOSSES.



   (A)   The city may establish a trust or escrow account to hold
proceeds from losses arising from fire or explosion of insured real property
located within the city.



   (B)   The city may utilize these funds to secure, repair or demolish
damaged or destroyed structures and clear the property in question, so that
the structure and property are in compliance with local code requirements and
applicable city code provisions.



   (C)   Any unused portion of the retained proceeds shall be returned
to the insured. In addition, the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S.
§ 65A.50, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated
herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provision thereof.



(2003 Code, § 2.76)  (Ord. 61, passed 5-31-1996)



§ 30.16  EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The Council recognizes its duty to, insofar as possible,
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and
their property.



      (2)   In order to fulfill this responsibility it may be
necessary, in times of individual need or widespread disaster giving rise to
an emergency, to recall city employees.



      (3)   Thus, this section is adopted to require employee
residency within a reasonable area or response time to meet those needs.



   (B)   Employees affected. The Public Works Director, the Electrical
Superintendent, the Water Superintendent and all employees of the Public
Works Department, the Electrical Department and the Water Department, the
Chief of Police and all police officers shall, for the purpose of this
section, be “affected employees”.



   (C)   Residency. The following areas and response times are hereby
determined to be reasonable, and required within six months after assuming
city employment:



      (1)   The area in which affected employees shall reside is
within five miles of the city limits;



      (2)   All affected employees shall be able to reach the city
administrative offices within ten minutes by motor vehicle; and



      (3)   Any present city employee, now residing outside the area
or response time specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above who moves his
or her residence in the future, will be bound by this division (C).



(2003 Code, § 2.72)



§ 30.17  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND; APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to
establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's
computerized criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes
of employment background checks for the positions described hereinafter.



   (B)   Criminal history employment background investigations.



      (1)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the
exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the city,
unless the city's hiring authority concludes that a background investigation
is not needed: all regular part-time or full-time employees of the city and
other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults.



      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background
investigation in order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department
is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension's Computerized Criminal History Information System in accordance
with the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension policy. Any data that is accessed
and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and
custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the City
Council, the City Manager, the City Clerk or other city staff involved in the
hiring process.



      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken the applicant
must authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the
collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's
prior conviction, unless the crime is directly related to the position of
employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request
on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the
following:



         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial.



         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure
set forth in M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time.



         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment.



         (d)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will
be considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 165, passed 12-2-2013)  Penalty, see 10.99



CHAPTER 31:  BOARDS, DEPARTMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONS



Section



   31.01   City Manager; department heads



   31.02   Boards and commissions generally



   31.03   Police Department



   31.04   Fire Department



   31.05   Legal Department



   31.06   Public Works Department



   31.07   Finance Department



   31.08   Electrical Department



   31.09   Water Department



   31.10   Public Transit/Forestry Department



   31.11   Planning Commission



   31.12   Airport Commission



   31.13   Public Utilities Commission



   31.14   Community Development Commission (Port Authority)



   31.15   Board of Adjustments and Appeals



   31.16   Hospital Board



   31.17   Library Board



   31.18   Park Board



   31.19   Community Center Board



§ 31.01  CITY MANAGER; DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   (A)   City Manager. The City Manager shall, upon request of the
Mayor or the Council, furnish reports of the general administration,
inventory, progress and details of the operation of any department or office.



   (B)   Department heads. The heads of departments and city officials
shall make reports as are required of them by the Council, the laws of the
state, the City Charter and the city code.



(2003 Code, § 2.30)



§ 31.02  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   All board and commission appointments authorized by ordinance
or resolution shall be made by the Council.



   (B)   The term of each appointee shall be established and stated at
the time of his or her appointment, and terms of present board and commission
members may be reestablished and changed so as to give effect to this section.



   (C)   New appointees shall assume office on January 1; provided,
however, that all appointees to board and commissions shall hold office until
their successor is appointed and qualified.



   (D)   All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an
expired term. No appointed board or commission member shall be an employee of
the city, but an ex officio member may be so employed.



   (E)   All appointed board and commission members shall serve without
remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in
the performance of their duties when the expenses have been authorized by the
Council before they were incurred.



   (F)   The Chairperson and the Secretary shall be chosen from and by
the board or commission membership at its first regular meeting in December
of each year to serve for the next calendar year; provided, however, that no
Chairperson shall be elected who has not completed at least one year as a
member of the board or commission.



   (G)   Any board or commission member may be removed by the Council
for misfeasance, malfeasance or non-feasance in office and his or her
position filled as any other vacancy.



   (H)   Each board and commission shall hold its regular meeting at a
time established and approved by the Council.



   (I)   The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of all boards
and commissions; provided, that if he or she is unable to attend a meeting or
act in the capacity of the membership, he or she may be represented by his or
her assistant or some person duly authorized by him or her.



   (J)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all boards and
commissions shall be advisory to the Council, and this section shall apply to
all boards and commissions.



(2003 Code, § 2.50)



§ 31.03  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Police Department is hereby established. The head of this
Department shall be known as the Chief of Police, and the number of
additional members and employees of the Police Department shall be determined
by the City Manager which may be changed from time to time. The City Manager
shall have authority to appoint additional members of the Police Department
for temporary duty when, in his judgment, an emergency exists for the
preservation of life or property.



   (B)   The Chief of Police and all members of the Police Department
shall have the powers and authority of police officers generally and shall
perform duties as are required of them by the Council or by law.



   (C)   The City Manager shall have administrative supervision of the
Police Department and custody of all property used and maintained for the
purposes of the Department.



   (D)   The Chief of Police shall make and file other reports as may
be required by the City Manager.



(2003 Code, § 2.31)



§ 31.04  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Fire Department is hereby established. The Fire Department
may establish, subject to Council approval, and from time to time revise and
amend, written rules and regulations of the Department including, but not
limited to, its internal structural organization and compensation, a copy of
which shall be distributed to each of its members whenever established,
revised or amended. The Chief and the Assistant Chief shall be elected by
members of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have general
supervision of the Fire Department and custody of all property used and
maintained for the purposes of the Department. He or she shall see that the
same are kept in proper order and that all rules and regulations and all
provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relative to a
Fire Department and to prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly
observed. He or she shall supervise the preservation of all property
endangered by fire and shall control and direct all persons engaged in
preserving the property.



   (C)   In case of the absence or disability of the Chief for any
cause, the Assistant Chief shall exercise all powers, perform all the duties
and be subject to all the responsibilities of the Chief. It is the duty of
the Chief of the Fire Department to make an annual report to the City Manager
as to the condition of equipment and needs of the Fire Department, and to
make and file other reports as may be requested by the Council or the City
Manager.



(2003 Code, § 2.32)



§ 31.05  LEGAL DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A Legal Department is hereby established. The Council shall
appoint a City Attorney, who shall be head of the Legal Department, together
with assistants as may be necessary who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall perform the duties as are required of
him or her by law or referred to him or her by the Council.



   (C)   It shall be the official duty of the City Attorney to act as
“Revisor of Ordinances”.



(2003 Code, § 2.33)



§ 31.06  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.



   A Public Works Department is hereby established. The head of the
Department shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be the Public
Works Director. The city sewer and water systems, storm sewers and drainage,
streets, parks and the light and power plant and dam shall be under the
direct supervision of the Public Works Director and he or she shall be
responsible for and have custody of all property of the Department. It is
also the duty of the Public Works Director, on or before the date of the
first regular Council meeting in each month, to file with the City Manager a
report as to any recommendations as to repairs or improvements he or she
deems advisable, together with a report of the activities of his or her
Department during the preceding month. The Director shall also make and file
other reports as may be requested by the Council or City Manager.



(2003 Code, § 2.34)



§ 31.07  FINANCE DEPARTMENT.



   A Finance Department is hereby established. The head of this Department
shall be the Finance Director. It is the duty of the Finance Director to
maintain complete and accurate records as to all financial matters of the
city. He or she shall be responsible for assisting the City Manager in
drafting the annual budget and preparing the budgetary and financial reports
as the Council or the City Manager may from time to time require.



(2003 Code, § 2.35)



§ 31.08  ELECTRICAL DEPARTMENT.



   An Electrical Department is hereby established. The Head of this
Department shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be the Electrical
Superintendent. The municipal electric utility shall be under his or her
direct supervision and control. It is also the duty of the Electrical
Superintendent, on or before the date of the first regular Council meeting in
each month, to file with the City Manager a report as to any recommendations
as to repairs or improvements he or she deems advisable, together with a
report of the activities of his or her Department during the preceding month.
The Superintendent shall also make and file other reports as may be requested
by the Council or City Manager.



(2003 Code, § 2.36)



§ 31.09  WATER DEPARTMENT.



   A Water Department is hereby established. The head of this Department
shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be the Water Superintendent.
The municipal water utility shall be under his or her direct supervision and
control. It is also the duty of the Water Superintendent, on or before the
date of the first regular Council meeting in each month, to file with the
City Manager a report as to any recommendations as to repairs or improvements
he or she deems advisable, together with a report of the activities of his or
her Department during the preceding month. The Superintendent shall also make
and file other reports as may be requested by the Council or City Manager.



(2003 Code, § 2.37)



§ 31.10  PUBLIC TRANSIT/FORESTRY DEPARTMENT.



   A combined Public Transit and City Forestry Department is hereby
established. The head of this Department shall be known as the Public Transit
Coordinator/City Forester. It is the duty of the Public Transit
Coordinator/City Forester to operate both a public transit system and a
forestry department within the city. The Department head shall have the
custody of all property of the Department, shall be responsible for preparing
all necessary reports and records, and perform other miscellaneous duties, of
whatever nature, as may be assigned from time to time by the City Manager.
The Public Transit Coordinator/City Forester shall be appointed by the City
Manager.



(2003 Code, § 2.38)  (Ord. 10, passed 9-15-1989)



§ 31.11  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Planning Commission is hereby
established. The Commission shall be composed of five members who shall serve
staggered three-year terms. The City Manager, by reason of his or her
position, shall be an ex officio member, and shall act as Secretary of the
Commission.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have all the
powers and duties defined or granted in the statutes and the city code
relating to planning, zoning and subdivision regulation and shall act in an
advisory capacity to the Council in all of those areas.



(2003 Code, § 2.51)



§ 31.12  AIRPORT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. An Airport Commission is hereby
established. The Commission shall be composed of five members, who shall
serve staggered three-year terms. Four members shall be residents of the
city, and the fifth member shall be a resident of the political subdivision
in which the airport is geographically located.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall advise the Council in
all matters dealing with the airport, and its operation. It shall recommend
an annual operating budget, report on the adequacy of facilities, recommend
capital improvements, and serve as a forum for others to express their views
on subjects relating to the airport and its operation.



(2003 Code, § 2.52)  (Ord. 149, passed 6-1-2009)



§ 31.13  PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Public Utilities Commission
is hereby established. The Commission shall be composed of seven members, one
of whom shall be a member of the Council whose term shall be limited to his
or her term of office on the Council. The other six members shall serve
staggered three-year terms. The City Manager shall be an ex officio member.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall advise the Council in
all matters relating to the operation of the power plant and transmission
lines, including necessary improvements and personnel for the management and
operation of the system. It shall also advise the city as to the operation
and improvement of the water and sewer plants and systems.



(2003 Code, § 2.53)



§ 31.14  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION (PORT AUTHORITY).



   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established, pursuant to
Chapter 225 of the Minnesota 1981 Session Laws, a Community Development
Commission to be known as the City Port Authority, for the purpose of
creating, maintaining, encouraging and assisting with economic development,
housing and redevelopment activity within the city.



   (B)   Membership and term of office. The Authority shall consist of
the members of the City Housing and Redevelopment Authority as it is
currently comprised, plus two additional members to be appointed pursuant to
the terms and provisions of M.S. § 469.003, as it may be amended from time
to time. Each member from the Council shall serve for a term coterminous with
his or her term as Mayor or Council member. Current members of the existing
Housing and Redevelopment Authority shall be allowed to complete the
remainder of their current term with their successors appointed according to
the provisions hereof.



   (C)   Organization of Commission.



      (1)   The Commissioners shall establish by-laws and/or rules
and procedures for operation of the Authority as they may deem appropriate to
include, but not be limited to, procedures for selection of Chairperson,
establishment of sub-committees, quorums for the holding of meetings and
conducting of business thereat, selection, retention and dismissal of
personnel, the obtaining and use of administrative and other services and the
procedures involved therewith, and other matters as the Commissioners deem
appropriate for the orderly operation and function of the Authority.



      (2)   The City Attorney shall provide the general legal
counsel to the Commission, but private attorneys may also be retained.



   (D)   Powers and duties. The Authority may hereby under this
section, as the same may be amended from time to time by the Council acting
as the Council, exercise any and all of the powers granted to the Authority
pursuant to Chapter 225 of the Minnesota 1981 Session Laws, being M.S. §§
469.048 to 469.068, and component sections thereunder, as amended from time
to time.



   (E)   Limitations. The following limitations shall apply with
respect to actions by the agency.



      (1)   The sale of all bonds or instruments of indebtedness
issued by the Authority which guarantee or financially secure a developer’s
investment shall require prior approval by Council resolution.



      (2)   The Authority shall follow the budget process for city
departments as provided by City Charter, and as implemented by the Council
and Mayor.



      (3)   All official actions of the Authority shall be
consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan of the city, and any official
controls implementing the plan.



      (4)   The Authority shall submit to the Council for approval
by resolution any proposed project as defined by M.S. § 273.73(8) as
amended, supplemented or superseded from time to time.



      (5)   The Authority shall submit all planned activities for
influencing the action of any other governmental agency, subdivision or body
to the Council for approval by resolution.



      (6)   The Authority shall submit its administrative structure
and management practices to the Council for approval by resolution.



      (7)   The Authority shall exercise no powers of taxation,
wherever authorized, without prior approval by the Council by resolution.



      (8)   Ownership of land and/or buildings by the Commission
shall be limited to 90 days, except by prior consent of the Council.



      (9)   The Commission shall not lease land and/or buildings,
either as tenant or landlord, without the approval of the Council.



      (10)   The Commission may not provide equity capital and/or
become a limited partner in a project, without the approval of the Council.



      (11)   Commission members shall serve without compensation.



(2003 Code, § 2.54)  (Ord. 15, passed 4-27-1990; Ord. 85-3, passed
6-21-1985)



§ 31.15  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment. A Board of Adjustments and Appeals, composed of
the members of the Planning Commission, is hereby established.



   (B)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals may be
taken by any affected person upon compliance with conditions imposed by the
zoning provisions of the city code.



      (2)   The Board shall have the following powers with respect
to the zoning provisions:



         (a)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of the zoning provisions
of the city code; and



         (b)   To hear requests for variances from the literal
provisions of the zoning provisions of the city code in instances where their
strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique
to the individual property under consideration and to grant the variances
only when it is demonstrated that the actions will be in keeping with the
spirit and intent of the zoning provisions.



      (3)   UNDUE HARDSHIP as used in connection with the granting
of a variance means the property in question cannot be put to a reasonable
use if used under conditions allowed by the official controls, the plight of
the owner is due to circumstances unique to his or her property not created
by the owner, and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.



      (4)   Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an
undue hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of
the zoning provisions. Undue hardship also includes, but is not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.



      (5)   Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered
construction as defined by statute when in harmony with the zoning
provisions. A variance may not be granted for any use that is not permitted
or conditional under the zoning provisions for property in the district where
the affected land is located. A variance may be granted for the temporary use
of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling, and a variance may be
granted which imposes conditions to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent
properties.



   (C)   Time of filing. All petitions and appeals shall be filed with
the Board within 30 days after written notice of the adverse decision by
service of the petition or written notice of appeal upon the City Clerk.



   (D)   Form and contents. All petitions and appeals shall be filed by
the aggrieved person and shall briefly state the facts and circumstances
giving rise to the petition or appeal.



   (E)   Hearing and procedure.



      (1)   Upon receipt of any petition or appeal, the City Clerk
shall forthwith forward a copy thereof to the Secretary of the Board, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission, and any administrative officer involved
in the enforcement thereof, showing the date of receipt thereof.



      (2)   Within 30 days after receipt of the petition or notice
of appeal by the City Clerk, the Board shall call a hearing thereon and give
notice thereof in writing to all petitioners, appellants and other persons as
the Board may determine to have an interest or property right in any decision
made pursuant thereto, and the administrative officers as it may determine.
The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date set for
hearing. Notice shall also be given to the public by publication thereof once
in a legal newspaper at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing.



      (3)   At any such hearing, all persons desiring to be heard
shall have the opportunity, it being deemed to have completed its
investigation by the date set for hearing.



(2003 Code, § 2.55)



§ 31.16  HOSPITAL BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Hospital Board is hereby
established. The Board shall be composed of seven members, one of whom shall
be a member of the Council whose term shall be limited to his or her term of
office on the Council. The other six members shall serve staggered three-year
terms.



   (B)   Organization, meetings and officers. The Board shall elect
from its membership a President, Vice President and Secretary-Treasurer
annually, and may adopt the rules and regulations as it deems necessary. The
President shall preside at all meetings of the Board and shall sign, with the
Secretary, all contracts, orders and other documents to be executed by the
Board. The Vice President shall perform the duties of the President in the
absence or disability of that officer. The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep a
full, true and complete record of all monies received and disbursed by the
Board. The Board may prescribe additional powers and duties for its officers
as may be consistent with the provisions of this section. Vacancies in any of
the offices shall be filled for the unexpired term of the vacating officer.



   (C)   Powers and duties. The Hospital Board shall have charge of the
maintenance, control and administration of any hospital owned by the city.
The Board shall hire a Superintendent and all other necessary employees, and
fix and pay their compensation. The Board shall fix the fees and charges for
the use of the hospital and make contracts with the county and other
governmental subdivisions for the care and hospitalization of indigent cases.
The Board may purchase necessary equipment, apparatus and supplies, but all
purchases must be in accordance with the City Charter, but it shall not have
the authority to construct additional buildings or structures. The Board
shall keep financial and other records as may be required by the Council and
shall report the same at times and in a manner as the Council may prescribe.



   (D)   Funds, accounting and payment of accounts. All earnings of the
Municipal Hospital, together with all contributions and other funds procured
for the maintenance and improvement of the Hospital shall be paid into a
Municipal Hospital Fund. Disbursements from this Fund shall be made only by
checks signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Hospital Administrator
and Chairperson of the Hospital Board of Directors, pursuant to an order of
the Hospital Board approved by a majority of its members, and signed by its
Chairperson and Secretary-Treasurer, or, if the disbursement is made in
payment of principal of bonds or interest on bonds issued for hospital
purposes, pursuant to an order approved by a majority of the members of the
Council. No disbursements shall be made from the funds, except in payment of
costs, expenses and indebtedness incurred in the maintenance, operation,
equipment, repair and construction of the Municipal Hospital, except that the
Council may in its discretion transfer any accumulated surplus in the Fund to
any other fund. The Hospital Board shall keep an accurate account of all
monies received and disbursed from the Fund, and of all outstanding credits
and liabilities of the Hospital. The fiscal year of the Municipal Hospital
Fund shall commence on January 1 of each year. As soon as practicable, after
the close of the fiscal year of the city, the Board shall file with the City
Manager a report containing the complete record of hospital earnings,
expenditures, assets, liabilities, property and a general summary of its
business transactions for the previous fiscal year. The Hospital Board shall
also render a monthly operating statement to the Council.



   (E)   Removal from Board. The Council may, by a majority vote,
remove for cause, any member of the Board, and appoint a new Board member for
the unexpired term of the member so removed.



   (F)   Payment responsibilities and collection. In addition to the
powers herein above granted, including those noted in divisions (C) and (D) 
hereof, the Hospital Board, or its designated employees and agents, shall be
granted the authority to enter into such contracts as necessary with third
parties for the providing of services by the hospital, to include the
provisions of ambulance services and related fees and expenses, to include,
but not necessarily be limited to, the establishment of contracts with
various townships, counties and other political subdivisions, organizations
and individuals and entities as it deems appropriate and to establish such
fees as it deems appropriate for the providing of such services.  Further,
unless otherwise prohibited by law, in addition to all other legal rights and
remedies it may have for collection of fees and expenses for such services,
labor and material provided, the Hospital Board may certify to the City
Council and the City Council, through its normal administrative process,
shall certify to the appropriate county auditor for collection by special
assessment such unpaid fees and expenses against the appropriate party
requesting or provided with such services.  It is further provided that if
deemed appropriate by the City Council, and as may otherwise be required by
law, the city may levy a tax or other charges for emergency services provided
outside the corporate limits.  Charges for such emergency services may be
collected by either imposition of a tax levy or special assessment pursuant
to the provisions of M.S. §§ 471.476 and 415.01(2), with reference to §§
366.011 and 366.012.  The amount to be charged for such emergency services
shall be designated by resolution of the City Council adopted from time to
time.



(2003 Code, § 2.56) (Ord. 171, passed 7-21-2014)



§ 31.17  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. The Library Board composed of
seven members, serving staggered three-year terms, is hereby established.
Five of the members shall reside within the corporate limits of the city and
two, though not residing within the corporate limits of the city, shall
nonetheless reside within the area for which either a city mailing address or
telephone number is provided. No more than one Council member shall be a
member of the Board, and shall be one of the five members required to reside
within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Duties. The duties of the Board are as follows:



      (1)   To annually elect from its membership a President,
Secretary and other officers as it deems necessary; adopt rules and
regulations for the government of the library and conduct of its business;
appoint a qualified person to be appointed by the City Manager, who shall
also appoint other staff as necessary, establish compensation of employees,
and remove them for cause;



      (2)   To pay into the city treasury all money received for the
library, and interest thereon, which shall be credited to he Library Fund and
kept separate from the other money of the city, and paid out only upon
approval of the Council; and



      (3)   To annually report to the Council receipts and their
sources, disbursements and for what purposes, the number of library materials
on hand, purchased and loaned, and other information it deems advisable; and,
to file the information with the State Department of Education not later than
April 1 of each year.



   (C)   Title to property. All property given, granted, conveyed,
donated, devised or bequeathed to, or otherwise acquired by, the city for a
library shall vest in, and be held in the name of, the city, and any
conveyance, grant, donation, devise, bequest or gift made to, or in the name
of, the library or Library Board shall be deemed to have been made directly
to the city.



(2003 Code, § 2.57) (Ord. 99, passed 12-7-2001; Ord. 132, passed 6-22-2006)



§ 31.18  PARK BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Park Board is hereby
established. The Board shall be composed of five members who shall serve
staggered three-year terms.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Park Board shall have the power and
duty to advise, adopt and maintain parks and playgrounds, and to recommend
expansions and plans for the development of the park system to the Council.
The Board may enter into necessary contracts for the maintenance and care of
park property and is authorized to receive and accept, in the name of the
city, gifts or devises of real or personal property to be used for park
purposes. All licenses for concessions or amusements in parks shall be
granted only upon the approval of the Council.



(2003 Code, § 2.58)



§ 31.19  COMMUNITY CENTER BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and composition. A Community Center Board is
hereby established. The Board shall be composed of seven members, two of whom
shall be members of the Council, whose term shall be limited to their term of
office on the Council. The other five members, two of whom may be
nonresidents of the city, but all of whom shall be active members of the
community center, shall serve staggered three year terms. The City Manager,
by reason of his or her appointed office, shall serve as ex officio member.



   (B)   Powers and duties. The Board shall advise the Council on all
matters relating to the operation of the city area multi-purpose Community
Recreation and Education Center, it shall recommend an annual operating
budget, report on the adequacy of facilities, recommend capital improvements
and serve as forum for others to express their views on subjects relating to
the Community Center and its operation.



   (C)   Standing committees. The Board shall also be given the
authority to appoint various standing committees to serve in an advisory
capacity to assist the Board in carrying out its duties and responsibilities.
The standing committees shall be determined by the Board and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following: fundraising, membership and publicity.
Membership in the respective standing committee shall be determined by the
Community Center Board.



(2003 Code, § 2.59)  (Ord. 82, passed 2-26-1999; Ord. 150, passed 6-1-2009)



CHAPTER 32:  FEES FOR EMERGENCY PROTECTION SERVICES



Section



   32.01   Purposes and intent



   32.02   Definitions



   32.03   Parties affected



   32.04   Rate schedule



   32.05   Billing and collection



   32.06   Mutual aid agreement



   32.07   Application of collections to budget



§ 32.01  PURPOSES AND INTENT.



   This chapter is adopted for the purposes of authorizing the city to
charge for fire service as authorized by M.S. §§ 366.011, 366.012 and
415.01, as they may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



§ 32.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACT.  A contract between the city and a town or
other city or political subdivision for the city to provide fire service.



   FIRE SERVICE.  Any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or
equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an
effort to protect equipment, life or property in an area threatened by fire.
It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to
provide fire suppression, rescue, extraction and any other services related
to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur.



   FIRE SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge imposed by the city for receiving
fire service.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi trailers. It does
not include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles or park
trailers.



   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.  An agreement between the city and a town or
other city or the city’s Fire Department to provide assistance to the fire
department of a town or other city.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



§ 32.03  PARTIES AFFECTED.



   (A)   Owners of property within the city who receive fire service.



   (B)   Anyone who receives fire service as a result of a motor
vehicle accident or fire whether or not within the city.



   (C)   Owners of property in towns or cities to which the city
provides fire service pursuant to a fire protection contract.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



§ 32.04  RATE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The rate schedule indicates rates per fire call or per
incident (incident of fire service) unless otherwise noted, and is effective
as of the date of adoption of this chapter, and is subject to modification
from time to time by resolution duly authorized and passed by the City
Council pursuant to Charter and city code, the most recent resolution to be
kept on file at the office of the City Clerk for inspection by the public
during normal business hours. The rate schedule in effect as of the time of
the providing of service as defined hereinabove shall control.



 



Per Man Rate
 

$12



183 Pierce Truck
 

$65



184 Dash Truck
 

$65



185 Arial Truck
 

$150



186 Tanker Truck
 

$125



188 Dodge Pickup Grass Rig
 

$40



189 Chevy Pickup Grass Rig
 

$40



287 Rescue Truck
 

$65



289 Suburban
 

$30



Gamma Goat
 

$50



Foam
 

$95/gallon





 



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, there shall be a minimum charge
of $500 per incident of fire service provided by the city herein.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



§ 32.05  BILLING AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   Parties requesting and receiving fire services may be billed
directly by the city. Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did
not request services but a fire or other situation exists which, at the
discretion of the Fire Department personnel in charge requires fire service,
the party will be charged and billed. All parties will be billed whether or
not the fire service is covered by insurance. Any billable amount of the fire
charge not covered by a party’s insurance remains a debt of the party
receiving the fire service.



   (B)   Parties billed for fire service will have 30 days to pay. If
the fire service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered
delinquent and the city will send a notice of delinquency.



   (C)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after
this notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and
reasonable legal means to collect the fire service charge. The party
receiving fire service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by
the city including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and
court costs.



   (D)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after
notice of delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or before
October 15 of each year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the County
Auditor for collection with property taxes. The city must give the property
owner notice of its intent to certify the unpaid fire service charge by
September 15.



   (E)   The City Council shall retain the authority to waive billing
in the event of false alarms; provided, however, that it need not do so. Each
matter shall be considered on a case by case basis and the waiver of a bill
in one case shall not be deemed a precedent so as to require waiver in any
other cases.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



§ 32.06  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.



   When the City Fire Department provides fire service to another fire
department pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, the billing will be determined
by the mutual aid agreement.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



§ 32.07  APPLICATION OF COLLECTIONS TO BUDGET.



   All collected fire charges will be city funds and used to offset the
expenses of the City Fire Department in providing fire services.



(Ord. 129, passed 12-19-2005)



CHAPTER 33:  LODGING TAX



Section



   33.01   Definitions



   33.02   Imposition of tax



   33.03   Collections



   33.04   Exemptions



   33.05   Advertising no tax



   33.06   Payment and returns



   33.07   Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands



   33.08   Refunds



   33.09   Protests by lodger



   33.10   Failure to file a return



   33.11   Administration of tax



   33.12   Examine records



   33.13   Contract with state



   33.14   Violations



   33.15   Use of proceeds



   33.16   Appeals



 



   33.99   Penalty



§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Granite Falls, Minnesota, acting by or through its
duly authorized representative(s).



   LODGING.  The furnishing, for a consideration, of lodging by a hotel,
motel, apartment, tourist court, municipal campground, bed and breakfast or
resort, other than the renting or leasing of such a premises for a continuous
period of 30 days or more to the same occupant. The furnishing of rooms owned
by religious, educational or non-profit organizations for self-sponsored
activities shall not constitute LODGING for purposes of this chapter.



   OPERATOR.  A person who has charge, care or control of a building in
the city, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let,
whether in the capacity of owner,  lessee,  sub-lessee,  licensee or any
other capacity.



   PERSON.  Includes all firms, partnerships, associations, 
corporations and natural persons.



   RENT.  The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging,
whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for
services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging, other than the room
charge itself.



   LODGER.  The person obtaining lodging from an operator.



(2003 Code, § 12.01)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.02  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   Pursuant to M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time,
there is hereby imposed a tax of 3% of the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and charged
separately and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger, the tax
collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the city
and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the
tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which
the operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a
lodger.



(2003 Code, § 12.02)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.03  COLLECTIONS.



   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time
the rent is paid. The tax collected shall be deemed to be held in trust by
the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from
the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall
receive a receipt of payment from the operator.



(2003 Code, § 12.03)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose
occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be
granted, except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected,
and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on
forms provided by the city. All the claims shall be forwarded to the city
when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 12.04)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.05  ADVERTISING NO TAX.



   It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to
the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part
thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.
In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than $0.01 shall be
considered an additional cent.



(2003 Code, § 12.05)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.06  PAYMENT AND RETURNS.



   (A)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the
operator to the city monthly not later than 20 days after the end of the
month in which the taxes were collected.



      (1)   At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return upon forms and containing information as the city may require.



      (2)   The return shall contain the following minimum
information:



         (a)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging
during the period covered by the return;



         (b)   The total amount of exemptions;



         (c)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due
for the period;



         (d)   The signature of the person filing the return or
that of his or her agent duly authorized in writing;



         (e)   The period covered by the return;



         (f)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject
to the lodging tax; and



         (g)   A certification, of accuracy attested to by the
person signing the form for submission to the city.



   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect
to any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter
previously paid as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which
became uncollectible.



(2003 Code, § 12.06)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.07  EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.



   (A)   The city or its duly authorized representatives shall, after a
return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or examination
of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary
for determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of the
examination shall be the tax to be paid.



   (B)   If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the
excess shall be paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice
thereof, given either personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address shown on the return.



   (C)   If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the
excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within
ten working days after determination of the refund.



(2003 Code, § 12.07)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.08  REFUNDS.



   Any person may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period,
provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed
within one year from the date the return was due to be filed. The city shall
examine the claim and make and file written findings denying or allowing the
claim, in whole or in part, and shall mail a notice thereof by registered
mail, return receipt requested, to the person at the address stated upon the
return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city shall credit
the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this chapter from the
claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid by the city
to the claimant.



(2003 Code, § 12.08)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.09  PROTESTS BY LODGER.



   (A)   Any lodger may dispute or protest the amount of tax determined
in accordance with this chapter by paying the tax due and submitting to the
city with the tax an objection/protest tax form. The city shall provide a
form for the objections and the form shall be available from all operators.
All operators are required to submit the completed forms with the monthly
payment of the tax.



   (B)   A hearing on the objection/protest shall be held within 30
days of the receipt of the form by the city. All the hearings shall be held
at the City Hall on the fourth Monday of each month, unless the date is a
legal holiday, in which case the hearing shall be held on the following day.
The time of the hearing shall be 9:00 a.m. in either case. The lodger will
not receive a separate notice of the date, time and place of the hearing
since the form itself will contain a copy of this portion of this chapter.



   (C)   Failure of the lodger to appear at the next hearing
immediately following the filing of the objection/protest shall result in a
waiver of the objection/protest. At the hearing the lodger may present his or
her basis for the objection/protest to the tax and the city shall either
reject the objection/protest or waive the tax.



(2003 Code, § 12.09)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.10  FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.



   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent, return, the operator shall,
upon written notice and demand, file the return or corrected return within
five days of receipt of the notice and shall at the same time pay the tax due
on the basis thereof. If the person, shall fail to file the return or
corrected return, the city shall make a return or corrected return for the
person based upon the knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and
assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore
made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by the return)
shall be paid within five days of the receipt of the written notice and
demand for the payment. Any such return or assessment made by the city shall
be prima facie correct and valid and the burden of proving to the contrary
rests with any person in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.



   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be
paid, the city may institute the legal action as it, in its sole discretion,
may deem appropriate to cover the amount due, plus interest, penalties and
the costs and disbursements of any action.



   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator
one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment
of taxes as required by this chapter, provided the interest during the period
of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.



(2003 Code, § 12.10)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.11  ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.



   The city shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of
the taxes imposed by this chapter. The city shall cause to be prepared blank
forms for the returns and other documents required by this chapter and shall
distribute the same throughout the city. Failure to receive or secure the
forms shall not relieve any person from any obligation required of him or her
under this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 12.12)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.12  EXAMINE RECORDS.



   (A)   Persons acting on behalf of the city authorized in writing by
the city may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order
to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to
ascertain the taxes provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Every operator is directed and required to give to the city
the means, facilities and opportunity during regular city business hours for
the examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.



(2003 Code, § 12.13)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.13  CONTRACT WITH STATE.



   The City Manager is authorized to confer with the State Commissioner of
Taxation to the end that an agreement between the city and the Commissioner
of taxation may be entered into for the purpose of providing for the
administration and collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter. Such an
agreement shall not become effective until presented to the Council for its
approval and when so approved, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be
collected and administered pursuant to the terms of the agreement.



(2003 Code, § 12.14)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.14  VIOLATIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail to make, a return
required, by this chapter, or to fail to pay the taxes collected or any
penalty or interest imposed by this chapter after written demand for the
payment, or to refuse to permit the city’s authorized agents to examine the
books, records and papers under his or her control, or to willfully make any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return.



(2003 Code, § 12.15)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.15  USE OF PROCEEDS.



   Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of
taxes pursuant to this chapter shall, in accordance with M.S. § 469.190 as
the same may be amended from time to time, be used for the purpose if
advancement of the city as a tourist and convention center. The city shall
retain 5% of the proceeds obtained hereunder to either defray the costs and
expenses of collection and administration of the tax or other use as may be
designated from time to time by the Council consistent with the law.



(2003 Code, § 12.16)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.16  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination
made by the city under this chapter may file a petition for review of the
notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the
petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging
subject to the order, notice or determination.



   (B)   The petition for review shall be filed with the city within
ten days after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought
has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition, the City Manager shall set a
date and time for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five days prior
written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing.



   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity
to show cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or
withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner’s
choosing at petitioner’s own expense.



   (E)   The hearing shall be conducted by the Council or its
authorized representative and it shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions based upon the applicable provisions of this chapter and the
evidence presented. The Council or its authorized representative may affirm,
reverse or modify the notice, order or determination which is the subject of
the appeal.



(2003 Code, § 12.17)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time
herein specified, for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be
added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.



   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the
time prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that the failure is not
due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the
penalty provided in division (A) above, a penalty of 10% for each 30-day
period or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not exceeding
25% in the aggregate. There shall be a minimum penalty assessed of $25 if
penalties in the aggregate do not exceed that amount. The amount so added to
any tax shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and as
part of the tax, unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the
negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same
manner as the tax.



   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any
payment required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent
return, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax
or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal
to 50% of any tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of the false or
fraudulent return) found due for the period to which the return related. This
penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax, and shall be in addition to
all other penalties provided by this chapter.



   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties,
next to interest, and then to the tax due.



   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty
provided by this section, shall bear interest at the maximum rate per annum
from the time the tax should have been paid until a payment is made. Any
interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as a part
thereof.



(2003 Code, § 12.11)  (Ord. 91, passed 11-24-2000)



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



   34.01   Adoption by reference



§ 34.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The personnel policies of the city are hereby adopted by reference and
included in this code as fully as if set out at length herein.



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS



      51.   WATER SERVICE



      52.   SEWERAGE SERVICE



      53.   ELECTRICAL SERVICE



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities



   50.03   Fixing rates and charges for public utilities



   50.04   Contractual contents



   50.05   Rules and regulations relating to municipal utilities



   50.06   Connection or tapping prohibited; delinquent assessments or
charges



   50.07   Fees, rates and charges for use of wastewater facilities



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE.  Any public utility system to which a
franchise has been granted by the city.



   CONSUMER and CUSTOMER.  Any user of a utility.



   MUNICIPAL UTILITY.  Any city-owned utility system, including, but not
by way of limitation, water, sewerage and electric service.



   SERVICE.  Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.



   UTILITY.  All utility services, whether the same be public city-owned
facilities or furnished by public utility companies.



(2003 Code, § 3.01)



§ 50.02  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not
limited to, rates for service, permit fees, deposit, connection and meter
testing fees, disconnection fees, re-connection fees including penalties for
non-payment if any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and
adopted by resolution. No such resolution shall be adopted before a public
hearing has been held thereon. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published once at least ten days prior thereto. Notice of adoption of the
resolution shall be published at least 30 days prior to the effective date
thereof. The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept
on file and open to inspection in the office of the City Clerk and shall be
uniformly enforced. For the purpose of fixing the rates and charges, the
Council may categorize and classify under the various types of service,
provided, that the categorization and classification shall be included in the
resolution authorized by this section.



(2003 Code, § 3.02)



§ 50.03  FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   All rates and charges for public utility franchisees, not regulated by
an agency of the state, shall be fixed and determined by the Council and
adopted by ordinance. Public utility company rates and charges may be fixed
and determined by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section,
as follows.



   (A)   No rate or charge involving an increase thereof shall become
effective until approved by the Council. To request the increase, the
franchisee shall prepare its written petition, setting forth the then current
and proposed rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increases
(which may not be within 90 days of filing the petition), and the reason or
reasons necessitating the proposed increase or increases. The petition shall
be filed with the Council by serving the same on the City Clerk in person or
by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (B)   Within 30 days of the filing, the Council shall adopt a
resolution and serve the same upon the resident superintendent of the
franchisee in like manner as the petition may be served either approving the
proposed increases or ordering a hearing thereon to be held within 60 days
thereof. If no such action is taken by the Council, the increase or increases
shall take effect on the date stated in the franchisee’s petition as though
approved by the Council.



   (C)   Prior to the hearing date, the franchisee shall, without
delay, comply with the city’s reasonable requests for examination and
copying of all books, records, documents and other information, relating to
the subject matter of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay,
fail or refuse the requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of
the hearing date.



   (D)   Notice of hearing shall be in the form and manner stated in
the resolution. At the hearing, all persons wishing to be heard thereon shall
be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a decision shall be made
by the Council within 15 days after the hearing and served upon the
franchisee.



(2003 Code, § 3.03)



§ 50.04  CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.



   Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall
constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of
municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent
to the same.



(2003 Code, § 3.04)



§ 50.05  RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.



   (A)   Billing, payment and delinquency. All municipal utilities
shall be billed monthly and a utilities statement or statements shall be
mailed to each consumer. All utilities charges are due on the fifteenth day
of each month and delinquent at noon on the sixteenth day; provided, however,
that if the fifteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the charge
shall be delinquent at noon of the next business day. Payments received by
mail postmarked on or before the fifteenth day shall be deemed paid within
that period. A penalty thereof shall be added to, and become part of, all
delinquent utility bills. If service is suspended due to delinquency, it
shall not be restored at that location until a reconnection charge has been
paid for each utility reconnected in addition to amounts owed for service and
penalties. In the event that delinquent charges are specially assessed under
division (H) below, an additional sum computed on the delinquent amount of
charges and penalties shall be added to, and become part of, the amount so
assessed to cover administrative costs of making the assessment.



   (B)   Application, connection and sale of service. Application for
municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the city, and
strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent
has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal utilities
shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable rate
applied to the amount of the utilities taken as metered or ascertained in
connection with the rates.



   (C)   Discontinuance of service. All municipal utilities may be shut
off or discontinued whenever it is found that:



      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any
person working on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has
violated any requirement of the city code relative thereto, or any connection
therewith;



      (2)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility
service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city's form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the
effect:



         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before
the date set forth on the bill; and



         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that
date, a second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the
bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and



         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his
or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing.  This
official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of
the customer's complaint.



         (d)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not
be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



         (e)   When it becomes necessary for the city to
discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service
will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid,
along with a turn-on charge in the sum of $20.



      (3)   There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or
occupant in connection with any application for service or delivery or
charges therefor.



   (D)   Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal
utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto, shall
be and remain in the city and no person shall own any part or portion
thereof; provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances
constructed on private property are not intended to be included in municipal
ownership.



   (E)   Right of entry. By applying for, or receiving, a municipal
utility service, a customer irrevocably consents and agrees that any city
employee acting within the course and scope of his or her employment may
enter into and upon the private property of the customer, including dwellings
and other buildings, at all reasonable times under the circumstances, in or
upon which private property a municipal utility, or connection therewith, is
installed, for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, reading meters,
connecting or disconnecting the municipal utility service, and trimming trees
or brush under or adjacent to utility lines or appurtenances. It is unlawful
for any customer to hinder or prevent a city employee from making the entry.



   (F)   Meter test. The city may, at any time, test utility meters
(and remote registers) for accuracy. Whenever a consumer shall request the
city to test any utility meter in use by him or her, such a request shall be
accompanied by a cash deposit for each meter to be tested. If any such meter
is found to be inaccurate the same shall be replaced with an accurate meter
and the deposit thereon refunded. If the meter shall be found to be accurate
in its recordings or calculations it shall be reinstalled and the deposit
shall be retained by the city to defray the cost of the test. A meter found
to be within the standard of accuracy of 98% shall be considered accurate.



   (G)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly
break, injure, mar, deface, disturb or in any way interfere with any
buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit
any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to make any connection
with, opening into, use or alter in any way any municipal utility system
without first having applied for and received written permission to do so
from the city. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, any
attachment of roof water conductors, basketball hoops or any other item or
thing to any utility pole or appurtenance.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a
utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for
non-payment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained
a permit to do so from the city.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to “jumper” or by any
means or device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or
to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any
utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no
knowledge.



   (H)   Municipal utility services and charges a lien.



      (1)   Payment for all municipal utility (as that term is
defined in § 50.01) service and charges shall be the primary responsibility
of the fee owner of the premises served and shall be billed to the owner
unless otherwise contracted for and authorized in writing by the fee owner
and any other person (such as a tenant, contract purchaser, manager and the
like), as agent for the fee owner, and consented to by the city. If the
utility service and charges are for a single metered multi-unit rental
residential building, the owner of the building shall be the customer of
record and this responsibility shall not be waived by contract or otherwise.
The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative and at
the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this division (H)(1).



      (2)   Each such account is hereby made a lien upon the
premises served. All the accounts which are more than 45 days delinquent may,
when authorized by resolution of the Council, be certified by the City Clerk,
to the County Auditor, and the City Clerk in so certifying shall specify the
amount thereof, the description of the premises served, and the name of the
owner thereof. The amount so certified shall be extended by the Auditor on
the tax rolls against the premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the County Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other
taxes.



(2003 Code, § 3.05)  (Ord. 56, passed 1-24-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.06  CONNECTION OR TAPPING PROHIBITED; DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS OR
CHARGES.



   No permit shall be granted to tap or connect with sewer or water mains
when any assessment, or connection charge for the sewer or water main,
against the property to be connected is in default or delinquent. If the
assessment or connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall
be granted unless all installments then due and payable have been paid.



(2003 Code, § 3.06)



§ 50.07  FEES, RATES AND CHARGES FOR USE OF WASTEWATER FACILITIES.



   These fees, rates and charges are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated into this code as fully as if set out at length herein.



(2003 Code, § 3.07)



Editor’s note:



   Ord. 6, passed 8-15-1988, is listed in the TSO. A copy of the ordinance
is on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and use by
the public.



CHAPTER 51:  WATER SERVICE



Section



   51.01   Deficiency of water and shutting off water



   51.02   Repair of leaks



   51.03   Abandoned service penalties



   51.04   Service pipes



   51.05   Private water supplies



   51.06   Prohibited uses or restricted hours



   51.07   Private fire hose connections



   51.08   Opening hydrants



   51.09   Unmetered service



   51.10   Water meters



   51.11   Metered water not discharged



   51.12   Code requirement



   51.13   Additional rules and regulations



   51.14   Lawn watering regulations



§ 51.01  DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.



   The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of
water to customers whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the
purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever. In
case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to insure a supply for
firefighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be
shut off at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-1)



§ 51.02  REPAIR OF LEAKS.



   It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the
service pipe from the main into the house or other building. In case of
failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring
in his or her service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has
been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off
and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the
water service has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when
damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the
repair is not proceeded with immediately.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-2)



§ 51.03  ABANDONED SERVICE PENALTIES.



   All service installations connected to the water system that have been
abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall
be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises, served by this
service, shall pay the cost of the excavation and disconnection. The city may
perform the actual disconnection or inspect the work. When new buildings are
erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase the size of
the water service, the old service shall be disconnected at the main and the
new larger service shall be installed only after a new permit shall be taken
out. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be
hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or to
save expense in improperly removing the pipe from the main. Also, the
improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city and the cost
incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing the work to be
performed.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-3)



§ 51.04  SERVICE PIPES.



   Every service pipe must be laid in a manner so as to prevent rupture by
settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet below
the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by
freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Curb stops shall be located at or near property
lines.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-4)



§ 51.05  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.



   No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any
pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source
of water supply and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner or
occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water
shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are
permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when
the new connection is made. When a building is connected to city water, the
private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-5)



§ 51.06  PROHIBITED USES OR RESTRICTED HOURS.



   Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens
the city, it may entirely prohibit water use or limit the times and hours
during which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden
sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning and other uses, or
either or any of them. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or
permit water to be used in violation of the determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically
indicating the restrictions thereof.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.07  PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.



   Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may
apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants,
large pipes and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own
installation expense and at such rates as the Council may adopt by resolution
as herein provided.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-7)



§ 51.08  OPENING HYDRANTS.



   It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire
Department or other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of
lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the
same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person
so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any
hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their
lawful use.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.09  UNMETERED SERVICE.



   (A)   Unmetered service may be provided for construction, flooding
skating rinks and any other purpose. Service shall be at a duly adopted rate.



   (B)   Where it is difficult or impossible to accurately measure the
amount of water taken, unmetered service may be provided and the unmetered
rate applied; provided, however, that by acceptance thereof the consumer
agrees to have the city estimate the water used.



   (C)   In so estimating, the city shall consider the use to which the
water is put and the length of time of unmetered service.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-9)



§ 51.10  WATER METERS.



   Except as herein otherwise provided, all water furnished by the city
shall be measured by meters furnished by the consumer, the type of the meter
to be specified by and purchased from the city. The initial purchase and
installation of the meter and remote register are the responsibility of the
owner of the premises. The city shall thereafter maintain and repair, at its
expense, any meter that has become unserviceable through ordinary wear and
tear and shall replace it if necessary. Where repair or replacement is made
necessary by act or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises it
serves, any city expense caused thereby shall be a charge against and
collected from the water consumer, and water services may be disconnected by
the city until the cause is corrected and the amount charged is paid. All
meters are to be installed in a horizontal position not less than four inches
from the floor and wall area and in a safe, warm area with ready
accessibility for replacement, maintenance, testing and reading, and remote
registers shall be installed in places designated by the city to provide
ready access for reading. No meters or remote registers shall be painted. All
meter installations and necessary plumbing for the inlet and outlet ends of
the meter are the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises and
shall be done within 60 days after notification by the city. Replacement
meters shall be installed by the city at no cost to the consumer unless the
work is done by a non-city employee, in which case the consumer is
responsible for the costs incurred.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-10)



§ 51.11  METERED WATER NOT DISCHARGED.



   (A)   If a portion of the water furnished to any premises is not
directly or indirectly discharged into the sewerage system, the quantity of
the water shall be deducted in computing the sewerage service charge or
rental, provided a separate meter shall be installed and operated to register
the quantity so not discharged into the sewerage system; provided also, that
where it is not practicable to meter the portion of the water not discharged
into the sewerage system, the adjustment may be made as shall be fair and
equitable in order to determine the amount of the service charge or rental;
but until the adjustment shall be effected that water consumption basis
hereinbefore prescribed shall remain in full force and effect. The additional
meter and installation costs shall be borne by the customer.



   (B)   The additional metering shall be as close to the point of
service entry as possible.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-11)



§ 51.12  CODE REQUIREMENT.



   All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and
performed strictly in accordance with the State Plumbing Code. Failure to
install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have or
permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an
additional ground for termination of water service to any consumer.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-12)



§ 51.13  ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may, by resolution, adopt additional rules and regulations
relating to placement, size and type of equipment as it, in its discretion,
deems necessary or desirable. Copies of such additional rules and regulations
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, and uniformly enforced.



(2003 Code, § 3.20-13)



§ 51.14  LAWN WATERING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. To promote a higher awareness of the primary use of
water in the summer lawn irrigation, and to regulate the watering of lawns,
grass seed and sod.



   (B)   Rain sensors. M.S. § 103G.298, as it may be amended from time
to time, together with laws amendatory or supplemental thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference and rain sensors are hereby required for all landscape
irrigation systems installed from and after July 1, 2003.



(Ord. 135, passed 9-5-2006)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERAGE SERVICE



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Use of public sewers



   52.03   Private sewage disposal



   52.04   Building sewers and connections



   52.05   Main and lateral sewer construction



   52.06   Protection from damage



   52.07   Authority of inspectors



   52.08   Violations



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biological oxidation of organic matter expressed in milligrams per liter,
as determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lower horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called HOUSE CONNECTION.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer originally designed and currently designated
to receive both surface water runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
or sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables or condemned food.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from
any industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.



   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES)
PERMIT.  The system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the
discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the
contiguous zone, and the oceans by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342 and 1345.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE.  Wastes with a biological oxygen
demand concentration not to exceed 220 milligrams per liter and a total
suspended solids concentration not to exceed 220 milligrams per liter.



   OTHER WASTES.  Garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust,
shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil tar, chemicals, offal and other
substances except sewage and industrial wastes.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.



   PROCESS WATER.  Any water used in the manufacturing, preparation or
production of goods, materials or food. PROCESS WATER is an industrial waste.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  Any sewer owned or operated by a unit or agency of
government.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground water are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER.  The water-carried waste products from
residences, public buildings, institutions, industrial establishments or
other buildings including the excrementitious or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals, together with the ground water
infiltration and storm and surface water as may be present.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial waste or
other waste liquids.



   SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains
and other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or
conducting sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration of flows during the normal operation.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than
unpolluted cooling or process water.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable
by-laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes,
other wastes, or any substance which renders the water unclean or noxious, or
impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or
injurious to public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial,
industrial or recreational use, or to livestock, wild animals, bird, fish or
other aquatic life.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of
devices and structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial waste and
sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous for WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER
TREATMENT PLANT or WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-1)



§ 52.02  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural
outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this section.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (C)   It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property
having a dwelling house or business building situated thereon, which property
is abutting a street in which there are city water and sewer mains, to
install a toilet in the dwelling or business building and make connection
thereof with the water and sewer mains, if the property is within 300 feet of
the mains. The city shall serve written notice upon the owner or  occupant
requiring the installation of toilet facilities upon premises described in
the notice, and connection thereof with the sewer and water mains, all of
which shall be done within 30 days after service of the written notice.
Whenever any owner or occupant shall default in compliance with the written
notice, the Council may by resolution direct that a toilet be installed and
connection made with the water and sewer mains and that the actual cost of
the installation be paid in the first instance out of the General Revenue
Fund, and assessed against the property so benefitted. After the installation
and connection is completed by order of the Council, the city shall serve a
written notice of intention to make an assessment therefor. If the assessment
is not paid within ten days, the city shall certify the amount thereof to the
County Auditor in the same manner as with other special assessments, provided
that the Council may by resolution provide that the assessment be spread over
a term of three years upon written request by the owner of the property.



   (D)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer
in compliance with a notice given under division (H) below, the city may
undertake to have the connection made and shall assess the cost thereof
against the benefitted property and the assessment shall be a lien against
the property. The assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the legal
rate for local improvements and shall be certified to the Auditor of the
appropriate county and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the
same manner as assessments for local improvements. The rights of the city
under this division (D) shall be in addition to any other remedial or
enforcement provisions of this section.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged directly or indirectly any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, waste from on-site disposal systems,
unpolluted cooling or process water into the sanitary sewer collection
system. No roof, sump pump, swimming pool discharge, or surface or subsurface
water drainage system shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system, and no
building shall hereafter be constructed, nor shall any existing buildings be
hereafter altered in a manner so as to provide the connection with the
sanitary sewer system, either inside or outside the building, except as
herein provided.



      (1)   Before March 1, 1991, any person having a roof, sump
pump, swimming pool discharge or surface or subsurface drainage system now
connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer, shall disconnect and/or
remove the same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be
closed and repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by the
city.



      (2)   The owner of the property shall allow employees of the
city or its agents to inspect the buildings to confirm compliance with the
provisions hereof, or the owner may alternatively furnish a certificate from
a licensed plumber certifying that their property is in compliance with this
Subparagraph in lieu of a city inspection of the same. It is unlawful for any
person to refuse to allow their property to be inspected, or to refuse to
provide a plumber’s certificate of compliance within 14 days of the date a
city employee or agent is denied admittance to inspect the property.



      (3)   In addition to any criminal penalties which may be
imposed for violation of this division (E), the property owner shall make the
necessary changes to bring the property into compliance by March 1, 1991.



      (4)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, upon
application to the city, a property owner, in the sole discretion of the city
upon a showing of undue hardship, may be granted authorization to discharge
contrary to the terms hereof during the months of December, January, February
and March.



   (F)   Storm water and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged
to a storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or process water shall only
be so discharged upon approval by the city or other local unit of government.



   (G)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances
to any public sewer:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the wastewater treatment works;



      (3)   Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper continuation of the wastewater
facilities, including, but not limited to ashes, cinders, disposable diapers,
glass grinding or polishing wastes, stone cuttings or polishing wastes, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails
and sanitary napkins, paper dishes, cups, milk containers and other paper
products;



      (5)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair; and/or



      (6)   Prohibited wastes shall be regulated in accordance with
the city’s NPDES/SDS permit, 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a) and (b) of the Clean
Water Act and all other applicable state and federal regulations.



   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, the following described substances to any
public sewer unless in the opinion of the city, the discharge will not harm
the wastewater facilities, nor cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, nor
otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, nor constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city may
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, the city’s NPDES/SDS permit, and other pertinent factors. The city
may make the determinations either on a general basis or as to discharges
from individual users or specific discharges, and may prohibit certain
discharges from individual users because of unusual concentrations or
combinations which may occur. The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F
(0° and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles
greater than one-half inch in any dimension;



      (4)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;



      (5)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works, or which interfere
with the treatment required to meet the requirements of the state and federal
government and any other public agency with proper authority to regulate the
discharge from the sewage treatment plant;



      (6)   Radioactive wastes or isotypes of a half-life or
concentration that they are in noncompliance with regulations issued by the
appropriate authority having control over their use or which have caused or
may cause damage or hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it;



      (7)   Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5; or



      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentration of suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
wastewater treatment works;



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting a slug; or



         (e)   Water or wastes containing substances which are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or
requirements of other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge from the sewage treatment plant.



   (I)   If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or wastes
do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated under this division (I),
or which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the
treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may take
any or all of the following steps:



      (1)   Refuse to accept the discharges;



      (2)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge;



      (3)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for the
discharge to the public sewers; or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treatment wastes. The design and installation of the plant and equipment for
pre-treatment or equalization of waste flows shall be subject to the review
and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of 33 U.S.C. §
1317(b) of the Clean Water Act and all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



   (J)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, or
any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors
required herein shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units.



   (K)   Where preliminary treatment, flow equalizing facilities or
interceptors are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be effectively
operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective condition
by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be available for inspection by
the city at all reasonable times.



   (L)   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control structure, together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation  sampling and measurement of
the wastes. The structures and equipment when required shall be constructed
at the owner’s expense in accordance with plans approved by the city and
shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (M)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, and shall be determined at the control
structure provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control structures.



      (1)   In the event that no special structure has been
required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls
of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be
taken.



      (2)   Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses will be obtained from 24-hour composite of all outfalls whereas
pH’s will be determined from periodic grab samples.



   (N)   The city may conduct tests as are necessary to enforce this
section, and employees of the city may enter upon any property for the
purpose of taking samples, obtaining information or conducting surveys or
investigations relating to the enforcement.



      (1)   Entry shall be made during operating hours unless
circumstances require otherwise. In all cases where tests are conducted by
the city for the purpose of checking to determine if a previously found
violation of this section has been corrected, the cost of the tests shall be
charged to the user and added to the user’s sewer charge.



      (2)   In those cases where the city determines that the nature
of volume of a particular user’s sewage requires more frequent than normal
testing, the city may charge the user for the test, after giving the user ten
days’ written notice of its intention to do so, and the cost thereof shall
be added to the user’s sewer charge.



      (3)   In any case where industrial wastes are discharged to a
public sewer, the city may require the user at his or her own expense to test
his or her discharge on a regular basis and to report the test results to the
city within a reasonable time.



      (4)   All the tests shall be ordered by the city and shall be
conducted by qualified personnel and in accordance with the standards set out
in division (M) above.



   (O)   Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the sewage
works, directly or through another disposal system, or to any place from
which the waste may enter the treatment works, shall be reported to the city
by the persons responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of
the premises where the discharge occurred, immediately upon obtaining
knowledge of the fact of the discharge.



   (P)   New connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be
prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream
facilities, including capacity for flow, BOD and suspended solids.



   (Q)   No statement contained herein shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern, in accordance with applicable ordinances and any
supplemental agreement with the city, and providing that national categorical
pretreatment standards and the city’s NPDES/SDS permit limitations are not
violated.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-2)  (Ord 7, passed 9-23-1988; Ord. 19, passed
11-22-1990; Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.03  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 52.02, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the rules and regulations of the city,
and State Rule 6 MCAR 4.8040, entitled “Individual Sewage Treatment System
Standards”.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-3)



§ 52.04  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, unless authorized, to uncover,
make any connections with or openings into, use, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining the written permit
from the city.



   (B)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage to public sewer
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.



   (C)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building; except where two or more buildings are situated on one
parcel such that the parcel may not be subdivided; such a joint use private
sewer may be extended to the rear building or buildings and the whole
considered as one joint use private sewer. Special variances will be
considered by the Council.



   (D)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to
meet all requirements of this section.



   (E)   Unused septic tanks, cesspools, leaching pits and similar
devices and structures shall be backfilled or made safe and unusable in a
manner acceptable to the city.



   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of Water
Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 and applicable
American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Standards shall apply.



   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the
building drain shall be provided with a lifting device by an approved means
and discharged to the building sewer.



   (H)   It is unlawful for any person to make connections of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other source of
surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (I)   The construction of the building sewer and its connection into
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Code, the sewer specifications included herein or other applicable
rules and regulations and the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of
Practice No. 9 and the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM), all
the construction shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before
installations.



   (J)   Employees of the city shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and no
underground portions shall be covered before the final inspection is
completed. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or
its representative.



   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the city.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.05  MAIN AND LATERAL SEWER CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, unless authorized, to uncover,
make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from
the city.



   (B)   No sanitary or storm sewers shall be constructed in the city
(except house or building service sewers) except by the city or by others in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by a professional engineer.
No such sewers shall be considered to be a part of the public sewer system
unless accepted by the city.



   (C)   The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, methods
to be used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and
other work connected with the construction of sewers shall conform to the
requirements of the city.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.06  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the public sewer.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.07  AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this section. Those employees shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries except as is necessary to
determine the kind and source of the discharge to the public sewer.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the authorized employees of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.



   (C)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation and construction of public sewers.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-7)



§ 52.08  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this section shall
be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violation. It is unlawful for any person to continue
any violation beyond the time provided for herein. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the
city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of the
violation.



(2003 Code, § 3.30-8)  (Ord. 7, passed 9-23-1988)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 53:  ELECTRICAL SERVICE



Section



   53.01   Code requirement



   53.02   Electrical installations



   53.03   Point of delivery



   53.04   Only one occupancy served through one meter



   53.05   Security lights



   53.06   Aerial lines



   53.07   Underground service lines



   53.08   Service charges for temporary service



   53.09   Voltage fluctuations caused by customer



   53.10   Interruption of service



   53.11   Notice of trouble



   53.12   Non-standard service



   53.13   Additional rules and regulations



§ 53.01  CODE REQUIREMENT.



   All wiring, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and
performed strictly in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Failure
to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have
or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an
additional ground for termination of electrical service to any consumer.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-1)



§ 53.02  ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS.



   All electrical installations shall comply with the following, where
applicable.



   (A)   Motors of 20 HP or more must have line compensators on same;
provided, however, that the city may, at its option, make an exception if the
total connected motor load required is smaller than the consumer connected
load, and the motor starting current is less than the current corresponding
to the consumer’s total connected load.



   (B)   Any establishment having a total motor load of 125 HP or more
is required to have 440 volts for its motor load.



   (C)   All motor installations of 5 HP or less shall be supplied with
240 volt single phase energy except: motors of 1/2 HP or smaller may be 120
volt; or three-phase motors of 3 HP or more may be served from existing
secondary power circuits where only service wires and meters are required.



   (D)   The city shall make an installation charge for extraordinary
expenses required by a consumer.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.03  POINT OF DELIVERY.



   The point of delivery is the point, as designated by the city, on the
customer’s premises where current is to be delivered to building or
premises. All wiring and equipment beyond this point of delivery shall be
maintained by the customer.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-3)



§ 53.04  ONLY ONE OCCUPANCY SERVED THROUGH ONE METER.



   A separate meter is required for each residential household or
occupancy. Similarly, a separate metering installation is required for each
commercial or industrial establishment or occupancy. Where a heating system
or other service system supplies more than one occupancy, its electric usage
shall be billed under appropriate commercial rate.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-4)



§ 53.05  SECURITY LIGHTS.



   Upon written application by any person or business receiving electrical
service from the city, a mercury vapor security light will be installed on an
existing city distribution pole on which conductors with secondary voltage
are present. The city will install, own and maintain the lights. They will be
connected so that the energy consumed by them does not go through the
consumer’s meter. The sizes of lights and the monthly charge are designated
by city policy.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-5)



§ 53.06  AERIAL LINES.



   It shall be the general policy of the city due to soil conditions to
maintain overhead electrical service, primary and secondary, by way of
easement or lot lines. Easement shall be provided by home owner, builder or
developer for new construction. Maintenance of existing primary or secondary
shall be obtained by prescriptive easement. Secondary aerial services shall
be three-wire to the building installed by the city, and new services shall
be triplex. Existing service shall be changed as time and conditions of wire
dictate.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-6)



§ 53.07  UNDERGROUND SERVICE LINES.



   (A)   It shall be the general policy of the city that electrical
service to new areas of residential development shall be underground where
soil conditions allow.



      (1)   The city will provide a point of connection for each
building site. The point of connection shall be either on the lot line or
across an adjacent alley or utility easement.



      (2)   The home owner, builder or developer shall install his
or her underground service to the point of connection provided. The City Line
Department will make the terminal connections.



      (3)   The home owner, builder or developer shall grant an
easement to the city for placement of the necessary electrical facilities in
the location needed.



   (B)   The city will permit and will facilitate in so far as possible
the installation of underground service entrances by owners or builders to
existing overhead lines where underground distribution facilities are not
available.



      (1)   The city will provide a pole bearing secondary
conductors of the proper voltage at some point on the owner’s lot line or
across an adjacent alley or utility easement.



      (2)   The owner or builder shall have his service entrance
conductors installed to the pole and up the pole to the secondary level. The
conductors shall be protected on the pole by rigid electrical conduit with a
suitable weather head at the top. A rain type of usable disconnect of the
proper size shall be installed in the raceway on the pole as determined by
the city. Enough free conductor shall be left at the top to reach the
secondaries in their existing position. The neutral conductor shall be
identified.



      (3)   City personnel will attach the service conductors to the
city secondary line.



      (4)   The meter location shall be determined by the City Line
Department.



      (5)   If the city replaces the overhead line with underground
facilities later, it will attempt to provide service to the same location and
will make whatever rearrangement of the owner’s service that is necessary
to reconnect it to the new facilities.



   (C)   The city shall give consideration to the installation of
buried distribution facilities in areas where groups of home owners petition
to have the city remove its overhead facilities and replace them with
underground facilities.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the interested home
owners to obtain written assurance of the willingness of all property owners
involved to accomplish the change in their service entrance within a
reasonable time and to assume its total cost.



      (2)   The area involved or segment of line involved must be
large enough to be practical for consideration.



      (3)   If in the judgment of the city it is not practical,
feasible or expedient to make the conversion reasonably soon after the
request is made, the matter will be deferred until a time that mutual consent
of all home owners involved and the city exists for proceeding with the
conversion.



   (D)   The city may, at its discretion, improve and storm proof its
distribution facilities through the replacement of overhead facilities with
buried facilities.



      (1)   When such a change is planned in a given area, all home
owners involved will be notified in writing that they must install
underground services. Such a notice will be given not less than six months
before the overhead facilities will be removed, at which time the new
services must be in use in order to avoid loss of electrical service.



      (2)   When such a conversion is planned and the notice given,
home owners must make the change to underground service entrance at their own
expense.



      (3)   Exceptions to the provisions of division (D)(2) above
will be made in those cases where the home owners existing service entrance
has the full capacity as indicated by the latest provisions of the National
Electrical Code for the house and occupancy involved. In those cases, the
city will furnish and install the necessary underground service entrance
conductors from the point of connection to the consumer’s service
equipment. This shall be done at city expense but the service entrance shall
become the property of the consumer who shall be responsible for all future
repairs or maintenance on it. The home owner will be responsible for removal
of his or her existing overhead service entrance and for any other change or
rearrangement of the service equipment needed or desired.



   (E)   All commercial, industrial or other special services whether
being considered for overhead or underground construction shall be given
individual study and planning.



   (F)   The city recommends that all residential underground services
be of 200-amp capacity.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-7)



§ 53.08  SERVICE CHARGES FOR TEMPORARY SERVICE.



   Customers requiring electric service on a temporary basis may be
required by the city to pay all costs for connection and disconnection
incidental to the supplying and removing of service. This rule applies to
circuses, carnivals, fairs and the like.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-8)



§ 53.09  VOLTAGE FLUCTUATIONS CAUSED BY CUSTOMER.



   Electric service shall not be used in such a manner as to cause unusual
fluctuations or disturbances to city’s system. The city may require the
customer, at his or her own expense, to install suitable apparatus which will
reasonably limit the fluctuations.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-9)



§ 53.10  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   The city will use reasonable diligence to provide a regular and
uninterrupted supply of power, but in case the supply of power should be
interrupted or disturbed for any cause, the city shall not be liable for
damages resulting therefrom.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-10)



§ 53.11  NOTICE OF TROUBLE.



   The customer shall notify the city immediately should the service be
unsatisfactory for any reason, or should there be any defects, trouble or
accidents affecting the supply of electricity. The notices, if verbal, shall
be confirmed in writing.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-11)



§ 53.12  NON-STANDARD SERVICE.



   The customer shall pay the cost of any special installation necessary
to meet his or her peculiar requirements for service at other than standard
voltages, or for the supply of closer voltage regulation than required by
standard practice.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-12)



§ 53.13  ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may, by resolution, adopt additional rules and regulations
relating to placement, size and type of equipment as it, in its discretion,
deems necessary or desirable. Copies of the additional rules and regulations
shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, and uniformly enforced.



(2003 Code, § 3.40-13)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL STREET/TRAFFIC PROVISIONS



      71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      72.   PARKING AND STOPPING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL STREET/TRAFFIC PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Application



   70.03   Scope and orders of officers



   70.04   Traffic and parking control



   70.05   Load limits



   70.06   Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction



   70.07   Statutes adopted



   70.08   Truck route



   70.09   Bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and
related devices



   70.10   Exhibition driving



   70.11   Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal



   70.12   Excessive vehicle noise




Streets and Sidewalks




   70.25   Ice and snow on public sidewalks



   70.26   Obstructions in streets



   70.27   Grass, weeds and trees



   70.28   Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral
installation



   70.29   Curb and gutter, street and sidewalk painting or coloring



   70.30   Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as otherwise defined in the city code, or where the context
clearly indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in M.S.
Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable to
this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 7.01)



§ 70.02  APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to the drivers of all
vehicles and animals upon streets, including, but not limited to, those owned
or operated by the United States, the state or any county, town, city,
district or other political subdivision.



(2003 Code, § 7.02)



§ 70.03  SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter relate exclusively to
the streets and alleys in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles
refer exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon the streets
and alleys.



   (B)   Orders of an officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic.



(2003 Code, § 7.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.



   (A)   Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or
maintained for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall first have
approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided in this section;
provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, the
marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.



   (B)   Temporary restrictions. The city, acting through the Chief of
Police, may temporarily restrict traffic or parking for any private, public
or experimental purpose. It is the duty of the Chief of Police to so restrict
traffic or parking when a hazardous condition arises or is observed.



   (C)   Traffic restrictions and prohibitions. It is a misdemeanor for
any person to drive a vehicle contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions
painted on any street, or contrary to sign-posted, fenced or barricaded
restrictions or prohibitions.



   (D)   Parking restrictions and prohibitions. It is unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle, except an emergency vehicle, contrary to lane
restrictions or prohibitions painted on any curb, or contrary to signposted,
fenced or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.



   (E)   Damaging or moving markings. It is a misdemeanor for any
person to deface, mar, damage, move, remove or in any way tamper with any
structure, work, material, equipment, tools, sign, signal, barricade, fence,
painting or appurtenance in any street unless the person has written
permission from the city or is an agent, employee or contractor for the city,
or other authority having jurisdiction over a particular street, and acting
within the authority or scope of a contract with the city or other authority.



(2003 Code, § 7.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   The City Manager, upon the recommendation of the Public Works
Director, may from time to time impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or
all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or desirable.



   (B)   The limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads
are limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon.



   (C)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a vehicle on any
street in violation of the limitation so posted; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to emergency vehicles of public utilities used for
repairing its plant or equipment, nor shall it apply to roads paved with
concrete cement.



(2003 Code, § 7.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.06  LIMITING TIME OF RAILWAY-STREET CROSSING OBSTRUCTION.



   It is a misdemeanor for any person operating or in charge of a railroad
train, car, engine, locomotive or other railroad equipment, or combination
thereof, to so operate, park or leave the same standing upon the railroad at
its intersection with a street, so as to prevent unobstructed vehicular
traffic on the street for a period longer than ten minutes.



(2003 Code, § 7.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  STATUTES ADOPTED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the regulatory and
procedural provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to
time (commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic Regulation Act) and M.S.
Chapter 171, as amended through Laws 1995, as it may be amended from time to
time, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the
penalty provisions thereof.



(2003 Code, § 7.30)  (Ord. 64, passed 5-31-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  TRUCK ROUTE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural
implement, truck over 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, truck-trailer,
tractor-trailer or truck tractor in through traffic, upon any street, except
those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck routes.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, THROUGH TRAFFIC means
originating without the city and with a destination without the city, as
distinguished from LOCAL TRAFFIC, which means traffic either originating or
having a destination within the city.



(2003 Code, § 7.31)  (Ord. 81, passed 12-18-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES AND RELATED
DEVICES.



   (A)   Traffic laws apply. Every person riding a bicycle upon a
roadway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except as to special
regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this chapter
which by their nature can have no application.



   (B)   Manner and number riding.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to
ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



      (2)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except on a baby
seat attached to the bicycle, provided that the seat is equipped with a
harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is
provided against the child’s feet hitting the spokes of the wheel or in a
seat attached to the bicycle operator.



   (C)   Hitching rides. It is unlawful for any person riding upon any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line, skates, toboggan, sled, skateboard
or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.



   (D)   Where to ride.



      (1)   Every person operating a bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, in-line skates or skateboard upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



      (2)   Persons riding the devices noted in division (D)(1)
above, shall not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or the devices.



      (3)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a roadway, riders or operators of the devices noted in division
(D)(1) above, shall use the paths, and shall not use the roadway.



   (E)   Right-of-way; sidewalks. Whenever a person is riding a bicycle
or operating any of the other devices noted in division (C) above, upon a
sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian; provided,
that it is unlawful for any person to ride the devices on a sidewalk in a
Business District or to park a bicycle or coaster upon a sidewalk except
where parking stalls have been provided.



   (F)   Carrying articles. It is unlawful for any person operating a
bicycle or coaster to carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the
driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.



(2003 Code, § 7.32)  (Ord. 40, passed 7-1-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.10  EXHIBITION DRIVING.



   (A)   Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition
driving when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates or turns
at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears to
grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding, or, as to
two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact
with the ground or roadway surface.



   (B)   Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any
exhibition driving on any street, parking lot or other public or private
property, except when an emergency creates necessity for the operation to
prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section
shall not apply to driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a
RACETRACK means any track or premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses,
dogs or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for
an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a
consideration for admission.



(2003 Code, § 7.33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.11  DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.



   It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic control
device by driving upon or through any private property.



(2003 Code, § 7.34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.12  EXCESSIVE VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.



         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort and repose of
any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property’s value;



         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor
vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order; or



         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.693, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules parts
7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute and these rules may be amended
from time to time, which establish motor vehicle noise standards.



      ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE.  A Dynamic Brake, rake Brake, Jacobs
Brake, C-Brake, Paccar Brake, transmission brake or other similar engine
retarding brake system which alters the normal compression of the engine and
subsequently releases that compression.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or
permit the discharge of the exhaust on any motor vehicle except through a
muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies
with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (C)   It is unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally
use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or
alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise from the
engine because of an illegally modified or defective exhaust system, except
in any emergency.



   (D)   M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693, as they may be amended from time
to time (motor vehicle noise limits) and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through
7030.1050, as these statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference.



   (E)   Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” may be
installed at locations deemed appropriate by the Council to advise motorists
of the prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign stating
“VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” shall be installed on a state highway
without a permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this section are in full force and effect even if no signs are
installed.



   (F)   It is the intention of the Council that all future amendments
to any statutes and rules referenced or adopted by reference in this section
are also referenced or adopted by reference as if they had been in existence
at the time this section was adopted.



(2003 Code, § 7.67)  (Ord. 112, passed 2-28-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99




STREETS AND SIDEWALKS




§ 70.25  ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon
public sidewalks in the business district is hereby declared to constitute a
public nuisance, and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting
private property within 12 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to be
deposited.



   (B)   City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed
from all public sidewalks, beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to
fall, all snow or ice which may be discovered thereon, and it shall keep a
record of the cost of the removal and the private property adjacent to which
the accumulations were found and removed.



   (C)   Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Manager shall, upon
direction of the Council, and on receipt of the information provided for in
the preceding division (B), extend the cost of the removal of snow or ice as
a special assessment against the lots or parcel of ground abutting on walks
which were cleared, and the special assessments shall at the time of
certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as other
special assessments are certified and collected.



   (D)   Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Manager shall, in the
alternative, upon direction of the Council, bring suit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to
which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above, the cost of
clearing and the cost and disbursement of a civil action therefor.



(2003 Code, § 7.05)



§ 70.26  OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS.



   (A)   Obstructions. It is a misdemeanor for any person to place,
deposit, display or offer for sale, any fence, goods or other obstructions
upon, over, across or under any street without first having obtained a
written permit from the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects
with the terms and conditions of the permit, and taking precautionary
measures for the protection of the public. An electrical cord or device of
any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation, within the
definition of an obstruction.



   (B)   Fires. It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain
a fire upon a street.



   (C)   Dumping in streets. It is a misdemeanor for any person to
throw or deposit in any street any nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans,
discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree
limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other
petroleum products, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious
chemical thereon. It is a violation of this section to haul any such
material, inadequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same to
fall upon streets. It is also a violation of this section to place or store
any building materials or waste resulting from building construction or
demolition on any street without first having obtained a written permit from
the Council.



   (D)   Signs and other structures. It is a misdemeanor for any person
to place or maintain a sign, advertisement or other structure in any street
without first having obtained a written permit from the Council. In a
district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises special permission
allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the street may
be granted upon such terms and conditions as may be set forth in the zoning
or construction provisions of the city code.



   (E)   Placing snow or ice in a roadway or on a sidewalk.



      (1)   It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a
specific contract with the city or without special permission from the City
Manager, to remove snow or ice from private property and place the same in
any roadway, on a sidewalk, parking lot or open areas near fire hydrants.



      (2)   Where permission is granted by the City Manager, the
person to whom the permission is granted shall be initially responsible for
payment of all direct or indirect costs of removing the snow or ice from the
street or sidewalk. If not paid, collection shall be by civil action or
assessment against the benefitted property as any other special assessment.



   (F)   Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in
violation of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.



   (G)   Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the
provisions of this section, the Council may impose insurance or bonding
conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or
private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding the persons and
property. The insurance or bond shall also protect the city from any suit,
action or cause of action arising by reason of the obstruction.



(2003 Code, § 7.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.27  GRASS, WEEDS AND TREES.



   (A)   City to control tree planting (standards). The city shall have
control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging,
all the streets or other public property. The city may establish and enforce
uniform standards relating to the kinds and types of trees to be planted and
the placement thereof. The standards shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Manager and may be revised from time to time by action of the
Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager.



   (B)   Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds and maintain
trees and shrubs.



      (1)   Every owner of property abutting on any street shall
cause the grass and weeds to be cut from the line of the property nearest to
the street to the center of the street.



      (2)   If the grass or weeds in such a place attain a height in
excess of six inches, it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply
with this division (B).



      (3)   It shall also be the duty of every owner and every
occupant of property to keep all trees, on the property owned or occupied,
and overhanging any sidewalk, street or alley, so trimmed that no branches
are closer to the curbline or pavement edge of any street or alley than 14
feet, and so that no branches are closer to the sidewalk than eight feet.



      (4)   All limbs of trees not kept trimmed as provided herein
are declared to constitute a public nuisance.



   (C)   City may order work done. The city may, in cases of failure to
comply with this section, perform the work with employees of the city,
keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or parcel
of land abutting upon the street.



   (D)   Assessment.



      (1)   If the maintenance work is performed by the city as set
forth in the foregoing division (C), the City Manager shall forthwith upon
completion thereof ascertain the cost attributable to each lot, piece or
parcel of abutting land. The City Manager shall, at the next regular meeting
thereof, present the certificate to the Council and obtain its approval
thereof.



      (2)   When the certificate has been approved, it shall be
extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against the
abutting land and the special assessment shall, at the time of certifying
taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for collection as other special
assessments are certified and collected.



(2003 Code, § 7.08)  (Ord. 18, passed 8-24-1990)



§ 70.28  REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the
improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if the petition
contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base,
or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have
been made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the
curb, if the area along the street will be served by the utilities installed
in the street.



   (B)   Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer
system shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to
platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously
with construction of mains.



   (C)   Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section
only if it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon the notice and
hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.



(2003 Code, § 7.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.29  CURB AND GUTTER, STREET AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.



   It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street,
sidewalk or curb and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color
any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same
may be done by city employees acting within the course or scope of their
employment; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing, or uniformly painted house
numbers, as such coloring may be approved by the City Manager.



(2003 Code, § 7.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.30  MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized vehicle,
except a wheelchair powered by electricity and occupied by a disabled person,
on any public sidewalk or public property designated for use as a pedestrian
walkway or bicycle trail, except when crossing the same for ingress and
egress through a curb cut to property lying on the other side thereof.



(2003 Code, § 7.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 71:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



   71.01   Snowmobile traffic control and regulations



   71.02   Four-wheel, all-terrain vehicles and motorized golf carts



§ 71.01  SNOWMOBILE TRAFFIC CONTROL AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE.  A device which, when
pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor
to be disengaged from the driving mechanism.



      OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a
snowmobile.



      OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a snowmobile.



      OWNER.  A person, other than a lien holder having the property
in or title to a snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.



      SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on
snow or ice steered by skis or runners.



   (B)   Scope of application. Notwithstanding provisions of this
section to the contrary, this section shall apply to control of traffic and
regulation of that certain class of vehicles falling within the definition of
snowmobiles as to matters set forth herein. All provisions of this section,
not relating to matters herein stated, apply as equally to snowmobiles as
other vehicles.



   (C)   Operation. Except as otherwise herein permitted, it is
unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile not licensed as a motor
vehicle as follows:



      (1)   On the portion of any right-of-way of any public
highway, street, road, trail or alley used for motor vehicle travel, except
upon the most right-hand lane of a street or alley and may in passing or
making a left-hand turn, operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle
traffic in the same direction. A snowmobile may also be operated upon the
ditch bottom or the outside bank of trunk, county state-aid and county
highways where the highways are so configured within the corporate limits;



      (2)   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel;



      (3)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way;



      (4)   On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of the property;



      (5)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all surrounding circumstances;



      (6)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner
or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any
person or property;



      (7)   During the hours from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any
day, closer than 100 feet to any dwelling which is usually occupied by one or
more persons; provided, however, that snowmobile operation shall be permitted
during hours when traveling directly to or from the residence of the operator
and the nearest city limits line at a rate of speed not in excess of 15 mph;



      (8)   So as to tow any person or thing except through use of a
rigid towbar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;



      (9)   At any place while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs as defined in M.S. § 169.121, as it may be amended from time to time,
which is hereby incorporated herein by reference; or



      (10)   Within 100 feet of any pedestrian, fisherman, skating
rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with the use or
endanger other persons or property.



   (D)   Special orders. In addition to the regulations provided in
division (C) above, it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on any public
place where prohibited by order of the city. The City Manager shall have the
power, by written order, to prohibit the operation whenever in his or her
discretion the same would be likely to produce damage to property or endanger
the safety or repose of other persons. Those areas shall be appropriately
sign-posted before the order shall become effective.



   (E)   Direct crossings. A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a
street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:



      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90
degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;



      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way;



      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard;



      (4)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is
made only at an intersection of the street or highway with another public
street or highway; and



      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced
visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on.



   (F)   Yielding the right-of-way. It is unlawful for any person
operating a snowmobile to enter any intersection without yielding the
right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close
to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.



   (G)   Locking vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to leave a
snowmobile on a public place unless he or she shall lock the ignition, remove
the key and take the same with him or her.



   (H)   Emergencies. Notwithstanding the prohibition of operating a
snowmobile upon a roadway to the contrary, a snowmobile may be operated on a
public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when, at
locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.



   (I)   Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run
over or kill any animal with a snowmobile.



   (J)   Signal from officer to stop. It is unlawful for a snowmobile
operator, after having received a visible or audible signal from any law
enforcement officer to come to a stop, to: operate a snowmobile in willful or
wanton disregard of the signal; interfere with or endanger the law
enforcement officer or any other person or vehicle; or increase his or her
speed or attempt to flee or elude the officer.



   (K)   Certain statutes adopted. M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.90, as it
may be amended from time to time, inclusive, as amended in 1980, together
with rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, are hereby adopted by
reference, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof, except as otherwise
provided herein.



(2003 Code, § 7.35)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.02  FOUR-WHEEL, ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CLASS 1 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. An all-terrain vehicle that has a
total dry weight of less than 900 pounds.



      CLASS 2 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. An all-terrain vehicle that has a
total dry weight of 900 to 1,500 pounds.



      FOUR-WHEEL ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A four-wheel all-terrain vehicle
is a motorized flotation-tired vehicle with four low-pressure tires that is
limited in engine displacement to less than 800 cubic centimeters, and
includes Class 1 and Class 2 all-terrain vehicles.



   (B)   Operation prohibited. No motorized golf carts or Class 1
four-wheel all-terrain vehicles shall be operated in the City of Granite
Falls at any time on state or federal highways within the city limits or on
Prentice Street from 6th Avenue to 9th Avenue, on 9th Avenue from Prentice
Street to Granite Street, and on Granite Street from 9th Avenue to the
intersection of Highway 212. No motorized golf carts or Class 1 or Class 2
four-wheel all-terrain vehicles shall be operated in the City of Granite
Falls on streets or alleys under the jurisdiction of the city without a valid
city-issued permit.



   (C)   Permits.



      (1)   Permits required.  No person shall operate a motorized
golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle on streets and alleys within the
city limits or under the jurisdiction of the city without first obtaining a
written permit from the city, except no permits will be required for parades.
Said permits shall prohibit operation of a motorized golf cart or Class 1
four-wheel all-terrain vehicle on state and federal highways within the city
limits; and also shall prohibit operation on school property and city park
property and as otherwise noted in division (B). Said permits shall prohibit
operation of a motorized golf cart or Class 1 four-wheel all-terrain vehicle
from 8:00 p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever is earlier, until
6:00 a.m. or one-half hour before sunrise, whichever is later.  A sticker or
other proof of the existence of a current valid permit provided by the city
shall be displayed on the vehicle where designated by the city.



      (2)   Restriction of permits.  Permits are restricted to
persons who are 18 years of age or older.



      (3)   Application form.  Applications for a permit to operate
a motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle shall be made to the
City Clerk on forms furnished by the city.



      (4)   Permit period.  Permits shall be issued for periods of
one calendar year commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each
year, and may be annually renewed.



      (5)   Permit fee.  A permit fee will be included in the rate
resolution and will be required to be paid when an application for a permit
is submitted to the City Motor Vehicle Registrar. The permit fee will not be
prorated if issued after January 1 during any calendar year.



      (6)   Permit revocation.  A permit may be revoked at any time
by court order or the Yellow Medicine or Chippewa County Sheriff or Chief of
Police for the City of Granite Falls if there is evidence that the permittee
cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain
vehicle or has not complied with the terms of this section for which the
permit has been issued.



      (7)   Work endorsement.  The City Motor Vehicle Registrar may
issue a permit with a work endorsement upon the request of an applicant who
demonstrates that the golf cart, or Class 1 or Class 2 four-wheel all-terrain
vehicle, will be used for work purposes.  Said work endorsement shall allow
the permittee to operate said vehicle for work purposes at any time on the
streets and alleys within the city limits of City of Granite Falls, including
school property and city park property, which are not otherwise restricted by
federal, state or county laws, rules or regulations.



   (D)   Insurance required.  Each applicant for a permit shall be
required to furnish evidence of insurance equivalent to the insurance
required for operation of a motorcycle under the provisions of M.S. §
65B.48(5).



   (E)   Operation of vehicles.



      (1)   Where operation is permitted.  Permittees will be
allowed to operate their golf carts or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles on all
streets and alleys within the city limits which are under the jurisdiction of
the city, except as herein otherwise prohibited and also except school
property and city park property. The City Motor Vehicle Registrar shall
prepare, post and provide to each permittee a city map which identifies the
streets and alleys within the city limits which are under the jurisdiction of
the City of Granite Falls and shall also designate such streets within the
city limits upon which operation is prohibited.



      (2)   Times of operation.  Motorized golf carts and Class 1
four-wheel all-terrain vehicles may not be operated on designated roadways
from 8:00 p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever is earlier, until
6:00 a.m. or one-half hour before sunrise, whichever is later. They shall not
be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather,
smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient
light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500
feet.



      (3)   Speed limit.  The maximum speed at which a motorized
golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle may be operated as permitted
under the provisions of this section shall not exceed posted speed limits.



      (4)   Required equipment. Motorized golf carts shall display
the slow moving vehicle emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.522.  Four-wheel
all-terrain vehicles shall display a safety flag (minimum six inches by ten
inches).  The top of the flag shall be a minimum of six feet from the
ground.  Motorized golf carts and four-wheel all-terrain vehicles shall have
the equipment required by M.S. §§ 84.92 to 84.929, as permitted in this
section, on the streets and alleys within the city limits which are under the
jurisdiction of the city.



      (5)   Passengers.  Permittees shall be allowed to carry one
passenger who is seated in a separate seat from the one occupied by the
driver, provided that the permittee and passenger follow the provisions of
M.S. § 84.9257 including, but not limited to age requirements for wearing a
safety helmet on a Class 1 all-terrain vehicle, and use of a seat belt
provided by the manufacturer on a Class 2 all-terrain vehicle.



      (6)   Noise. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to create
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which is in excess of 96 decibels and
which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other
persons.



   (F)   Traffic laws.



      (1)   Application of traffic laws. Every person operating a
motorized golf cart or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle, under permit, in the
city has all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicles
under the provisions of M.S. §§ 84.92 to 84.929 and M.S. Chapter 169, and
traffic ordinances and laws of the city, except when those provisions cannot
reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts or four-wheel all-terrain
vehicles and except as otherwise specifically provided in this section.



      (2)   Non-application of certain laws. The provisions of M.S.
Chapter 171 are not applicable to persons operating motorized golf carts or
four-wheel all-terrain vehicles under permits issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section. The provisions of M.S. Chapter 169 relating to
equipment on vehicles, except for the requirements of M.S. §§ 84.92 to
84.929 and 169.70, are not applicable to motorized golf carts or four-wheel
all-terrain vehicles operated under permits issued pursuant to the provisions
of this section.



(2003 Code, § 7.36) (Ord. 183, passed 5-1-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING AND STOPPING REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Presumption



   72.02   General parking prohibitions



   72.03   Parking of certain vehicles prohibited



   72.04   Unauthorized removal



   72.05   Direction to proceed



   72.06   Parallel parking



   72.07   Angle parking



   72.08   Streets without curb



   72.09   Parking hours



   72.10   Snow removal



   72.11   Truck parking



   72.12   Parking rules in city parking lots



   72.13   Impounding and removing vehicles



   72.14   Unattended vehicle



   72.15   Vehicle repair on street



   72.16   Physically disabled parking



   72.17   Parking on private property without consent



§ 72.01  PRESUMPTION.



   As to any vehicle parking in violation of this chapter when the driver
thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same,
or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner.



(2003 Code, § 7.50)



§ 72.02  GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of
the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



   (E)   On a crosswalk;



   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;



   (G)   In a sign-posted fire lane;



   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;



   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance when properly sign-posted;



   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street, excavation or obstruction
when the stopping, standing or marking would obstruct traffic;



   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (M)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;



   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict
stopping, marking or both;



   (O)   In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so
long as reasonably necessary for the loading and unloading to or from
adjacent premises;



   (P)   On any boulevard which has been curbed; or



   (Q)   On Chippewa County Highway 38 from the east city limits to the
junction of County State Aid Highway 5 and on County State Aid Highway 5 from
the junction of Chippewa County Highway 38 to the north city corporate limits.



(2003 Code, § 7.51) (Ord. 175, passed 7-5-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. The term RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE means any
of the following:



      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER.  A folding structure, mounted-on
wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses;



      (2)   MOTOR HOME.  A portable, temporary building to be used
for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle;



      (3)   PICK-UP COACH.  A structure designed to be mounted on a
truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation;



      (4)   TRAILER.  Any vehicle designed for carrying property or
passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle but
does not include a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semi-trailer combination
or an auxiliary axle on a motor vehicle which carries a portion of the weight
of the motor vehicle to which it is attached; or



      (5)   TRAVEL TRAILER.  A vehicular, portable structure built
on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified “travel trailer”
by the manufacturer of the trailer.



   (B)   Limitations.



      (1)   No person shall park any of the following described
vehicles upon any street, street right-of-way, alley or public parking lot
for more than 72 hours in any one seven calendar day period unless otherwise
provided:



         (a)   Trucks of a capacity of more than one ton, not to
exceed 12,000 pounds gross weight, according to the manufacturer’s rating;



         (b)   Trucks having an overall length of more than 20
feet, or width at any point of more than six feet, unless greater according
to original manufacturer’s rating or specification; and



         (c)   Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, trailers,
boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up coaches, motor homes, camping
trailers or any heavy machinery.



      (2)   It is further provided that during periods of time as
the vehicle is authorized to be parked upon any street, street right-of-way,
alley or public parking lot, they shall nonetheless not be occupied as living
quarters.



      (3)   The limitations contained in this division (B) do not
apply to parking of a trailer, whether attached to a towing vehicle or not,
which trailer is used for commercial purposes and the parking of the trailer,
when the same is actively engaged in commercial activity and is at an
adjacent site, but only to the extent that the commercial activity
necessitates the use of the trailer and only for periods during which the
commercial activity is actually occurring. Trailers shall not be left
unattended unless the same has proper reflectors or other safety hazard
markers.



(2003 Code, § 7.52)  (Ord. 81, passed 12-18-1998)



§ 72.04  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.



   It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by the person
into any prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.



(2003 Code, § 7.53)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  DIRECTION TO PROCEED.



   It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street
when directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.



(2003 Code, § 7.54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  PARALLEL PARKING.



   Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by
curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a
two-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with
the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb, and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the
street, the vehicle shall be within the markings, front and rear; provided
that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked, except that the
left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches
from the left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and with
respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the
flow of traffic upon the one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in
violation of this section.



(2003 Code, § 7.55)



§ 72.07  ANGLE PARKING.



   Where angle parking has been established by Council resolution, and is
allowed, as shown by curb narking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle
stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with
the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the
curb or street, provided that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be
the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way traffic; and
it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.



(2003 Code, § 7.56)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  STREETS WITHOUT CURB.



   Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or parked
parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled part of
the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.



(2003 Code, § 7.57)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  PARKING HOURS.



   Parking on streets shall be limited as follows.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess of 72 hours
unless otherwise further restricted by other provisions of the city code in
which case the more restrictive revisions shall apply.



   (B)   The Manager may, when authorized by resolution of the Council,
designate certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as
prohibited parking zones, or five-minute, ten-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute,
one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-hour, eight-hour, morning or afternoon
rush hour limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones
so established. The zones shall be established whenever necessary for the
convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a free
flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave
standing any vehicle in a prohibited parking zone, for a period of time in
excess of the sign-posted limitation, or during sign-posted hours of
prohibited parking.



(2003 Code, § 7.58)  (Ord. 81, passed 12-18-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.10  SNOW REMOVAL.



   (A)   In order to facilitate snow removal from the public streets of
the city from November 1 through April 1 of each year, no person shall park,
nor shall any motor vehicle be parked on any street for a period of time that
results in the vehicle being plowed in or plowed around by a city-owned or
contracted snow removal vehicle or piece of equipment.



   (B)   Additionally, parking is not allowed on any public street when
four inches or more of snow has fallen until the street has been plowed curb
to curb. The official depth for the purpose of this provision shall be
determined by the city, which determination shall be final and not subject to
appeal.



   (C)   In addition to any other provisions provided in this code, any
vehicle parked in violation of this chapter may be towed or removed summarily
without notice to the owner or operator thereof. The vehicle shall be removed
and stored in a parking lot or facility designated by the Police Department.



   (D)   The owner of the vehicle which is towed shall not be allowed
to redeem the same until all costs of removing, towing and storage shall be
paid to any party having the claim for services rendered in the removing,
towing and storing of the motor vehicle.



   (E)   The city shall not be responsible for any damage to a vehicle
removed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition to any
of the foregoing, the Public Works Director or his or her designee is also
hereby authorized to post no parking signs for snow removal along streets
where snow removal operations will require further use of the street by snow
plowing and snow removal equipment.



   (F)   No person shall park any vehicle nor leave any vehicle which
was parked at the time of the posting for a period of more than two hours
thereafter until the snow removal operations have been completed and the
signs removed.



(2003 Code, § 7.59)  (Ord. 158, passed 2-22-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.11  TRUCK PARKING.



   (A)   It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any
street, city-owned parking lot, or other public property, except such as are
specifically designated by the Council by resolution and sign-posted.



   (B)   It is unlawful to park a truck (other than a one-ton truck not
exceeding 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, or less), truck-trailer,
tractor-trailer or truck-tractor within an area zoned as a residential
district except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same, and then
only during such time as is reasonably necessary for the activity.



   (C)   It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than
12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight upon any street in the business district
except streets as specifically designated by the Council by resolution and
sign-posted, but parking of the vehicle for a period of not more than 20
minutes shall be permitted in the space for the purpose of necessary access
to abutting property while actively loading or unloading when the access
cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where
truck parking is not so restricted.



   (D)   It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer or semi-tractor on any
street, or within 300 feet of the occupied dwelling of another, with any
engine thereon running, for a period of more than one hour.



(2003 Code, § 7.60)  (Ord. 81, passed 12-18-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.12  PARKING RULES IN CITY PARKING LOTS.



   In addition to any other rules and restrictions imposed by this chapter
with respect to parking in city-owned parking lots, the Council may limit the
sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking and
prescribed method of parking, provided that the further limitations and
restrictions are marked or sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful to park or
leave standing any vehicle backed into a parking place, to drive in a
direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by “one-way” signs or
arrows, or to park any vehicle in any city-owned parking lot contrary to the
restrictions or limitations marked or sign-posted therein or as otherwise
provided in this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 7.61)  (Ord. 81, passed 12-18-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.13  IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street
or city-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, the officer
is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
street or city-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, the
officer is hereby authorized to impound the unlawfully parked vehicle and to
provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage
or other facility or place of safety; provided, that if any charge shall be
placed against the vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone
called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from
that place of storage or safekeeping.



(2003 Code, § 7.62)



§ 72.14  UNATTENDED VEHICLE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle
unattended while the engine is running.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle
unattended with the key in the ignition.



(2003 Code, § 7.63)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.15  VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.



   It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle
any vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service the
vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon, but in
no event for more than 24 hours.



(2003 Code, § 7.64)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.16  PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING.



   (A)   Statutory parking privileges for physically disabled shall be
strictly observed and enforced. Police officers are authorized to tag
vehicles on either private or public property in violation of the statutory
privileges.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically
disabled, to stop, park or leave standing, a motor vehicle: in a sign-posted
fire lane at any time; or in lanes where, and during hours as parking is
prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush
hours.



(2003 Code, § 7.65)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.17  PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT.



   It is a misdemeanor to park or abandon a motor vehicle on the property
of another, or upon an area developed as an off-street parking facility,
without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of any such
property or facility.



(2003 Code, § 7.66)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      91.   ANIMAL REGULATIONS



      92.   CEMETERY PROVISIONS



      93.   FAIR HOUSING



      94.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      95.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



      96.   RIGHT-OF-WAY PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 90:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   90.01   Public parks



   90.02   Bathing and skating



   90.03   Obstructions on public property



   90.04   Junk cars, furniture, household furnishings and appliances
stored on public or private property



   90.05   Prohibited use and parking of mobile homes, recreational
camping vehicles, trailers, boats and boat trailers



   90.06   Abandoning a motor vehicle



§ 90.01  PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   Adoption. The Council may by resolution adopt, and from time
to time amend, rules and regulations governing public parks. It is unlawful
to violate rules and regulations as are conspicuously sign-posted in the
parks.



   (B)   Unlawful acts. In addition to the foregoing, it is unlawful
for any person to:



      (1)   Conduct any activity or use of any city park which will
unreasonably interfere with, or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the city park other than its intended use; or



      (2)   Be within the confines of any city park during the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except as otherwise herein provided.



   (C)   Permit required. The use of Memorial Park, Rice or East
Granite Park, and Campsite Park by any group of individuals numbering 25 or
greater, for any purpose whether private or public in nature, shall be by
permit only. The permit shall be issued by the City Clerk upon application
and satisfaction of the requirements hereinafter specified, provided that the
application is filed at least three days prior to the date of the use.



      (1)   Groups using the park will clean up the grounds where
the use occurred, and the grounds will be left in the same condition as
before the use, normal wear and tear of both the grounds and other facilities
provided excepted.



      (2)   The application for a permit shall show the nature of
the use, or type of event planned, the planned location of the use, the date
or dates of use, the number of individuals involved and the estimated time
period of the use.



   (D)   Exception. This section shall not apply to persons using
designated camping areas, restroom facilities and access roads to and from
the camping areas after the hours stated above, nor shall the hours apply to
holders of permits as provided for in division (C) above.



(2003 Code, § 8.43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.02  BATHING AND SKATING.



   (A)   Declared unsafe. The City Manager, in his or her discretion,
shall, during certain portions of the year, declare to be unsafe all bathing,
skating or swimming in or upon any portion of the Minnesota River within the
city limits. This warning shall be published for one week in the official
newspaper of the city, and thereafter, it is unlawful to bathe, swim or skate
in or upon any portions of the Minnesota River within the city limits.



   (B)   Length of time. The published notice shall state the length of
time that it is unlawful to bathe, skate or swim in or on that portion of the
Minnesota River within the city limits, but in no event shall the time period
extend longer than 30 days without republication.



(2003 Code, § 8.44)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.03  OBSTRUCTIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit,
display or offer for sale, any fence, goods or other obstructions upon, over,
across or under any public property without first having obtained a written
permit from the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the
terms and conditions of the permit, and taking precautionary measures for the
protection of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby
included, but not by way of limitation, within the definition of an
obstruction.



   (B)   Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a
fire upon public property.



   (C)   Dumping on public property. It is unlawful for any person to
throw or deposit on public property any nails, dirt, glass or glassware,
cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or
tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other
petroleum products, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious
chemicals thereon. It is a violation of this section to place or store any
building materials or waste resulting from building construction or
demolition on public property without first having obtained a written permit
from the Council.



   (D)   Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to
place or maintain a sign, advertisement or other structure on public property
without first having obtained a written permit from the Council.



   (E)   Snow or ice on public property. It is unlawful for any person
not acting under a contract with the city to dump snow or ice on public
property.



   (F)   Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in
violation of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.



   (G)   Condition.



      (1)   Before granting any permit under any of the provisions
of this section, the Council may impose the insurance or bonding conditions
thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property
or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding the persons and property.



      (2)   The insurance or bond shall also protect the city from
any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of the obstruction.



(2003 Code, § 8.45)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.04  JUNK CARS, FURNITURE, HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES STORED
ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   It is unlawful to park or store any unlicensed, unregistered
or inoperable motor vehicle, household furnishings or appliances, or
components hereof, on any property, public or private, unless housed within
lawfully erected building or unless located on the premises of a duly
recognized automobile dealer, an impound lot, whether private or public, the
premises of a vehicle repair shop or facility, the premises of a service
station (gasoline station), a towing company storage lot, or other facilities
which are duly screened or fenced and authorized for storage of the items
upon express written consent of the city.



   (B)   Any violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance and
upon ten days’ written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises on
which the material is found, the city may remove the same and certify the
cost of removal against the premises as any other special assessment.



(2003 Code, § 8.46)  (Ord. 57, passed 1-26-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.05  PROHIBITED USE AND PARKING OF MOBILE HOMES, RECREATIONAL CAMPING
VEHICLES, TRAILERS, BOATS AND BOAT TRAILERS.



   (A)   Definitions. The terms MOBILE HOME, RECREATIONAL CAMPING
VEHICLES and TRAILER shall mean and include the following definitions.



      CAMPING TRAILER.  A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses.



      MOTOR HOME.  A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle.



      PICK-UP COACH.  A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.



      TRAILER.  Any vehicle designed for carrying property or
passengers on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, but
does not include a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semi-trailer combination
or an auxiliary axle on a motor vehicle which carries a portion of the weight
of the motor vehicle to which it is attached.



      TRAVEL TRAILER.  A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified “travel trailer” by the
manufacturer of the trailer.



   (B)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home,
recreational camping vehicle, boat and boat trailer or other trailer upon
public or private property for human habitation except in a licensed mobile
home park.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to park or store a mobile
home, recreational camping vehicle, boat or boat trailer, or other trailer on
all portions of any lot in any “Residence District” (R-1, R-2 and RM)
except as follows:



         (a)   Within a garage or other accessory building duly
approved and authorized by the city code;



         (b)   Upon those portions of the property not lying
within either the “setback area” as defined by the city code, or that
portion of the property lying between the street and the front line or that
side of the home facing the street; and



         (c)   Upon those areas of the property that have been
specifically improved pursuant to the city code for driveway purposes,
whether paved or unpaved (herein “driveway”).



   (C)   Trailer parking.



      (1)   The limitations contained in this section do not apply
to parking of a trailer, whether attached to a towing vehicle or not, which
trailer is used for commercial purposes and the parking of the trailer, when
the same is actively engaged in commercial activity and is at an adjacent
site, but only to the extent that the commercial activity necessitates the
use of the trailer and only for periods during which the commercial activity
is actually occurring.



      (2)   Trailers shall not be left unattended unless the same
have proper reflectors or other safety hazard markers.



(2003 Code, § 8.47)  (Ord. 81, passed 12-18-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public
or private property without the consent of the person in control of the
property. For the purpose of this section, a MOTOR VEHICLE is as defined in
M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2003 Code, § 8.48)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMAL REGULATIONS



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Running at large



   91.03   License required



   91.04   License issuance, term and renewal



   91.05   Adoption of fees



   91.06   Tag required



   91.07   Animal pound



   91.08   Notice of impounding



   91.09   Right to hearing and release from animal pound



   91.10   Seizure by a citizen



   91.11   Immobilization of animals



   91.12   Other unlawful acts



   91.13   Summary destruction



   91.14   Rabies control, generally



   91.15   Reports of bite cases



   91.16   Responsibility of veterinarians



   91.17   Police dogs, seeing-eye dogs



   91.18   Animals in heat



   91.19   Limitation on number of animals in residential areas



   91.20   Exception to number of animals allowed in residential areas



   91.21   Multiple animal permit procedure



   91.22   Grandfather clause



   91.23   Feeding of deer prohibited



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all
fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal
kingdom. ANIMALS shall be classified as follows.



      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, the animals shall
include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters,



guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and
non-constricting reptiles or amphibians and other similar animals.



      (2)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly
considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or
which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health,
safety and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, the animals shall
include:



         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family
Felidae), including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars,
but excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats;



         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family
(family Canidae), including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs;



         (c)   Any crossbreeds, such as the crossbreed between a
wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated
house pet;



         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family,
including any skunk (whether or not de-scented), raccoon, squirrel or ferret,
but excluding those members otherwise defined as commonly accepted as
domesticated pets;



         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting or
inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families, including
rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators; and



         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed
above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise restrained or confined.



   CAT.  Both male and female and includes any animal of the feline kind.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  An animal which has caused injury to a person, or
which animal, by its actions, exhibits a propensity for causing imminent
danger to persons.



   DOG.  Both male and female and includes any animal of the dog kind.



   FARM ANIMALS.  Those animals associated with a farm or performing work
in an agricultural setting.  Unless otherwise defined, the animals shall
include members of the equestrian family (horses and mules), bovine family
(cows and bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens and turkeys), foul (ducks and
geese), swine (excluding Vietnamese pot bellied pigs), goats, bees and other
animals associated with a farm, ranch or stable.



   OWN.  To have a property interest in, or to, harbor, feed, board, keep
or possess.



   OWNER.  Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring an animal.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-1)  (Ord. 136, passed 11-23-2006; Ord. 170, passed
7-7-2014)



§ 91.02  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who
owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A person, who owns,
harbors or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person
or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible
person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be
permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area
with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited”.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit the
animal to run at large. Any dog shall be deemed to be running at large with
the permission of the owner unless it is on a durable leash secured to an
object which it cannot move and on the premises of the owner, or on a leash
and under the control of an accompanying person of suitable age and
discretion, or effectively confined within a motor vehicle, building or
enclosure. Any cat shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission
of the owner unless it is on the premises of the owner, or effectively
confined within a motor vehicle, building or enclosure.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal (except farm animals
otherwise lawfully maintained within any agriculturally zoned area of the
city) three months of age or more to fail to obtain a license from the city
for the animal(s).



(2003 Code, § 8.05-3)  (Ord. 136, passed 11-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.04  LICENSE ISSUANCE, TERM AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   All animal licenses shall be issued only upon presentation of
a certificate issued by a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary
medicine in the state, showing rabies immunization, distemper vaccination or
vaccination for other commonly accepted disorders and/or diseases as are
commonly associated with and for which vaccination is routinely employed for
the type of animal involved, consistent with standard veterinary practice,
for at least the term of the license and so certified by the veterinarian.



   (B)   All animal licenses shall be for the duration set forth in the
resolution adopting fees, but must be renewed upon exploration of the
applicable immunization period stated in the veterinarian’s certificate
originally presented by presentation of a new certificate.



   (C)   If three or more citations have been previously issued for
violation of any provisions of this section or other applicable state law
with respect to the animal for which licensure is being sought, the licensure
shall be denied and the animals shall not be possessed within the corporate
limits absent licensure.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-4)  (Ord. 136, passed 11-23-2006)



§ 91.05  ADOPTION OF FEES.



   All fees for the licensing, impounding and maintenance of animals,
including penalties for late application, may be fixed and determined by the
Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. The fees may from
time to time be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the
resolution setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on file in
the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular business
hours.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-5)



§ 91.06  TAG REQUIRED.



   All licensed animals shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed
thereto evidencing a current license. A duplicate for a lost tag may be
issued by the city upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of
the duplicate license fee. Tags shall not be transferable, and no refund
shall be made on any license fee because of leaving the city or death of the
animal before the expiration of the license.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-6)



§ 91.07  ANIMAL POUND.



   (A)   Any animal found in the city without a license tag, running at
large or otherwise in violation of this chapter, shall be placed in the
animal pound, and an accurate record of the time of the placement shall be
kept on each animal.



   (B)   Every animal so placed in the animal pound shall be held for
redemption by the owner for at least five business days.



   (C)   Impoundment records shall be preserved for at least six months
and shall show:



      (1)   The description of the animal by species, breed, sex,
approximate age and other distinguishing traits;



      (2)   The location at which the animal was seized;



      (3)   The date of seizure;



      (4)   The name and address of the person from whom any animal
three months of age or over was received; and



      (5)   The name and address of the person to whom any animal
three months of age or over was transferred.



   (D)   If unclaimed, the animal shall be humanely destroyed and the
carcass disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed educational or
scientific institution under authority of M.S. § 35.71, as it may be amended
from time to time; provided, however, that if a tag affixed to the animal, or
a statement by the animal’s owner after seizure specifies that the animal
should not be used for research, the animal shall not be made available to
any such institution but may be destroyed after the expiration of the ten-day
period.



   (E)   A person claiming an interest in an animal in custody under
this section may prevent disposition of the animal by posting security in an
amount sufficient to provide for the animal’s actual costs of care and
keeping.



   (F)   The security must be posted within ten days of the seizure
inclusive of the date of the seizure.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-7)  (Ord. 125, passed 2-7-2005)



§ 91.08  NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   Upon impounding an animal under this section, notice shall be
given the owner or person claiming interest in the animal by delivering or
mailing it to a person claiming an interest in the animal or by posting a
copy of it at the place where the animal is taken into custody or by
delivering it to a person residing on the property, and telephoning, if
possible.



   (B)   The notice shall include:



      (1)   A description of the animal seized; the authority and
purpose for the seizure; the time, place and circumstances under which the
animal was seized; and the location, address, telephone number and contact
person where the animal is kept;



      (2)   A statement that a person claiming an interest in the
animal may post security to prevent disposition of the animal and may request
a hearing concerning the seizure or impoundment and that failure to do so
within ten days of the date of the notice will result in disposition of the
animal;



      (3)   A statement that all actual costs of the care, keeping
and disposal of the animal are the responsibility of the person claiming an
interest in the animal, except to the extent that a court or hearing officer
finds that the seizure or impoundment was not substantially justified by law;
and



      (4)   A form that can be used by a person claiming an interest
in the animal for requesting a hearing under this section.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-8)



§ 91.09  RIGHT TO HEARING AND RELEASE FROM ANIMAL POUND.



   (A)   Upon request of a person claiming interest in the animal,
which request must be made within ten days of the date of seizure, a hearing
shall be held within five business days of the request to determine the
validity of the seizure and impoundment.



   (B)   If the seizure was done pursuant to a warrant under M.S. §
343.22, as it may be amended from time to time, the hearing must be conducted
by the judge who issued the warrant. If the seizure was done under M.S. §
343.29, as it may be amended from time to time, the city may either:



      (1)   Authorize a licensed veterinarian with no financial
interest in the matter or professional association with either party; or



      (2)   Use the services of a hearing officer to conduct the
hearing.



   (C)   A person claiming interest in the animal who is aggrieved by a
decision of a hearing officer under this section may seek a court order
governing the seizure or impoundment within five days of the notice of the
order.



      (1)   The judge or hearing officer may authorize the return of
the animal, if the judge or hearing officer finds that:



         (a)   The animal is physically fit; and



         (b)   The person claiming an interest in the animal can
and will provide the care required by law for the animal.



      (2)   The person claiming an interest in the animal is liable
for all actual costs of the care, keeping and disposal of the animal, except
if a court or hearing officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not
substantially justified by law. The costs shall be paid in full or a mutually
satisfactory arrangement for payment must be made between the city and the
person claiming an interest in the animal before return of the animal to the
person.



         (a)   If such an animal is owned by a resident of the
city, the cost shall include the purchase of a license, if unlicensed,
payment for the animal’s maintenance while in custody, and may include an
immunization fee of any such animal for rabies.



         (b)   If such an animal is owned by a person not a
resident of the city, the cost shall include payment for the animal’s
maintenance while in custody, and may include an immunization fee of any such
animal for rabies.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-9)  (Ord. 65, passed 5-31-1996)



§ 91.10  SEIZURE BY A CITIZEN.



   It is lawful for any person to seize and impound an animal so found
running at large and shall within six hours thereafter notify the Chief of
Police of the seizure. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to place
the animal in the city pound. If the name of the owner of the animal so
seized is known to the person who first takes the animal into custody, he or
she shall inform the Chief of Police of the name of the owner, and the
address, if known.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.11  IMMOBILIZATION OF ANIMALS.



   For the purpose of enforcement of this section any peace officer, or
person whose duty is animal control, may use a so-called tranquilizer gun or
other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and catching an animal.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-11)



§ 91.12  OTHER UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to guide dogs
accompanying a blind person or to a person with dogs engaged in search or
rescue activities on behalf of the public.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to:



      (1)   Fail to have the license tag issued by the city firmly
attached to a collar worn at all times by the licensed animal;



      (2)   Own a dangerous animal;



      (3)   Interfere with any police officer, or other city
employee, in the performance of his or her duty to enforce this section;



      (4)   Fail to keep his or her dog from barking, howling or
whining;



      (5)   Fail to keep his or her cat from emitting loud or
unusual noise;



      (6)   Allow the animal to frequent school grounds, parks or
public places;



      (7)   Allow the animal to chase vehicles;



      (8)   Allow the animal to molest or annoy any person away from
the property of his or her owner or custodian;



      (9)   Allow the animal to damage any lawn, garden or other
property, private or public, or to urinate or defecate on private property
without the consent of the owner or possessor of the property;



      (10)   Fail to immediately remove any feces left by the animal
on any sidewalk, gutter, street, park land or other public or private
property and to dispose of the feces in a sanitary manner in a proper
receptacle located on property owned or possessed by the owner or custodian;



      (11)   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess,
harbor or offer for sale any non-domestic animal within the city limits. Any
owner of such an animal at the time of adoption of this provision shall have
30 days in which to remove the animal from the city, after which time the
city may impound the animal as provided for in this chapter. An exception
shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and
actually providing assistance to the disabled, and for those animals brought
into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific
research laboratory, a licensed show or exhibition or a wildlife
rehabilitation facility permitted by state and/or federal authority, provided
there is no objection thereto by registered property owners located within
100 feet of the wildlife rehabilitation facility; and



      (12)   Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural
district of the city. An exception shall be made to this division (B)(12) for
those animals brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian
clinic, scientific research laboratory, a licensed show or exhibit or by
permit issued by the City Council for an undeveloped area or areas within the
city other than a residential zone. Harboring, possessing or releasing farm
animals within the city limits in districts other than the agricultural
districts of the city, or as otherwise herein provided, shall be an unlawful
act.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-12)  (Ord. 83, passed 4-9-1999; Ord. 136, passed
11-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.13  SUMMARY DESTRUCTION.



   If an animal is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid or exposed to
rabies and the animal cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort or cannot
be impounded without serious risk to the person attempting to impound, the
animal may be destroyed in a humane manner.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-13)



§ 91.14  RABIES CONTROL, GENERALLY.



   (A)   Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported
to the Chief of Police and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the
direction of the Chief of Police for a period of 14 days, and shall not be
released from the quarantine except by written permission of the city.



      (1)   In the discretion of the Chief of Police, the quarantine
may be on the premises of the owner or at the veterinary hospital of his or
her choice.



      (2)   If the animal is quarantined on the premises of the
owner, the city shall have access to the animal at any reasonable time for
study and observation of rabies symptoms.



      (3)   In the case of a stray animal or, in the case of an
animal whose ownership is not known, the quarantine shall be at the animal
pound, or at the discretion of the Chief of Police the animal may be confined
in a veterinary hospital designated by him or her.



   (B)   The owners, upon demand made by any city employee empowered by
the Council to enforce this section, shall forthwith surrender any animal
which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to
rabies, for the purpose of supervised quarantine. The expenses of the
quarantine shall be borne by the owner and the animal may be reclaimed by the
owner if adjudged free of rabies upon payment of fees set forth in this
section and upon compliance with licensing provisions set forth in this
section.



   (C)   When an animal under quarantine and diagnosed as being rabid
or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid dies or is killed, the
city shall immediately send the head of the animal and rabies data report to
the State Health Department for pathological examination and shall notify all
persons concerned of the results of the examination.



   (D)   The city shall issue a proclamation and that action when
rabies is suspected or exists as is required by state statutes.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-14)



§ 91.15  REPORTS OF BITE CASES.



   It is the duty of every physician, or other practitioner, to report to
the Chief of Police the names and addresses of persons treated for bites
inflicted by animals, together with other information as will be helpful in
rabies control.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-15)



§ 91.16  RESPONSIBILITY OF VETERINARIANS.



   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Chief of
Police his or her diagnosis of an animal observed by him or her as a rabies
suspect.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-16)



§ 91.17  POLICE DOGS, SEEING-EYE DOGS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the ownership or use
of seeing-eye dogs by blind persons, or dogs used in police activities of the
city, such as canine corps or tracking dogs used by or with the permission of
the Police Department.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-17)



§ 91.18  ANIMALS IN HEAT.



   Except for controlled breeding purposes, every female animal in heat
shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary
hospital or boarding kennel, in a manner so that the female animal cannot
come in contact with other animals.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.19  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF ANIMALS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   No more than three animals, which are required to be licensed, may be
kept, harbored or possessed per dwelling unit within a residentially zoned
area of the city.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.20  EXCEPTION TO NUMBER OF ANIMALS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   A person wishing to keep more than three animals within a residentially
zoned area within the city may apply to the city’s duly designated
representative for a permit.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-20)



§ 91.21  MULTIPLE ANIMAL PERMIT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Application for a multiple animal permit must be made to the
city, accompanied by the required license fees for each animal, or proof that
license fees are paid current. There shall be no separate fee for the
multiple animal permit.



   (B)   The city’s duly authorized representative shall notify the
occupants of all properties within 350 feet, who shall then each have 15 days
from the date of the notification to file any comments in writing that they
may desire.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the filing or lack of filing of the comments,
the city shall retain sole discretion as to the issuance of such a multiple
animal permit.



   (D)   In addition to consideration of past complaints made by
neighboring property owners, the city shall also make an examination as to
the suitableness of the site, to include appropriate fencing, screening and
other facilities, and shall review any and all applicable records as to past
difficulties with respect to the harboring or maintenance of animals by the
applicant, including, but not limited to, charges filed or complaints made
for animals running at large, animals emitting noise complained about by
neighbors or otherwise.



   (E)   Within 30 days after the application has been submitted, the
city shall issue its determination to either authorize a multiple animal
permit or deny the same.



   (F)   In the event of a denial, the applicant may petition review
and consideration by the Council. The petition for review shall be made
within ten days after the initial determination to either grant or deny the
permit that has been made by the city. Any permit issued shall be valid for
one calendar year running from the date of issue and must be reviewed
annually thereafter upon proper request being made to the city as if the
permit were to be issued for the first time.



   (G)   If the permit holder fails to comply with any statements made
in the application or with any reasonable conditions imposed on the permit,
or violates any other applicable provisions of the city code, the multiple
animal permit is subject to summary revocation by the city. Maintaining more
than three animals without the permit is a violation of the city code, except
as hereinafter provided.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-21)



§ 91.22  GRANDFATHER CLAUSE.



   Any dwelling unit possessing more than three animals shall have six
months from the effective date to come into compliance with the requirements
hereof; however, any person harboring more than three animals within a
residentially zoned area may continue to do so, provided the animals are
otherwise duly licensed, during the six-month period following the effective
date.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-22)  (Ord. 95, passed 9-14-2001)



§ 91.23  FEEDING OF DEER PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Prohibition. No person shall feed deer within any area of the
city. For the purpose of this division (A), FEEDING shall mean provision of
any grain, fodder, salt licks, fruit, vegetables, nuts or other edible
materials, either on the ground or at a height which may reasonably be
expected to intentionally result in deer feeding. Food sources, such as fruit
trees and other live vegetation, shall not be considered as deer feeding.
This prohibition shall not apply to veterinarians, city officials or other
individuals authorized in the course of their duties who either have deer in
their custody or under their control, nor shall this prohibit any food being
placed upon property for the purposes of trapping or otherwise taking deer
where the trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit issued by the State
Department of Natural Resources.



   (B)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be petty misdemeanor.



(2003 Code, § 8.05-23)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-20-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  CEMETERY PROVISIONS



Section




Granite Falls City Cemetery




   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Officers and duties



   92.03   Cemetery lawn system and burial procedures



   92.04   Sale of cemetery lots and mausoleum rental



   92.05   Care and maintenance



   92.06   Conduct in cemetery



   92.07   Winter burials and use of mausoleum



   92.08   Additional rules and regulations




GRANITE FALLS CITY CEMETERY




§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   The grounds of the Granite Falls City Cemetery are sacredly devoted to
the interment of human dead, and a strict observance of the decorum which
should characterize such a place will be required. All lots are held as
burial places for the human dead and for no other purposes.



   (A)   Description; name. A cemetery has been established and is
continued upon land owned by the City of Granite Falls, in the County of
Chippewa, State of Minnesota, described as follows:



      The Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (NE-1/4 of SE-1/4)
of Section Twenty-seven (27), Township One Hundred Sixteen (116), Range
Thirty-nine (39);



      AND ALSO,




a tract of land described as follows: Beginning at a point 80 rods North of
the Southeast Corner of Section Twenty-seven (27), Township One Hundred
Sixteen (116), Range Thirty-nine (39), thence West along the North line of
the South Half of the Southeast Quarter (S-1/2 of SE-1/4) of said Section
Twenty-seven (27) 80 rods; thence South 1 rod; thence East 80 rods; thence
North 1 rod to the place of beginning. and the same shall be called the
“Granite Falls City Cemetery”.




   (B)   Mausoleum. A facility for the temporary storage of human
casketed remains, also known as the “Granite Falls Mausoleum”, has been
constructed and established and is continued upon land leased by the city,
described as follows:




A tract of land in the County of Yellow Medicine, State of Minnesota,
described as follows: Commencing on the point of intersection of the East
right-of-way line of Sixth Street, in the City of Granite Falls, Minnesota,
and the South right-of-way line of Fourteenth Avenue; thence due South along
the Easterly right-of-way line of said Sixth Street as vacated approximately
seventy (70) feet more or less to a point, said point being also described as
a point ten (10) feet South of the Southwesterly corner of the Wing-Bain
Funeral Home as now constructed and maintained, this being the point of
beginning; thence continuing Southerly along said Easterly right-of-way line
of Sixth Street vacated thirty (30) feet; thence due Easterly on a line
parallel to the South line of Fourteenth Avenue thirty-two (32) feet; thence
Northerly on a line parallel to the Easterly right-of-way line of Sixth
Street vacated thirty (30) feet; thence Westerly to the point of beginning,
together with the ingress and egress thereto over and across that portion of
vacated Sixth Street line between Blocks Fifty-three (53) and Fifty-four (54)
in Pillsbury’s Second Addition to the city lying adjacent to the
above-described property.




(2003 Code, § 2-42-1)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



§ 92.02  OFFICERS AND DUTIES.



   The city shall manage, operate and maintain the City Cemetery and
additions thereto subject to any limitations and restrictions set forth here
or as contained in any applicable law. The Council shall be ex officio
trustees of the cemetery and mausoleum. The Council shall perform all the
duties required as trustees of cemeteries as defined by the laws of this
state. The City Clerk shall perform all the duties required of secretaries of
cemeteries as defined by the statutes of this state. The cemetery has been
platted and subdivided into blocks, which have been subdivided into lots,
which, in turn, have been divided into grave sites.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-2)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



§ 92.03  CEMETERY LAWN SYSTEM AND BURIAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   No deceased person shall be interred in the City Cemetery
until a city official has located the lot in which burial is to be made; that
the lot is not being used beyond its capacity; and before making a proper
record of the name and age of the deceased person and the exact location of
the grave.



      (1)   No temporary storage shall be made in the mausoleum
without prior notification to and permission from the city.



      (2)   No more than one burial, including cremation burials,
shall be permitted on any one burial site; provided, however, that any one of
the following combinations shall be permitted:



         (a)   One non-cremation and one cremation burial;



         (b)   Two baby burials;



         (c)   One adult and one baby burial; or



         (d)   Two cremation burials.



   (B)   If a second burial is made on any burial site, it shall be
marked by a flush marker, only one elevated monument per burial site shall be
permitted. In order to compensate for additional work and record-keeping
where there is a second burial on a burial site, an additional charge of
one-half the then cost of a burial site shall be paid to the city for the
second burial on a site.



   (C)   The owner of a site, his or her spouse or children, may be
buried in a burial site without written approval. No other burials shall be
permitted in a site without first obtaining the written consent of the owner
and filing a copy thereof with the city, subject, however, to rules,
regulations or city code provisions to the contrary. The owner, for this
purpose, shall be the owner as the same appears on the cemetery records of
the city.



   (D)   Only one monument shall be allowed on a family plot, except in
areas within the cemetery in which multiple markers already exist. In those
areas, the size of the monument or memorial is to be governed by the size of
the lot and shall not exceed one-half the length of the rear line of the lot.
Markers must be set level with the ground at the head of each grave.
Foundations for monuments shall be concrete, built to provide at least four
inches of wash all around the base or first masonry course, and the
foundation must not extend into adjoining lots nor into walkway areas. Grave
markers may be laid flush with the ground with at least four-inch concrete
flushing or wash. No site shall be graded higher than the general level of
the cemetery, except so as to allow for one-year setting. No mound shall be
built over any grave. No fence and no stone or cement coping shall be
constructed around any site.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-3)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



§ 92.04  SALE OF CEMETERY LOTS AND MAUSOLEUM RENTAL.



   Values upon all unsold lots in the City Cemetery and additions thereto
are fixed and established as hereinafter set by resolution and are open to
public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. Conveyance of burial lots
shall be made by deed from the city to the purchaser, which deed shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder. No title to any cemetery grave
site, or portion thereof, shall be transferred by the owner thereof, except
as authorized by M.S. § 306.29, as the same may be supplemented or amended
from time to time. Whenever the title to any cemetery lot, or any portion
thereof, is to be transferred by the owner thereof, the city shall have the
first right to repurchase the same by paying to the owner the price
originally paid to the city therefor; provided, however, that this right of
repurchase by the city shall not apply when a conveyance is made to the city
for the purpose of transferring title in turn to a spouse, sister or brother
of the owner, or to a descendant of the owner or a descendant of the
owner’s spouse, sister or brother. Repurchase by the city under all other
circumstances not otherwise specified herein, shall be in accordance with
provisions of M.S. Chapter 306, as supplemented or amended from time to time,
the price to be paid, however, not to exceed that originally paid to the
city. The Council shall also, from time to time, determine the rental price
for space in the City Mausoleum.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-4)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



§ 92.05  CARE AND MAINTENANCE.



   The city shall provide general care for the cemetery and mausoleum
which shall include maintenance of roadways, mowing grass, trimming and
caring for trees and removing fallen trees. This shall not include providing
special care such as watering lawns or vases temporarily placed on graves.
The city shall have the right to remove trees, shrubs, plants or any
structures now located upon any burial site, which has or shall become by
reason of age or otherwise, unsightly or detrimental to the site upon which
they are located or any adjacent site or avenue, and shall have the right to
remove any such which may be placed on a site contrary to the provisions of
these regulations. Artificial flowers may be placed in approved urns or vases
and must be securely fastened to the urn or vase so that they will not fall
or be blown from the container and cause problems with mowing. No artificial
flowers, flags or decorations of similar nature shall be placed upon or
attached to any grassed area, any tree or shrub, or any monument or marker;
the flowers improperly placed may be removed by the city. Owners are
responsible for filling sunken grave sites.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-5)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



§ 92.06  CONDUCT IN CEMETERY.



   It is unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate or otherwise injure
any monument or enclosure or to injure or remove any shrubbery, trees, plants
or flowers on the ground. Motorcycles and bicycles are excluded from cemetery
areas and no dogs will be allowed. The discharge of firearms is prohibited,
except at military funerals. Children will not be permitted to run at will
through the grounds. Boisterous or unseemly conduct will not be permitted in
the cemetery.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-6)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.07  WINTER BURIALS AND USE OF MAUSOLEUM.



   No burials shall take place in the winter, except when all costs
incurred at the cemetery, including opening of roads, location of grave site
or burial place, marker inspections, and damages to markers are assumed by
the relatives of the deceased. It shall be the responsibility of the
relatives of the deceased to make arrangements with a private contractor for
all necessary snow removal. The charge for locating the lot, plot or burial
place and inspecting in order to determine the extent of damages, if any, to
adjacent markers as the result of snow removal operations shall be set by
resolution. Temporary “winter” storage of human remains shall be made
available in the City Holding Vault (mausoleum) to those requesting interment
in the City Cemetery. The fee for use of the Holding Vault will be set by
resolution.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-7)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



§ 92.08  ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council shall have the authority to adopt additional rules and
regulations from time to time, governing the use, operation, maintenance and
care of the City Cemetery and Mausoleum. These rules and regulations shall be
adopted by resolution which, for purposes of enforcement, shall be deemed to
be incorporated herein by reference.



(2003 Code, § 2-42-8)  (Ord. 2, passed 5-29-1987)



CHAPTER 93:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Unfair housing discrimination



   93.04   Reprisals



   93.05   Exceptions



   93.06   Construction



   93.07   Criminal Code; effect



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Discrimination in housing and real property based upon race,
color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital
status, familial status, disability and status in regard to public assistance
adversely affects the health, welfare, peace and safety of the community.



   (B)   People subject to the discrimination suffer depressed living
conditions, poverty and hopelessness, which injures the public health and
places a burden upon the public finances to ameliorate these conditions.



   (C)   It is the purpose of this chapter to foster equal opportunity
for all obtaining housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status,
disability and status in regard to public assistance.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SEXUAL ORIENTATION.  Having or being perceived as having an emotional,
physical or sexual attachment to another person without regard to the sex of
that person, or having or being perceived as having an orientation for the
attachment, or having or being perceived as having a self-image or identity
not traditionally associated with one’s biological maleness or femaleness.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION does not include a physical or sexual attachment to
children by an adult.



   STATUS WITH REGARD TO PUBLIC ASSISTANCE.  The condition of being a
recipient of federal, state or local assistance, including medical
assistance, or being a tenant receiving federal, state or local subsidies,
including rental assistance or rent supplements.



   UNFAIR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE.  Any act described in § 93.03. The
word DISCRIMINATE includes segregate or separate.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)



§ 93.03  UNFAIR HOUSING DISCRIMINATION.



   It is an unfair discriminatory practice:



   (A)   For an owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee or managing agent
of, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease any real
property, or any agent of these:



      (1)   To refuse to sell, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or
withhold from any person or group of persons any real property because of
their race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation,
marital status, familial status, disability or status in regard to public
assistance;



      (2)   To discriminate against any person or group of persons
because of their race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, familial status, disability or status in regard
to public assistance in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale,
rental or lease of any real property or in the furnishing of facilities or
services in connection therewith; or



      (3)   In any transaction involving real property to print,
circulate or post, or cause to be printed, circulated or posted, any
advertisement or sign, or use any form of application for the purchase,
rental or lease of real property, or make any record or inquiry in connection
with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of any real property which
expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or
discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
sexual orientation or status in regard to public assistance, or any intent to
make the limitation, specification or discrimination.



   (B)   For a real estate broker, real estate salesperson or employee
or agent thereof:



      (1)   To refuse to sell, rent or lease, or refuse to offer for
sale, rental or lease, any real property to any person or group of persons,
or refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of any real property to
any person or group of persons because of their race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status,
disability or status in regard to public assistance, or represent that real
property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact
it is so available, or otherwise deny or withhold any real property or any
facilities of real property to or from any person or group of persons because
of their race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, familial status, disability or status in regard
to public assistance;



      (2)   To discriminate against any person because of race,
color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital
status, familial status, disability or status in regard to public assistance,
in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of real
property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith; or



      (3)   To print, circulate or post, or cause to be printed,
circulated or posted, any advertisement or sign, or use any form of
application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property, or make any
record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or
lease of any real property which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation or status in regard to
public assistance, or any intent to make the limitation, specification or
discrimination.



   (C)   For a person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company,
insurance company or other financial institution or leader to whom
application is made for financial assistance or for the purchase, lease,
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real
property or any agent or employee thereof:



      (1)   To discriminate against any person or group of persons
because of their race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, familial status, disability or status in regard
to public assistance, or of the prospective occupants or tenants of the real
property in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or
in the rates, terms, conditions or privileges of the financial assistance or
in the extension of services in connection therewith; or



      (2)   To use any form of application for the financial
assistance, or make any record or inquiry in connection with applications for
the financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial
status, disability or status in regard to public assistance, or any intent to
make the limitations, specifications or discrimination.



   (D)   For any real estate broker or real estate salesperson, for the
purpose of inducing a real property transaction from which the person, that
person’s firm, or any of its members, may benefit financially to represent
that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition with
respect to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, familial status, disability or status in regard
to public assistance, of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood
or area in which the real property is located, including, but not limited to,
lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or anti-social behavior,
or a decline in the quality of schools or other public facilities.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.04  REPRISALS.



   It is an unfair discriminatory practice for any employer, labor
organization, employment agency, lessor, public accommodation, public service
or educational institution, or owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, assignee or
managing agent of any real property or any real estate broker, real estate
salesperson or employee or agent thereof to intentionally engage in any
reprisal against any person because that person associated with a person or
group of persons of a different race, color, creed, religion, sexual
orientation or national origin.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of § 93.03 shall not apply to:



   (A)   Rooms in a temporary or permanent residence home run by a
non-profit organization if the discrimination is by sex;



   (B)   The rental by a resident owner or occupier of a one-family
accommodation of a room or rooms in the accommodation to another person or
persons if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with regard
to public assistance, sexual orientation or disability. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to require any person or group of persons selling,
renting or leasing property to modify the property in any way or exercise a
higher degree of care for a person having a disability than for a person who
does not have a disability; nor shall this chapter be construed to relieve
any person, regardless of any disability, in a written lease, rental
agreement or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on
the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial
obligations of the lease, agreement or contract; or



   (C)   The rental by a residential owner of a unit in a dwelling
containing not more than two units, if the discrimination is on the basis of
sexual orientation.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)



§ 93.06  CONSTRUCTION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to mean the city condones,
recommends or sanctions any particular sexual lifestyle, nor that the city
authorizes or recognizes same sex marriages.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)



§ 93.07  CRIMINAL CODE; EFFECT.



   Nothing in this chapter alters the provision of M.S. Chapter 609, as it
may be amended from time to time, or any other law relating to criminal
penalties applicable to the actions described within this chapter.



(Ord. 121, passed 1-5-2003)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



   94.01   Uniform Fire Code adopted



   94.02   Storage of flammable and explosive material for resale or
redistribution



   94.03   Storage of liquified petroleum gas for on-site heating
purposes



   94.04   Grandfather clause



§ 94.01  UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The current edition of the Uniform Fire Code, as supplemented
and amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim
herein.



   (B)   One copy of the Code shall be marked “CITY OF GRANITE FALLS
- OFFICIAL COPY” and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and open
to inspection and use by the public.



(2003 Code, § 8.23-1)  (Ord. 94, passed 5-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.02  STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL FOR RESALE OR
REDISTRIBUTION.



   (A)   Subject to all applicable conditions of the Uniform Fire Code,
flammable liquids, liquified petroleum gas and explosive and blasting agents
shall be authorized only in the I-1 Limited Industry and I-2 General industry
Districts, except as hereinafter specifically provided.



   (B)   In the C-1 Highway/Auto Commerce District, liquified petroleum
gas (hereinafter LP) only shall be allowed in storage tanks, not to exceed
500 gallons in capacity. Storage containers of LP which are not used directly
for the purpose of supplying heat to a building in the R-1 Low Density
Residence, R-2 Medium Density Residence, R-M Multiple Dwelling Residence, A
Agriculture, C-1 Highway/Auto Commerce, C-2 Downtown Commerce, and F Flood
Zone Districts shall not be allowed, except as otherwise expressly provided
herein.



   (C)   In the I-1 Limited Industry and I-2 General Industry
Districts, storage containers not exceeding 500 gallons shall be authorized
without the necessity of a special use permit. Storage containers containing
more than 501 gallons shall require a special use permit.



   (D)   It is further provided that in the I-1 Limited Industry and
I-2 General Industry Districts, the installation of storage tanks shall be no
closer than 400 feet from any residential district, and in the C-1
Highway/Auto Commerce, the installation shall be no closer to any residential
district than authorized or permitted by current National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) standard(s) for the storage and handling of LP. Where any
such authorized LP storage installations are located on property adjacent to
any property zoned or developed for residential usage, the installations
shall be visibly screened from the residential property consistent with any
applicable provisions of the State Fire Code.



   (E)   All applications under this chapter shall be investigated by
the State Fire Marshal, the City Fire Chief, the City Building Inspection
Department and other individuals as may be required or designated, either by
the city or otherwise by law, or their designees.



   (F)   Installation of any such tanks, regardless of location, shall
require a building permit.



(2003 Code, § 8.23-2)  (Ord. 94, passed 5-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.03  STORAGE OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS FOR ON-SITE HEATING PURPOSES.



   LP storage tanks where the LP is used for the purpose of supplying heat
for the principal and accessory use buildings located on the property is
allowed in all zoning districts, subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   A building permit is required.



   (B)   Storage containers of 500 gallons and less are permitted
without special use permit. Storage containers of 501 gallons or more are
permitted only as provided in division (C) below.



   (C)   Storage containers containing 501 gallons to a total of 2,000
gallons may be allowed only for governmental or other similar institutional
uses, such as community centers, courthouses, jail facilities, hospitals,
schools and related uses, and only upon issuance of a special use permit, the
same to be issued as otherwise provided in the city code upon notice and
hearing as may be routinely required for issuance of special use permits in
general. Quantities may be in multiple tanks with the total gallons on any
one particular site not to exceed 2,000 gallons.



   (D)   Placement and setbacks of all the containers shall comply with
the Uniform Fire Code and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
standard(s).



   (E)   All installations requiring a special use permit shall be
inspected by the City Fire Chief, or other individuals as may be required or
designated, either by the city or otherwise by applicable law, or their
designees, and shall also be inspected by the City Building Inspection
Department.



   (F)   Containers over 500 gallons, as provided in division (C)
above, shall be screened from adjoining properties with the type and manner
of screening to be approved at the time of the issuance of the special use
permit and the designated screening shall be made an express condition of the
issuance of the permit.



   (G)   The City Building Inspection Department shall be authorized to
promulgate and enforce a set of uniform policies for the installation and
placement of all the storage tanks as hereinabove allowed.



(2003 Code, § 8.23-3)  (Ord. 94, passed 5-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  GRANDFATHER CLAUSE.



   Any storage tanks currently located within the corporate limits of the
city must be in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code and applicable National
Fire Protection Association standards.



(2003 Code, § 8.23-4)  (Ord. 94, passed 5-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   95.001   Assessable current services



   95.002   Tree diseases and shade tree pest control




Nuisances




   95.015   Public nuisance



   95.016   Public nuisances affecting health



   95.017   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   95.018   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   95.019   Nuisance parking and storage



   95.020   Inoperable motor vehicles



   95.021   Building maintenance and appearance



   95.022   Duties of city officers



   95.023   Abatement



   95.024   Recovery of cost



   95.025   Repeat nuisance call regulations




Weeds




   95.035   Short title



   95.036   Jurisdiction



   95.037   Definitions; exclusions



   95.038   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like



   95.039   Filing complaint



   95.040   Notice of violations



   95.041   Appeals



   95.042   Abatement by city



   95.043   Liability




Open Burning




   95.060   Definitions



   95.061   Prohibited materials



   95.062   Permit required for open burning



   95.063   Purposes allowed for open burning



   95.064   Permit application for open burning; permit fees



   95.065   Permit process for open burning



   95.066   Permit holder responsibility



   95.067   Revocation of open burning permit



   95.068   Denial of open burning permit



   95.069   Burning ban or air quality alert



   95.070   Rules and laws adopted by reference



   95.071   External solid fuel-fired heating devices (outdoor wood
burning stoves)




Disposal of Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Unclaimed Property and Excess Property




   95.085   Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles



   95.086   Disposal of unclaimed property



   95.087   Disposal of excess property



   95.088   Persons who may not purchase-exception



 



   95.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.001  ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURRENT SERVICE.  One or more of the following: snow, ice or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any
hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may
amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines;
street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public
streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.



   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.



      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant
of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the
walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt
or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit
thereon. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.



      (2)   Removal by city. The City Clerk or other person
designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks
all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after
any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall.
The City Clerk or other designated person shall keep a record showing the
cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.



   (C)   Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or
eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under the
following provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible
for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or
elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver
that information to the City Clerk.



   (D)   Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the
city installs or repairs water service lines serving private property, the
City Clerk shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or
repair against the property.



   (E)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.



      (1)   Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city
abutting a public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in
repair and safe for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the
standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee
may make inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and
alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or
vehicles. If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private
property is unsafe and in need of repairs, the City Council may cause a
notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service,
upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the
sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days, and stating that if
the owner fails to do so, the city will do so, and that the expense thereof
must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.



      (3)   Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired
within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the City Clerk may report the
facts to the City Council, and the City Council may by resolution order the
work done by contract in accordance with law. No person shall enter private
property to repair a sidewalk, except with the permission of the owner or
after obtaining an administrative warrant. The City Clerk shall keep a record
of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of
property.



   (F)   Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent
to which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for
the cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed and the
cost determined, the City Clerk, or other designated official, shall prepare
a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately
due and payable at the office of the City Clerk. If the bill remains unpaid,
after notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended
from time to time, the City Clerk may list the total unpaid charges along
with all other charges, as well as other charges for current services to be
assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable.
The City Council may then certify the charges against the property under that
statute and other pertinent statutes to the County Auditor for collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments as the
City Council may determine in each case.



   (G)   Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure
shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may
sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the
vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating,
driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in
excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. When the
driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but
is operating, driving or moving it with the express or implied permission of
the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly and severally
liable for any such damage. Any person who willfully acts or fails to
exercise due care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable
for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or as a
lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   Assessment. On or before October 31 of each year, the City
Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service
and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to which
they are attributable under this section. The City Council may then spread
the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under the
authority of M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each
case.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.002  TREE DISEASES AND SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.



   (A)   Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city is
threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing
upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value of
property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare
and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with M.S.
§§ 89.001, 89.01 and 89.51 through 89.64, as those sections may be amended
from time to time, the provisions of this section are adopted to attempt to
control and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.



   (B)   Jurisdiction. The city shall have control of all street trees,
shrubs and other plantings now or hereafter in any street, park, public
right-of-way or easement, or other public place within the city limits, and
shall have the power to plant, care for, maintain, remove and replace the
trees, shrubs and other plantings.



   (C)   Declaration of a shade tree pest.   The Council may declare
any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen or plant threatening to
cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest in the
community, to be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to
effectively eradicate, control or manage the shade tree pest including
necessary time lines for action.



   (D)   Public nuisances declared. A shade tree pest declared by
Council occurring within a declared control zone is a public nuisance.



   (E)   Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful. It is unlawful for any
person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on
any premises the person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be
abated as provided in this section.



   (F)   Definition of control areas. Upon declaring a shade tree pest,
the Council may define one or more locations within the geographic boundaries
of the city to be within a shade tree pest control area provided those
locations are characterized by biologic, composition, environmental and size
factors favorable to successful application of the control measures
prescribed by Council.



   (G)   Tree Inspector. The Council may appoint a Tree Inspector to
coordinate the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention
of damage by shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector will recommend to the
Council the details of any program for the declaration, control and
prevention of shade tree pests. The Tree Inspector is authorized to enforce
or cause to be enforced the duties incident to such a program adopted by the
Council. The term TREE INSPECTOR includes any person designated by Council or
the Tree Inspector to carry out activities authorized in this section.



   (H)   Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances.



      (1)   In abating a nuisance declared by ordinance under
divisions (B) and (C) above, the organism, condition or plant and any tree,
wood or material identified as injurious to the health of shade trees shall
be removed or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as
possible the spread of the shade tree pest. The abatement procedures shall be
carried out in accordance with the control measures and areas prescribed by
ordinance according to divisions (C) above and (K)and (O) below.



      (2)   In addition, should the appropriate abatement procedure
be removal and the tree(s) and/or hedge(s) be within the limits of a highway
in a rural area within the city’s jurisdiction, M.S. § 160.22, as it may
be amended from time to time, shall be complied with as necessary.



   (I)   Reporting discovery of shade tree pest. Any owner or occupier
of land or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who becomes aware
of the existence of public nuisance caused by a shade tree pest as defined
under division (C) above shall report the same to the city.



   (J)   Registration of tree care firms. Any person, firm or
corporation that provides tree care, tree trimming or removal of trees,
limbs, branches, brush or shrubs for hire must be registered with the State
Commissioner of Agriculture under M.S. § 18G.07, as it may be amended from
time to time.



   (K)   Inspection and application of control measures.



      (1)   The Tree Inspector is authorized to cause premises and
places within the city to be inspected to determine whether shade tree pests
exist thereon and to investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests.
The Tree Inspector shall have the power to take all reasonable precautions to
prevent the maintenance of public nuisances and may enforce the provisions
relating to abatement in this section. Diagnosis of shade tree pests may be
by the presence of commonly recognized symptoms or by tests as may be
recommended by the Commissioner of the State Department of Agriculture or the
Commissioner of the State Department of Natural Resources.



      (2)   Except in situations of imminent danger to human life
and safety, the Tree Inspector shall not enter private property for the
purpose of inspecting or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without
the permission of the owner, resident or other person in control of the
property, unless the Tree Inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a
court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry.



      (3)   No person, firm or corporation shall interfere with the
Tree Inspector acting under his or her authority while engaged in activities
authorized by this section.



   (L)   Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided in divisions
(M) and (O) below, whenever a Tree Inspector determines with reasonable
certainty that a public nuisance as described by this section is being
maintained or exists on premises in the city, the Tree Inspector is
authorized to abate a public nuisance according to the following procedure.



      (1)   The Tree Inspector will notify in writing the owner of
record or occupant of the premises of the fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice must be given in person or by mail. Failure
of any party to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the
notice. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the City Clerk.



      (2)   The notice of abatement shall state that unless the
public nuisance is abated by the owner or occupant, it will be abated by the
city at the expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify the
control measures to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable
amount of time to abate the nuisance. The notice will also state that the
owner or occupant has the right to appeal the determination that a public
nuisance exists by submitting a request in writing to the City Clerk within
seven days after service of the notice, or before the date by which abatement
must be completed, whichever comes first.



      (3)   If no timely appeal is submitted, and the notice of
abatement and its prescribed control measures are not complied with within
the time provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the Tree
Inspector or designated person shall have the authority to obtain permission
or an administrative search warrant, enter the property and carry out
abatement in accordance with the notice of abatement.



   (M)   High cost abatement. If the Tree Inspector determines that the
cost of abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good
faith estimate, the written notice referred to in division (L) above must
provide that if the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of
time provided, the matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing.
The date, time and location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.



   (N)   Appeal procedure. If the City Clerk receives a written request
for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance in fact exists,
the City Council shall hold a hearing within seven calendar days following
receipt by the Clerk of the written request. At least three days’ notice
shall be given to the individual who made the written request for the
hearing. The Council may modify the abatement notice or extend the time by
which abatement must be completed. Each owner, agent of the owner, occupant
and lien holder of the subject property or properties in attendance, if any,
shall be given the opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. After
holding the hearing, the City Council may issue an order requiring abatement
of the nuisance.



   (O)   Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.



      (1)   If the Tree Inspector determines that the danger of
infestation to other shade trees is imminent and delay in control measures
may put public health, safety or welfare in immediate danger, the Tree
Inspector may provide for abatement without following divisions (L) or (M)
above. The Tree Inspector must reasonably attempt to notify the owner or
occupant of the affected property of the intended action and the right to
appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without
notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which poses
an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



   (P)   Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.



      (1)   The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the
abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount
shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061,
as it may be amended from time to time, the City Clerk may list the total
unpaid charges, along with all other charges, as well as other charges for
current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges
are attributable. The City Council may then certify the charges against the
property under that statute and other pertinent statutes to the County
Auditor for collection along with current taxes the following year or in
annual installments as the City Council may determine in each case.



   (Q)   Penalty.



      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
The penalty which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under
this section, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference,
shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than
$1,000, or both.



      (2)   Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



      (3)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to
perform any official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



      (4)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this
section, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this section, the City Council or any official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct or abate the violation.



   (R)   Declared shade tree pests, control measures and control areas.



      (1)   Oak Wilt. Oak Wilt is declared a shade tree pest, and is
defined as any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump or
other portion of a tree from any species of the genus Quercus existing within
the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three inches
in diameter or ten inches in circumference and contains to any degree any
spore or reproductive structures of the fungus Ceratocystis fagacaarum.
Control measures prescribed for abating Oak Wilt Disease are:



         (a)   Installation of a root graft barrier. A root graft
barrier can be ordered installed to prevent the underground spread of Oak
Wilt Disease. The city will mark the location of the root graft barrier. The
barrier disrupts transmission of the fungus within the shared vascular
systems of root grafted trees. The barrier is created by excavating or
vibratory plowing a line at least 42 inches deep between any oak tree
infected with Oak Wilt Disease and each nearby and apparently healthy oak
tree within 50 feet of the infected tree;



         (b)   Removal and disposal of trees on property zoned
for residential and commercial use. On property that is zoned residential and
commercial the city may mark for removal trees that have the potential to
produce spores of the fungus Ceratocvstis fagacearum. After, and in no case
before the installation of the root graft barrier and no later than May 1 of
the year following infection, all marked trees must be felled. The stump from
the felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or,
if taller, must be completely debarked. If, however, after the city
prescribes the location for a root graft barrier, the city determines that
installation of the barrier is impossible because of the presence of pavement
or obstructions such as a septic system or utility line, the city may mark
for removal all oak trees whether living or dead, infected or not and located
between an infected tree and the marked barrier location. These marked trees
must be felled and disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following
infection. The stump from the felled trees must not extend more than three
inches above the ground or, if taller, must be completely debarked;



         (c)   Removal and disposal of trees on all other
property. On all other property the city may mark for removal all oak trees
whether living or dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree
and the marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and
disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump
from the felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground
or, if taller, must be completely debarked;



         (d)   Wood disposal. All wood more than three inches in
diameter or ten inches in circumference from the felled trees must be
disposed of by burying or debarking or chipping or sawing into wane-free
lumber or by splitting into firewood, stacking the firewood and immediately
covering the woodpile with unbroken 4-mil or thicker plastic sheeting that is
sealed into the ground until October 1 of the calendar year following the
calendar year in which the tree was felled or by burning before May 1 of the
year following infection. Wood chips from infected trees may be stockpiled or
immediately used in the landscape; and



         (e)   Control area. The control area for Oak Wilt
Disease is defined as all lands within the boundaries of the city.



      (2)   Emerald Ash Borer. Emerald Ash Borer is declared a shade
tree pest and is defined as an insect that attacks and kills ash trees. The
adults are small, iridescent green beetles that live outside of trees during
the summer months. The larvae are grub or worm-like and live underneath the
bark of ash trees.



         (a)   Control measures prescribed for abating Emerald
Ash Borer are those provided in the document, Minnesota Emerald Ash Borer
Science Advisory Group Recommendations on Preparing for Emerald Ash Borer in
Minnesota.



         (b)   Definition of control areas. The control area for
Emerald Ash Borer is defined as all lands within the boundaries of the city.



      (3)   Dutch Elm Disease. Dutch Elm Disease is declared a shade
tree pest and is defined as a disease of elm trees caused by the fungus
Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi, and includes any living or dead
tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump or other portion of a tree from any
species of the genus Ulmus existing within the control area defined that has
bark attached and that exceeds three inches in diameter or ten inches in
circumference and could contain bark beetles or any spore or reproductive
structures of the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi.



         (a)   Control measures. Control measures prescribed for
abating Dutch Elm Disease are:



            1.   Use of fungicide. Fungicides may be effective
in preventing Dutch elm disease when injected into living trees that do not
already show symptoms of Dutch elm disease. Fungicide injections on private
lands are optional and, if performed, are at the landowner’s expense.



            2.   Removal and disposal of trees. Prompt removal
of diseased trees or branches reduces breeding sites for elm bark beetles and
eliminates the source of Dutch elm disease fungus. Trees that wilt before
July 15 must be removed within 20 days of detection. Trees that wilt after
July 15 must be removed by April 1 of the following year. Diseased trees not
promptly removed will be removed by the city at the landowner’s expense.
Wood may be retained for use as firewood or sawlogs if it is de-barked or
covered from April 15 to October 15 with 4mm plastic. The edges of the cover
must be buried or scaled to the ground.



         (b)   Definition of control areas. The control area for
Dutch elm disease is defined as all lands within the boundaries of the city.



   (S)   Shade tree disease. Dutch Elm Disease, Oak Wilt Disease,
Emerald Ash Borer or any other vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant
pathogen or plant in the community threatening to cause significant damage to
a shade tree or community forest.



(Ord. 166, passed 3-17-2014)



NUISANCES



§ 95.015  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Whoever, by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty,
intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public;



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage
any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§
95.016, 95.017 or 95.018, or any other part of this code to be a public
nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.016  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;



   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease;



   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
operating under local license; and



   (L)   All unnecessary and annoying vibrations.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.017  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except
as otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those
occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of
law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining that place. For
the purposes of this section, INTOXICATING LIQUOR shall mean any ethyl
alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt beverage containing
more than 0.5% alcohol by volume; and



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of
intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other
immoral or illegal purpose.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.018  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours
after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as
they may be amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by
reference into this code;



   (E)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging
of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat,
motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any
recreational device, except through a muffler or other device that
effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all
applicable state laws and regulations;



   (F)   The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system,
machine or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any device referred to above
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly
audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this
section;



   (G)   No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of
people giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet or
repose of another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering
is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons
present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance
is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after
being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of the
premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable
effort to see that the disturbance is stopped;



   (H)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as
are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (I)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in
a dangerous manner;



   (J)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;



   (K)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;



   (L)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;



   (M)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;



   (N)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;



   (O)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or
other public properties;



   (P)   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health or safety hazards from accumulation;



   (Q)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other
person coming on the premises where it is located;



   (R)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;



   (S)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which
may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing
over the substance;



   (T)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way
or on adjacent private property;



   (U)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone;



   (V)   (1)   Noises prohibited.



         (a)   General prohibition. No person shall make or cause
to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or
welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects
their property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the
specific restrictions of this section.



         (b)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use
any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.



         (c)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall
create loud or excessive noise in loading, unloading or unpacking any vehicle.



         (d)   Radios, phonographs, paging systems and the like.
No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or
other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and
loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort
of any person nearby. Operation of any radio receiving set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the
structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment
adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.



         (e)   Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. No
person shall create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the
noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs
or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs
indicate the presence of the institution.



      (2)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.



         (a)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate
a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller,
edger, drill or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal
equipment is exempt from this provision.



         (b)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove
garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



         (c)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in
or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric,
diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



      (3)   Noise impact statements. The Council may require any
person applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license
for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration or project
that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact
statement on a form prescribed by the Council. It shall evaluate each such
statement and take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving
the license or permit applied for or the zoning change requested.



   (W)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting
exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on the property line of the property
where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel; and



   (X)   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting
exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on the property line of the property
where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.019  NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles,
materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential
purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a
public nuisance because it:



      (1)   Obstructs views on streets and private property;



      (2)   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;



      (3)   Prevents the full use of residential streets for
residential parking;



      (4)   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where
commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;



      (5)   Decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and



      (6)   Otherwise adversely affects property values and
neighborhood patterns.



   (B)   Unlawful parking and storage.



      (1)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or
storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar
non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the
front yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from
the front property line.



      (2)   A person must not place, store or allow the placement or
storage of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery or similar materials,
including all materials used in connection with a business, outside on
residential property, unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or
fence.



      (3)   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the
outside parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it
complies with the following requirements.



         (a)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling
unit may be parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except
as otherwise permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential
characteristics of the property. This maximum number does not include
vehicles of occasional guests who do not reside on the property.



         (b)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the
front yard area must be on a paved or graveled parking or driveway area.



         (c)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored
outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property. Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim
the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the
property.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.020  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor
vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for
repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is
not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. §
168B.011(3), as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a
building and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which
does not foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is
permissible.



   (C)   Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a
hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that
the vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding
place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of
children and citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into
the environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.021  BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.



   (A)   Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other
structures that have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition
and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be
public nuisances because they: are unsightly; decrease adjoining landowners
and occupants’ enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and adversely
affect property values and neighborhood patterns.



   (B)   Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public
nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration,
holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.



      (2)   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish
such as paint applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of
the finish. No wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked,
chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:



         (a)   Any one wall or other flat surface; or



         (b)   All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and
similar projections on any one side or surface.



      (3)   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures,
may be broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from
moldings.



      (4)   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and
have an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.



      (5)   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer
windows and similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from
cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.



      (6)   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that
admit water. All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.



      (7)   Chimneys, antennas, air vents and other similar
projections must be structurally sound and in good repair. These projections
must be secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior
roof.



      (8)   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good
repair.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.022  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   For purposes of §§ 95.022 and 95.023, the Police Department, or
Sheriff or person designated by the City Council under § 10.20, if the city
has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the provisions relating to
nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall have the power to
inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the
commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in emergency
situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police officer or
designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of inspecting
or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident
or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or person
designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent
jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in § 10.20.



§ 95.023  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date,
place and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City
Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be
given as set forth in this section.



      (1)   Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall
be served by a peace officer or designated person on the owner of record or
occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail.
If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner
of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of
violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.



      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any
City Council hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the
owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified
or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the
City Council hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by
posting it on the premises.



      (3)   Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases
determined by the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any
City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and
Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice
of any motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S.
§ 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from
time to time.



   (B)   Procedure. Whenever a peace officer or designated person
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the
premises in the city, the officer or person designated may notify in writing
the owner of record or occupant of the premises of the fact and order that
the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify
the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the
nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with
within the time specified, the officer or designated person shall report that
fact forthwith to the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after
notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine
that the condition identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and
further order that if the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed
by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of
the City Council order and notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain
an administrative search and seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.



   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of
emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and
procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above will permit a
continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare,
the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To
proceed with summary enforcement, the officer or designated person shall
determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in
the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably
endanger public health, safety or welfare. The officer or designated person
shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature
of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and
the time and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of
summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division
(A) above, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or
abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.



   (D)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition
which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.024  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance
has been abated by the city or a person who has caused a public nuisance on a
property not owned by that person shall be personally liable for the cost to
the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the
work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other
official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of
the City Clerk.



   (B)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. §
429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public
health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice
on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the
traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City
Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well
as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel
to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread the
charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current
taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
City Council may determine in each case.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.025  REPEAT NUISANCE CALL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definition and regulation.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the
public safety, health and welfare and to prevent and abate repeat service
response calls by the city to the same property or location for nuisance
service calls, as defined herein, which prevent police or public safety
services to other residents of the city.  It is the intent of the city by
the adoption of this section to impose and collect service call fees from the
owner or occupant, or both, of property to which city officials must
repeatedly respond for any repeat nuisance event or activity that generates
extraordinary costs to the city.  The repeat nuisance call fee is intended
to cover that cost over and above the cost of providing normal law or code
enforcement services and police protection city wide.



      (2)   Scope and application. This section shall apply to all
owners and occupants of private property which is the subject or location of
the repeat nuisance service call by the city.  This section shall apply to
any repeat nuisance service calls as set forth herein made by a Granite Falls
peace officer, part-time peace officer or other law enforcement personnel
assisting or enforcing the law on behalf of and within the City of Granite
Falls.



      (3)   Definition of NUISANCE CALL or similar conduct. The term
NUISANCE SERVICE CALL shall mean any call responding to any activity, conduct
or condition occurring upon private property within the city which
unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort
or repose of any member of the public; or will, or will tend to, alarm, anger
or disturb others or provoke a breach of the peace, to which the city is
required to respond, including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Any activity, conduct or condition deemed as a
public nuisance under provisions of the City Code;



         (b)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a
violation of Minnesota state laws prohibiting or regulating prostitution,
gambling, controlled substances, use of firearms; and



         (c)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting
disorderly conduct under M.S. Chapter 609 as currently written or as amended
or supplemented from time to time hereafter or violation of any other
criminal activity regulated by M.S. Chapter 609.



   (B)   Repeat nuisance service call fee amount.  The city may impose
a repeat nuisance service call fee of $250 upon the owner or occupant, or
both, of private property if the city has rendered services or responded to
the property on three or more occasions within a period of 365 days in
response to or for the abatement of nuisance conduct, activity or conditions
of the same or similar kind or as otherwise herein above described.  All
repeat nuisance service call fees imposed and charged against the owner or
occupant under this section shall be deemed delinquent 30 days after the
city's mailing a billing statement therefor.  Delinquent payments are
subject to a 10% late penalty of the amount due.



   (C)   Notice. No repeat nuisance service call fee may be imposed
against an owner or occupant of the property without first providing the
owner or occupant with written notice of the previous nuisance service calls
prior to the latest nuisance service call rendered by the city upon which the
fee is imposed.  A written notice shall:



      (1)   State the nuisance conduct, activity or condition that
is or has occurred or is maintained or permitted on the property, the dates
of the nuisance conduct, activity or condition;



      (2)   State the owner or occupant who may be subject to a
repeated nuisance call service fee if a third nuisance service call is
rendered to the property for the same nuisance, in addition to the city's
right to seek other legal remedies or actions for abatement of the nuisance
or compliance with the law; and



      (3)   Be served personally or by U.S. Mail upon the owner or
occupant at the last known address.



   (D)   Right to appeal repeat nuisance service call fee. 



      (1)   Upon the imposition of a repeat nuisance service call
fee, the city shall provide the owner or occupant notice as required by this
section.  The city shall also inform the owner or occupant of his/her right
to a hearing on the alleged repeat nuisance service calls.  The owner or
occupant upon whom the fee is imposed may request a hearing by serving upon
the City Manager within five business days of the mailing of the fee invoice
inclusive of the day the invoice is mailed, a written request for hearing.
The hearing shall be heard by the City Council or its appointed hearing
officer within 14 days of the date of the owner's or occupant's request for
hearing.



      (2)   The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and
the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence shall not be
strictly applied.  The hearing need not be transcribed, but may be
transcribed at the sole expense of the party who requests the
transcription.  After considering all evidence submitted, the hearing
officer shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of the issue of
whether the city responded to or rendered services for repeat nuisance
service calls of the same or similar kind on three or more occasions within a
365 day period.  The findings and conclusions shall be served upon the owner
or occupant by U.S. Mail within five days of the hearing.



      (3)   An owner or occupant's right to a hearing shall be
deemed waived if the owner or occupant fails to serve a written request for
hearing as required herein or fails to appear at the scheduled hearing date
and time.  Upon waiver of the right to a hearing, or upon the hearing
officer's written findings of fact and conclusions that the repeat nuisance
call service fee is warranted hereunder, the owner or occupant shall
immediately pay the fee imposed.



(Ord. 173, passed 10-20-2014)



WEEDS



§ 95.035  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Ordinance”.



§ 95.036 JURISDICTION.



   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or regulation
or county ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or
repealed.



§ 95.037  DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DESTRUCTION ORDER.  The notice served by the City Council or
designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the
ordinance violation that shall conform to M.S. § 18.83, Subd. 2, as it may
be amended from time to time.



      MEADOW VEGETATION.  Grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that
are native to, or adapted to, the state, and that are commonly found in
meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds as defined herein.



      PROPERTY OWNER.  The person occupying the property, the holder
of legal title or a person having control over the property of another, such
as a right-of-way, easement, license or lease.



      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION.  Includes, but is not
limited to, the following:



         (a)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include,
but not be limited to: alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada
Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed,
French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle,
Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy,
Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian
Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild
Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;



         (b)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more
and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated or otherwise maintained for two
consecutive years;



         (c)   Bushes of the species of tall, common or European
barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;



         (d)   Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees,
bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12
inches;



         (e)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled,
uncultivated growth of annuals and perennial plants;



         (f)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees,
cultivated plants or crops; and



         (g)   Any other weed designated by M.S. § 18.77(8), as
it may be amended from time to time, as noxious.



   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants
which have been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being
noxious or detrimental plants.



§ 95.038  OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.



    (A)   All property owners shall be responsible for the removal,
cutting or disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or
other uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of
notice, is in excess of seven inches in height.



   (B)   These provisions shall not apply to an area established with
meadow vegetation if:



      (1)   The prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow
vegetation is planted through transplanting or seed by human or mechanical
means; and



      (2)   A sign is posted on the property in a location likely to
be seen by the public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being
established. This sign must be no smaller than ten inches square, no larger
than one square foot, and no higher than three feet tall.



(Ord. 190, passed 8-20-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.039  FILING COMPLAINT.



   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located
within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in
violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed, dated and
filed with the City Clerk. If the city makes the complaint, an employee,
officer or Council member of the city shall file the complaint in all
respects as set out above.



§ 95.040  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



    (A)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds,
grasses or other vegetation or uncontrolled plant growth on a property in
violation of this subchapter, a person designated by the City Council shall
inspect the property. A notice shall be served, in writing, by U.S. Mail. The
notice shall provide that, within seven regular days after the receipt of the
notice, the designated violation shall be removed by the property owner or
person occupying the property.



   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are
to be with the City Clerk.



      (2)   First class U.S. Mail to the City Clerk or others is
deemed filed on the date of posting to the United States Postal Service.



(Ord. 190, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 95.041  APPEALS.



   (A)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of
objections with the City Council within 48 hours of the notice, excluding
weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City
Council. It is the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that the
matter in question is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not
otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not be subject to
destruction under the subchapter.



   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the
City Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council members
in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the
City Council.



§ 95.042  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



    In the event that the property owner or person occupying the property
shall fail to comply within seven regular business days and has not filed a
notice within 48 hours to the City Clerk of an intent to appeal, the
designated inspector for the city may employ the services of city employees
or outside contractors and remove the weeds, grasses, rank vegetation or
other uncontrolled plant growth to conform to this subchapter by all lawful
means.



(Ord. 190, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 95.043  LIABILITY.



   (A)   The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting
or destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter.



   (B)   The property owner is responsible for all collection costs
associated with weed destruction, including, but not limited to, court costs,
attorney’s fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If
the city uses municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per
hour rate for employees, equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.



   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the
City Clerk and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses
and costs incurred by the city.



   (D)   All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a
special assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time.



OPEN BURNING



§ 95.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS.  The Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which
provides fire protection services to the city.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein.
Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood
smokers and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than
three feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire
site” using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or
soot beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at
all times; for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social
purposes; extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and
respecting weather conditions, neighbors, burning bans and air quality so
that nuisance, health or safety hazards will not be created. No more than one
RECREATIONAL FIRE is allowed on any property at one time.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.  An area of no more than a three-foot diameter
circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely
surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material,
either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only
and which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed.
Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are
not a RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE as defined herein. RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall
not be located closer than 25 feet to any structure.



   RUNNING FIRE.  An attended fire allowed to spread through surface
vegetative matter under controlled conditions for the purpose of vegetative
management, forest management, game habitat management or agricultural
improvement.



   STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches,
cardboard or charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are
permitted as STARTER FUELS and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches
or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to
start an open burn.



   VEGETATIVE MATERIALS.  Dry leaves, dry grass clippings, twigs,
branches, tree limbs, untreated or unpainted wood that contains no glues or
resins, and other similar materials. Paper and cardboard are not considered
VEGETATIVE MATERIALS.



   WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto
logs”, charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does
not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil
soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be
used for recreational fires when cut into three-foot lengths.



§ 95.061  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils,
petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad
ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.



   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
hazardous waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated
from an industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.



   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving or consumption of food.



   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any
leaves or grass clippings.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.062  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the
city without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit
is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in §
95.060.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.063  PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following
purposes:



      (1)   Elimination of fire or health hazard that cannot be
abated by other practical means;



      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;



      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest,
prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land
and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other
alternative methods are not practical;



      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased
or infected nursery stock, diseased bee hives;



      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and
wood shakes generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or
other alternative disposal methods are not practical; or



      (6)   Running fires.



   (B)   Fire training permits can only be issued by the State
Department of Natural Resources.



   (C)   Permits for the operation of permanent tree and brush burning
sites may only be issued by the State Department of Natural Resources (DNR).



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.064  PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application
on a form prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by
the Fire Department. The permit application shall be presented to the Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing
those applications.



   (B)   An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee.
Permit fees shall be in the amount established from time to time by the City
Council.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.065  PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.



   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and
permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals, if he or
she reasonably believes necessary, may schedule a preliminary site inspection
to locate the proposed burn site, note special conditions and set dates and
time of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations.



§ 95.066  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be
responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in
effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit
holder or his or her competent representative. The open burning site shall
have available, appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as
set out in the fire safety plan.



   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the
permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be
allowed to smolder with no person present. It is the responsibility of the
permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter,
available for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire
Department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.



   (C)   The permit holder is responsible for compliance and
implementation of all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn
event safety plan as established in the permit issued. The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn,
including, but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.067  REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals.
Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire hazard
existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions
of the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or
nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire
smoldering with no flame present.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.068  DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are
not met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical
alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or
nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be
drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire
Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.



§ 95.069  BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.



   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or
DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.



Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.070  RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.



§ 95.071  EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICES (OUTDOOR WOOD BURNING
STOVES).



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EXTERNAL SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICE.  A device designed for
external solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the
interior of a building, and includes solid fuel-fired stoves, solid
fuel-fired cooking stoves and combination fuel furnaces or boiler which burn
solid fuel. SOLID FUEL-FIRED HEATING DEVICES do not include natural gas-fired
fireplace logs or wood burning fireplaces or wood stoves in the interior of a
dwelling.



      PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, company or
other association.



      STACKS or CHIMNEYS.  Any vertical structure incorporated into a
building and enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a
solid fuel-fired heating device, especially, the part of such a structure
extending above a roof.



   (B)   Requirements for operation.



      (1)   Any dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or
cinders, in unreasonable quantities, or any use of an external solid
fuel-fired heating device to burn solid fuels other than those solid fuels
for which the external solid fuel-fired heating device was designed, is
declared a public nuisance.



      (2)   No person may install, use or operate an external solid
fuel fired heating device on a lot less than four acres in size.



      (3)   All stacks or chimneys must be so constructed to
withstand high winds or other related elements and in accordance to the
specifications of the manufacturer of the external solid fuel-fired heating
device. The stack height shall be a minimum of 25 feet above ground level,
but shall also extend at least as high as the height of the roofs of
residents within 500 feet. All stacks or chimneys must be of masonry or
insulated metal with a minimum six-inch flue.



      (4)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices must be
set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines.



      (5)   All external solid fuel-fired heating devices must be
setback a minimum of ten feet from any principal or accessory structure.



   (C)   Fuels.



      (1)   Only fuels designed for burning in an external solid
fuel-fired heating device may be burned. No garbage may be burned in an
external solid fuel-fired heating device.



      (2)   The only fuel permitted to be burned is untreated fuel.
Wood may not be treated, processed, stained, finished or painted -
specifically prohibited woods include plywood, particle board and similar
products. Other fuels, such as corn, shall not contain any additives,
treatments or chemicals. No petroleum products or processed materials of any
kind may be burned.



Penalty, see § 95.999



DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
AND EXCESS PROPERTY



§ 95.085  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   The term ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE means a motor vehicle
as defined in M.S. Chapter 169, that has remained for a period of more than
48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or
has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without
the consent of the person in control of such property, or in an inoperable
condition such that it has no substantial potential further use consistent
with its usual function unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its
owner to and accepted by the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined
in M.S. Chapter 168, shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle
within the meaning of this section. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or
automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance with
the City Code, shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles within the
meaning of this section.



      (2)   JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that is three years old or
older; is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as
broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission, is apparently
inoperable; does not have a valid, current registration plate; and has an
approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the
scrap in it.



      (3)   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to
removal and impoundment pursuant to Minnesota Statutes but is not a junk
vehicle or abandoned vehicle.



      (4)   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle
that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including,
but not limited to, the motor,  drive train and wheels.



   (B)   Custody. The city may take into custody and impound any
abandoned or junk motor vehicle, or any unauthorized vehicle as provided by
statute.



   (C)   Sale;  waiting periods.



      (1)   An impounded vehicle is eligible for sale 15 days after
notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined to be an abandoned vehicle
or a junk vehicle even though said vehicle may have a valid,  current
registration plate.



      (2)   An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 45
days after notice to the owner if the vehicle is determined to be an
unauthorized vehicle.



   (D)   Notice.



      (1)   When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the
city or impound lot operator shall give notice of the taking within 10 days.
The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make,
model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if such information
can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held,
shall inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under division (E) of this section, and shall state that failure of
the owner or lien holder to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and
contents within the appropriate time allowed under statute shall be deemed a
waiver by them of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent
to the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to division (F) of this section.



      (2)   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered
owner, if any, of the impounded motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable
lien holders of record. This information shall be made available to impound
lot operators for notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine
with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner
and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in the official
newspaper where the motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published
notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy. If an
unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice
was sent, a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and
to all readily identifiable lien holders of record.



   (E)   Right to reclaim.



      (1)   The owner or any lien holder of an impounded motor
vehicle shall have the right to reclaim such vehicle from the city or impound
lot upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the
vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days as applicable under this section
after the date of the notice required by this section.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any
lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of the
lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this division (E), GARAGE
KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a
motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the
servicing,  repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



   (F)   Auction or sale.



      (1)   An abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle and contents
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot and not reclaimed under
division (E) of this section may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale
when eligible pursuant to division (E). The purchaser shall be given a
receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall
be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle
the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title,
free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is
issued a new certificate of title,  it must receive a motor vehicle safety
check.



      (2)   From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle by the city or public impound lot, the city shall
reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle,
and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to
this section. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the general fund of the city.



      (3)   The operator of a nonpublic impound lot may retain any
proceeds from a sale derived from a sale conducted under the authority of
this section. The operator may retain all proceeds from the sale of any
personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by the
owner or the owner's agent before the sale; except that any suspected
contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture in a
criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency.



   (G)   Operator's deficiency claim. The nonpublic impound lot
operator has a deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle
for the reasonable costs of services provided in the towing, storage and
inspection of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the sale or auction. The
claim for storage costs may not exceed the cost of 25 days' storage for an
abandoned or junk vehicle and 55 days' storage for a vehicle determined to be
an unauthorized vehicle.



   (H)   Disposal of vehicles. Where no bid has been received for an
abandoned or junk motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in accordance
with this section.



   (I)   Contracts and disposal.



      (1)   The city may contract with any qualified person for
collection, storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other
services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal
for recycling or other methods of disposal.



      (2)   Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly
licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review
the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency's plan for solid
waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the
Agency. Where a contract has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the city
for the costs incurred under the contract which have not been reimbursed.



      (3)   If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for
disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to
reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein
provided.



(2003 Code §  2.70) (Ord. 61, passed 5-31-1996)



§ 95.086  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Definition. The term ABANDONED PROPERTY means tangible or
intangible property that has lawfully come into the possession of the city in
the course of municipal operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has
been in the possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been declared
such by a resolution of the Council.



   (B)   Preliminary notice. If the City Manager knows the identity and
whereabouts of the owner, he/she shall serve written notice upon him/her at
least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the Council. If the
city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of
whom are known by the City Manager notice shall also be served upon him/her.
Such notice shall describe the property and state that unless it is claimed
and proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession established, the matter
of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the
Council after the expiration of 30 days from the date of such notice.



   (C)   Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring
certain property to be abandoned property, the City Manager shall publish a
notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if known) and
addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a
brief description of such property. The text of such notice shall also state
the time, place and manner of sale of all such property, except cash and
negotiables. Such notice shall be published once in a legal newspaper at
least ten days prior to the sale. Sale shall be made to the highest bidder at
public auction or sale or by a nonprofit organization with a significant
mission of community service in a private sale in the manner authorized by
statute.



   (D)   Funds and claims thereon. Expenses shall be paid from the
proceeds of the sale; the balance of the proceeds shall be paid into the
general fund of the city if the property was disposed of by a public auction
or sale; or in the case of a private sale, to the nonprofit organization
authorized to conduct said sale. The former owner, if she/he makes claim
within six months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided,
and upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the
amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount
received therefor, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage,
publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest.



(2003 Code §  2.70) (Ord. 61, passed 5-3-1996)



§ 95.087  DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY.



   (A)   Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The
City Manager may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that certain
personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed for a
municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, said property
shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the City Manager
authorized to dispose of said property in the manner stated herein.



   (B)   Surplus property with a total estimated value of less than
$100. The City Manager may sell surplus property with a total value of less
than $100 through negotiated sale.



   (C)   Surplus property with a total estimated value between $100 and
$500. The City Manager shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder,
surplus property with a total estimated value of from $100 to $500. Notice of
such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally
describing the property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of
sale either by publication once in the official newspaper, or by posting in a
conspicuous place in the City Hall at the City Manager's option. Such sale
shall be by auction.



   (D)   Surplus property with a total estimated value over $500. The
City Manager shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus
property with a total estimated value over $500. Notice of such public sale
shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing
property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale by
publication once in the official newspaper. Such sale shall be to the person
submitting the highest bid.



   (E)   Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from
sales of surplus property under this section shall be placed in the general
fund.



(2003 Code §  2.70)



§ 95.088  PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE-EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative
staff, department head, a member of the Council, or an advisor serving the
city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of property under this
subchapter. Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly
involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at
least one week's published or posted notice of sale  is given.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property
under this subchapter if such purchase is prohibited by the terms of this
subchapter.



(2003 Code §  2.70)



§ 95.999  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a
nuisance after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation
of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in § 10.99



CHAPTER 96:  RIGHT-OF-WAY PROVISIONS



Section



   96.01   Election to manage the public right-of-way



   96.02   Definitions and adoption of rules by reference



   96.03   Permit requirement



   96.04   Permit applications



   96.05   Issuance of permit; conditions



   96.06   Permit fees



   96.07   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   96.08   Supplementary applications



   96.09   Denial of permit



   96.10   Installation requirements



   96.11   Inspection



   96.12   Work done without a permit



   96.13   Supplementary notification



   96.14   Revocation of permits



   96.15   Mapping data; information required



   96.16   Location of facilities



   96.17   Damage to other facilities



   96.18   Right-of-way vacation



   96.19   Indemnification and liability



   96.20   Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities



   96.21   Appeal



   96.22   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



§ 96.01  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and
federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects
pursuant to this chapter to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.



§ 96.02  DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   Minn. Rules Ch. 7819, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and is incorporated into this code as if set out in
full. The definitions included in M.S. § 237.162, as they may be amended
from time to time, Minn. Rules part 7819.0100 subps. 1 through 23, and Minn.
Rules part 7560.0100 subps. 1 through 12 are hereby adopted by reference and
are incorporated into this chapter as if set out in full.



§ 96.03  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate permit from the city.



      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and
for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if
a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.



   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the
person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit
before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit
extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000
subp. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding division
(B) above, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by the
City Council.



   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete
only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:



   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of
the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:



      (1)   Each permittee’s name, gopher one-call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration;



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and placement and
use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to,
protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities and collapse of property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent
or other person designated by the Council be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and



         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, worker’s compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated
by the Council in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and
to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies;



      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended
from time to time as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and



      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of
authority from the State Public Utilities Commission or other applicable
state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the
certificate from the Commission or other state or federal agency.



   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:



      (1)   Permit fees as may be established by the City Council,
estimated restoration costs and other management costs;



      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the
city because of the applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or



      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges as may be established by
the City Council.



§ 96.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions. The director may impose reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with
all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited
to M.S. § 216D.01 - 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System), as
it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560.



   (C)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable
permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but
not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements
set forth in M.S. Chapter 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and
Minn. Rules Ch. 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over
existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the city.



§ 96.06  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit fees shall be in an amount as may be established by the City
Council.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation
permit fee as may be established by the City Council, in an amount sufficient
to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the
obstruction permit fee as may be established by the City Council, and shall
be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.



   (C)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees. The city may allow applicant to pay those fees within 30 days of
billing.



   (D)   Non-refundable. Permit fees as may be established by the City
Council, that were paid for a permit that the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent
or other person designated by the Council has revoked for a breach as stated
in § 96.14 are not refundable.



   (E)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



   (F)   State law. All permit fees shall be established consistent
with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.0100, as it may be amended from
time to time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.07  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
this chapter.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. The permittee shall patch its own work.
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or
to restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way,
the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If
following the restoration, the pavement settles due to the permittee’s
improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of
billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it may be required at the time of application for an
excavation permit to post a construction performance bond or a deposit in
accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.3000, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time. The Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council shall have the authority to prescribe the
manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of
general application or on a case-by-case basis.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents. The
permittee upon notification from the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other
person designated by the Council, shall correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council. The work shall be
completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council,
not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under this chapter.



   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, or fails
to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council, the
Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council at
his or her option may do the work. In that event, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
If the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights
under the construction performance bond.



   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee as may be established by the City Council; however, the right-of-way user
shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not
include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.



§ 96.08  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any
work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.



§ 96.09  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.



§ 96.10  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to time and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended from time to time.



§ 96.11  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in
accordance Minn. Rules part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Site inspection. The permittee shall make the work-site
available to city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person
designated by the Council may issue an order to the permittee for any work
which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct
the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council that the
violation has been corrected. If proof has not been presented within the
required time, the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated
by the Council may revoke the permit pursuant to § 96.14.



§ 96.12  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall
immediately notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it
considers to be an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take
whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any
event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty
pay double the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees
required by this code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter.



§ 96.13  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council of
the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



§ 96.14  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the
following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner;
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
96.11.



   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of
the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at
its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. The permittee’s failure
to so contact the city, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.



   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



§ 96.15  MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Information required. Each permittee shall provide mapping
information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules parts
7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn.
Rules 7560.0150, Subp. 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate
means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals,
and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the city
reasonably requires it. Permittees or other subcontractors shall submit to
the city evidence of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with
this division (B) and with applicable Gopher State One Call Law, being M.S.
Chapter 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules
governing service laterals installed after December 31, 2005, shall be a
condition of any city approval necessary for:



      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project including those under M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from
time to time; and



      (2)   City approval of performance under development
agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Chapter
462, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Appropriate method. The city shall reasonably determine the
appropriate method of providing the information. Failure to provide prompt
and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the
revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the
offending permittee or its subcontractors.



§ 96.16  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Compliance required. Placement, location and relocation of
facilities must comply with applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time,
to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or
replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.



   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety and welfare
or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council shall have
the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities
within the right-of-way. In making those decisions, the Clerk, Utilities
Superintendent or other person designated by the Council shall strive to the
extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the
right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public
interest, the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



§ 96.17  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it
necessary to maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the Clerk,
Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by the Council shall
notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed
as required.



   (B)   The costs associated therewith will be billed to that
registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each
facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities
in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each facility owner
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities
of another registrant caused during the city’s response to an emergency
occasioned by that owner’s facilities.



§ 96.18  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are
governed by Minn. Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to
time.



§ 96.19  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rules 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 96.20  ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.



   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other
right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, unless this requirement is
waived by the Clerk, Utilities Superintendent or other person designated by
the Council.



§ 96.21 APPEAL.



   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied
a permit; has had permit revoked; believes that the fees imposed are invalid;
or disputes a determination of the city regarding § 96.15(B), may have the
denial, revocation or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the
City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming
the denial, revocation or fee as imposition will be in writing and supported
by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.



§ 96.22  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee’s or registrant’s rights are subject to the regulatory
and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



      112.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



      113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      115.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      116.   PAWN SHOPS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Applications



   110.03   Action on application, transfer, termination and duplicate
license



   110.04   Fixing license fees



   110.05   Carrying or posting



   110.06   Penalty for property owner



   110.07   Responsibility of licensee



   110.08   Conditional licenses



   110.09   Renewal of licenses



   110.10   Insurance requirements



   110.11   License denial and fixing rates; hearing



   110.12   Withholding approvals due to delinquencies or defaults



   110.13   Criminal history background; applicants to city licenses



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION.  A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in
and completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished
by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of
the issuance of a license for a business.



   BOND.  A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions
acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.



   BUSINESS.  Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or
transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and
regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   LICENSE.  A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him
or her to carry on and transact a business.



   LICENSE FEE.  The money paid to the city pursuant to an application
and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.



   LICENSEE.  An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds
a valid, current, unexpired and un-revoked license from the city for carrying
on a business.



   SALE, SELL and SOLD.  All forms of barter and all manner or means of
furnishing merchandise to persons.



(2003 Code, § 6.01)



§ 110.02  APPLICATIONS.



   All applications shall be made as follows.



   (A)   All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk
upon forms that have been furnished by the city for those purposes.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all the
applications must be subscribed, sworn to and include information as the
Council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the business for which
license application is made.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false
statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in the
application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on
the application form shall, upon discovery of the falsehood work an automatic
refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit
issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no effect to protect the applicant from
prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part hereof.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each application
completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of
statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation of
each applicant for license to the extent as he or she deems necessary. For
the investigation the City Clerk may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police.
The Council shall not consider an application before the investigation has
been completed.



   (E)   Applications for renewal licenses may be made in the
abbreviated form as the Council may by resolution adopt.



(2003 Code, § 6.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  ACTION ON APPLICATION, TRANSFER, TERMINATION AND DUPLICATE
LICENSE.



   (A)   Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period
of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing
license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be
consistent with this chapter.



   (B)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Clerk shall
forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the
Council, payment of the appropriate license fee, and approval of the bond or
insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses shall
be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise specified herein as to
particular businesses. Except as to licenses which are specifically
city-wide, licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises
therein described.



   (C)   Transfer. Unless otherwise provided herein, no license shall
be transferable between persons or to a different location. It is unlawful to
make any transfer in violation of this division.



   (D)   Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



   (E)   Refusal and revocation. The Council may, for any reasonable
cause, refuse to grant any application, or revoke any license. No license
shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business
reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice
to the licensee and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be
given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling
for the hearing. Grounds for revocation may be, but are not limited to, any
of the following: that the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon
licensed premises; that the licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts but
failed to report the same to police; that the licensee failed or refused to
cooperate fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts; or
that the activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public
health, safety or welfare.



   (F)   Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be
issued by the City Clerk, without action by the Council, upon licensee’s
affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $2
for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked
“DUPLICATE”.



(2003 Code, § 6.03)



§ 110.04  FIXING LICENSE FEES.



   Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this
chapter shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution,
and uniformly enforced. Such license fees may, from time to time, be amended
by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth
currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk, and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the
purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may subdivide and categorize licenses
under a specific license requirement, provided, that any subdivision or
categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.



(2003 Code, § 6.04)



§ 110.05  CARRYING OR POSTING.



   All solicitors shall at all times when so engaged, carry their license
on their person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their place
of business near the licensed activity; provided, however, that in the case
of machine or other device licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the
current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device
requiring the sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand
by any officer or citizen.



(2003 Code, § 6.05)



§ 110.06  PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNER.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property
owned or controlled by him or her to be used, without a license, for any
business for which a license is required by this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 6.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.07  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, while engaged in
performance of their duties for their principal or employer under the
license, shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee.



(2003 Code, § 6.07)



§ 110.08  CONDITIONAL LICENSES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place the conditions and
restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and
justified.



(2003 Code, § 6.08)



§ 110.09  RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least
30 days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and shall contain
information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be waived
by the Council for good and sufficient cause.



(2003 Code, § 6.09)



§ 110.10  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after
approval by the Council, but before the license shall be issued, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk a policy or certificate of public
liability insurance showing: that the limits are at least as high as
required; that coverage is effective for at least the license term approved;
and that the insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30-days’
written notice served upon the City Clerk. Cancellation or termination of the
coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.



(2003 Code, § 6.10)



§ 110.11  LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES; HEARING.



   (A)   Right to deny. The Council reserves to itself the right to
deny any application for a license to operate any business licensed or
regulated under this chapter where the business involves service to the
public, rates charged for service, use of public streets or other public
property by the applicant or the public, or the public health, safety and
convenience. The Council may also consider the location of the business in
making the determination; provided, however, that before making the
determination, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to
the notice to interested parties and the public as it may deem necessary or
proper in action calling for the hearing.



   (B)   Rates. Where, under specific provisions of this chapter, the
Council has reserved to itself the right to fix or approve fees, rates or
charges of a licensed or regulated business, the rates shall be uniform for
each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a
regulated business shall claim or demand payment in excess thereof.



   (C)   Hearing. Any applicant or licensee under this chapter who
challenges denial of a license or rates fixed or approved by the Council
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council upon written request
therefor. Notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given to
the persons and by means as the Council may determine in calling the hearing.



(2003 Code, § 6.11)



§ 110.12  WITHHOLDING APPROVALS DUE TO DELINQUENCIES OR DEFAULTS.



   (A)   Conditions to city approvals.  A license or other city
approval or authorization of any kind may be granted only to an applicant who:



      (1)   Has complied with all applicable statutory and ordinance
requirements;



      (2)   Has paid all fees, charges, taxes, special assessments
and other debts or obligations that are due from the applicant and payable to
the city regarding any matter; and



      (3)   Is in compliance with all ordinance requirements and
attached conditions regarding other city approvals that have been granted to
the applicant for any matter.



   (B)   Waiver.  The requirements of the above may be waived in the
following circumstances:



      (1)   The applicant or licensee has provided sufficient
safeguards to assure payment of debts, fees or compliance with city
requirements within a reasonable time after the city approval.



      (2)   Enforcement of the requirements would result in a
significant hardship to the applicant through no fault of his or her own or
would result in an otherwise unfair situation.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 110.13  CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND; APPLICANTS TO CITY LICENSES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to
establish regulations to allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's
computerized criminal history information for a specified non-criminal
purposes of licensing background checks.



   (B)   Criminal history license background investigations. The City
Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the
city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for
the following licenses within the city:



      (1)   Liquor licenses, tobacco licenses, peddler's licenses
and any other licenses as may be designated by resolution by the city council
from time to time.



      (2)   In conducting the criminal history background
investigation in order to screen licensed applicants, the Police Department
is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Criminal Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension Computerized Criminal History Information System in
accordance with Bureau of Criminal Apprehension policy. Any data that is
accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the
care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her
designee. The summary of the results of the computerized criminal history
data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing authority,
including the city council, the City Manager, the City Clerk or other city
staff involved in the license approval process.



      (3)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant
must authorize the Police Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
M.S. Chapter 13, at it may be amended from time to time, regarding the
collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's
prior conviction, unless the crime is directly related to the license sought
and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a
jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the
city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:



         (a)   The grounds and reasons for the denial.



         (b)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure
set forth in M.S. § 364.06, as it may be amended from time to time.



         (c)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
the license.



         (d)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will
be considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 165, passed 12-2-2013)  Penalty, see 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



Section



   111.01   Amusement devices



   111.02   Dances



   111.03   Shows



   111.04   Billiards, pool and bowling



   111.05   Taxicabs



   111.06   Garbage and refuse haulers



   111.07   Charitable gambling



   111.08   Sewer service connection installer



   111.09   Communications permit



§ 111.01  AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Includes a game of skill, a coin amusement or
a video game, as defined in this section, or any combination thereof.



      ARCADE.  A contiguous area in which more than six amusement
devices are kept for use by the public generally.



      COIN AMUSEMENT.  Any machine which upon the insertion of a coin,
token or slug, operates or may be operated and is available to the public
generally for entertainment or amusement, which machine emits music, noise or
displays motion pictures.



      DISTRIBUTOR.  The person who places amusement devices on
premises not owned by him or her or under his or her control, which devices
may be played by the public generally for a price paid either directly or
indirectly.



      GAME OF SKILL.  Any device excepting pool and billiard tables,
bowling alleys and shooting lanes, but including miniatures thereof, played
by manipulating special equipment and propelling balls or other projectiles
across a board or field into respective positions whereby a score is
established, which is available to be played by the public generally at a
price paid either directly or indirectly for the privilege.



      VIDEO GAME.  Any electrical device which displays objects on a
screen and upon insertion of a coin, token or slug may be played by the
public generally for entertainment or amusement.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to have upon
premises owned or controlled by him or her: any amusement device; or operate
an arcade, without a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any
person to be a distributor without a license therefor from the city.



   (C)   Exception. This section shall not apply to video games of
chance under the control of the Charitable Gambling Control Board.



   (D)   Unlawful use and devices. It is unlawful for any person to:
sell or maintain a machine or device which is for gambling or contains an
automatic pay-off device; give any prize, award, merchandise, gift or thing
of value to any person on account of operation of the device; sell or
maintain, or permit to be operated in his or her place of business, any
amusement device equipped with an automatic pay-off device; equip any
amusement device with an automatic pay-off device; permit persons under the
age of 18 years to play or operate any game of skill; permit the playing of
coin amusement machines between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any
day; or permit the playing of coin amusement machines within 600 feet of any
church, public or parochial school or playground.



(2003 Code, § 6.30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  DANCES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PUBLIC DANCE.  Any dance wherein the public may participate by
payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing,
which fee may be in the form of a club membership, or payment of money,
directly or indirectly.



      PUBLIC DANCING PLACE.  Any room, place or space open to public
patronage in which dancing, wherein the public may participate, is carried on
and to which admission may be had by the public by payment, directly or
indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
public dancing place, or hold a public dance, without a license therefor from
the city.



   (C)   License fee. The license fee shall include the cost of
providing attendance of a police officer,  or officers.



   (D)   Application and license.



      (1)   A verified application for a dance license shall be
filed with the city and shall specify the names and addresses of the person,
persons, committee or organization that is to hold the dance, time and place
thereof, and the area of the dance floor.



      (2)   All applications shall be accompanied by affidavits of
two residents showing that the applicant is of good character and reputation
in the community in which he or she lives, that he or she has not been
convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or violation of any public dance
laws within the past five years. No license shall be issued to any person who
has been so convicted.



      (3)   No license shall be granted by the Council for any place
having so-called “private apartments” or “private rooms” furnished or
used for any purposes other than a legitimate business purpose which adjoins
the dancing place, or which may be reached by stairs, elevators or passageway
leading from the dancing place. Nor shall a license be granted for any place
which is not properly ventilated and equipped with necessary toilets,
washrooms or lighting facilities.



      (4)   Applications may be referred by the Council to the Chief
of Police for investigation and report prior to being acted upon by the
Council.



      (5)   The Council shall act upon all dance license
applications at a regular or special meeting thereof, whether or not it is
included in the call or agenda of the meeting.



      (6)   At least one security person shall be present at every
public dance during the entire time the dance is being held. Before any
person may be employed as a security person, the Chief of Police shall
conduct a background check of that individual and shall approve the
employment of that person as a security person. The security person shall be
employed and compensated by the individual or organization applying for the
dance permit.



      (7)   The dance license shall be posted in the public dancing
place and shall state the name of the licensee, the amount paid therefor, and
the time and place licensed. The license shall also state that the licensee
is responsible for the manner of conducting the dance.



      (8)   No license shall be issued to any applicant under the
age of 18 years.



   (E)   Dance regulations.



      (1)   Obscenity and immorality prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to dance, or for a licensee to permit or suffer any person to
dance at any public dance in an indecent or immodest manner. It is also
unlawful for any person at a public dance to speak in a rude, boisterous,
obscene or indecent manner or for any licensee to suffer or permit any person
so to act or speak in any public dancing place.



      (2)   Illumination. Every public dancing place shall be
brightly illuminated while in public use, and dancing therein while the
lights are extinguished, dimmed or turned low so as to give imperfect
illumination is prohibited.



      (3)   Certain persons prohibited. No licensee shall permit any
unmarried person under the age of 16 years, unless the unmarried person is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, to remain in a public dancing
place. Nor shall any licensee permit any intoxicated person, or other person
who persists in violating the law, to be or remain in a public dancing place.



      (4)   Hours of dancing. No public dance shall be held on any
day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(2003 Code, § 6.31)  (Ord. 32, passed 5-19-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  SHOWS.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to present any
public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other
performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license therefor
from the city.



   (B)   Exceptions. No license shall be required in the following
instances:



      (1)   Performances presented in the local schools and
colleges, under the sponsorship of the schools and colleges, and primarily
for the students thereof only;



      (2)   Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events
sponsored by local schools or colleges using student talent only; or



      (3)   Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide
local church and non-profit organizations, provided that the organization
shall be incorporated.



   (C)   Obscenity prohibited.



      (1)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         NUDITY.  Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered,
post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this
definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the
nipple and the areola only are covered.



         OBSCENE PERFORMANCE.  A performance which in whole or in
part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or explicit verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.



         OBSCENITIES.  Those slang words currently generally
rejected for regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to
genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products,
either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for
their bodily, sexual or excretory meaning.



         PERFORMANCE.  Any play, motion picture film, dance or
other exhibition pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience.



         SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or
upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.



         SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.



         SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female
genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation,
or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct
or nudity.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary
consideration or other valuable commodity or service, to knowingly or
recklessly: exhibit an obscene performance; directly or indirectly sell an
admission ticket or other means to gain entrance to an obscene performance,
or directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises whereon
there is exhibited an obscene performance.



      (3)   Any prosecution under this division (C) shall include
the following elements:



         (a)   The average person, applying contemporary
community standards, would find the performance, taken as a whole, appealing
to the prurient interest of the audience;



         (b)   The performance describes or depicts, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct included in the definition of
“obscene performance”; and



         (c)   The performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value.



(2003 Code, § 6.32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   No sexually oriented business shall locate in any place which is also
used to dispense or consume alcohol, see § 114.09



   Sexually oriented businesses, generally, see Chapter 114



§ 111.04  BILLIARDS, POOL AND BOWLING.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain any pool, billiard, snooker or other game table, or any bowling
alley (bowling lane) available for public use without first having obtained a
license from the city.



   (B)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Pool, billiard, snooker or other game table licensee to
be open between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any weekday, or between 1:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on any Sunday, and permit use of the licensed facilities;



      (2)   Licensee to permit any form of gambling thereon;



      (3)   Licensee to permit any person to become disorderly or to
use profane, obscene or indecent language; see M.S. § 609.72, disorderly
conduct, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding conduct that is
illegal; or



      (4)   Licensee, not having an on-sale liquor license, to sell
or possess, or knowingly allow any person on the licensed premises to sell or
possess, intoxicating liquor.



(2003 Code, § 6.33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.05  TAXICABS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over a
taxicab whether he or she be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed
operator.



      OPERATOR.  A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one
or more taxicabs.



      TAXICAB.  Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or
traversing a scheduled or unscheduled route for public use or hire upon
payment of a fare or at regular fare rates, but not including such as are
designed for mass transportation as buses, trains or streetcars.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to drive or
operate a taxicab without a license therefor from the city.



   (C)   License issuance and display, and vehicle marking. All
licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as otherwise herein
provided. License tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be
plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. Both sides of every
licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked as
such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the full or abbreviated
name of the licensed operator.



   (D)   Insurance required.



      (1)   No license to operate a taxicab shall be issued until
the applicant has filed with the city Clerk-Treasurer a policy or certificate
of policy evidencing coverage, under an insurance policy issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, approved by the
Council, insuring the person against claims, demands or losses in the sum of
at least $200,000 combined single limit, for injury to or death of any number
of persons or property damage in any one accident, resulting from the
negligent operation, use or defective condition of the licensed motor vehicle.



      (2)   Such insurance policy shall also contain a clause
obligating the insurer to give ten-days’ written notice to the City
Clerk-Treasurer and to the insured or assured, before any cancellation or
termination of the policy which is earlier than its expiration date.



      (3)   No such policy shall include or contain any imitation,
condition or clause providing, in effect, that the policy shall not cover
automobiles mentioned, described or included herein when the automobiles are
driven, used, operated or maintained while the driver or occupant thereof is
intoxicated or engaged in the illicit transportation of liquor. No such
policy shall contain any limitation, clause or provision whatever excepting
and releasing any insurer on any such policy from liability hereunder by
reason of any such taxicab being driven, used or operated when the driver or
occupant thereof is intoxicated or engaged in the illicit transportation of
liquor. Nothing contained in this division (D)(3) shall be construed to
affect the defense of contributory negligence which may be pleaded by the
licensee or his or her insurer.



      (4)   If, at any time, in the judgment of the City Clerk, any
such policy is not sufficient for any reason, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall
require the owner, lessee, licensee or operator of the vehicle to replace the
policy with another approved by the Council. If, for any reason, any policy
shall become void or be cancelled or become ineffectual for the purposes set
forth in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
licensed motor vehicle until a policy approved by the Council has been
obtained and deposited with the City Clerk. Any license issued under this
section shall terminate whenever, during the term of the license, the
licensee fails to keep in full force and effect the insurance as required in
this section.



   (E)   Rates. Each applicant shall file with the City Clerk, before a
taxicab license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to
be charged by him or her during the licensed period for which the application
is made. The schedule of maximum rates proposed August 30, 2013, or a
compromise schedule thereof, shall be approved by the Council before granting
the license. The schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
taxicab in full view of passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall
prevent a taxicab licensee from petitioning the Council for review of the
rates during the licensed period, and the Council may likewise consider the
petition and make new rates effective at any time. No taxicab licensee shall
charge rates in excess of maximum rates approved by the Council.



   (F)   Mechanical condition. Before issuing a taxicab license, the
applicant shall present to the Council a certificate signed by a competent
and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good
mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of
passengers, and that it is in neat and clean condition. A similar certificate
may be required from time to time during the licensed period. In lieu of a
certificate, the Council may accept the report of the Chief of Police
relative thereto.



   (G)   Additional conditions. The Council may, at the time of
issuance of any license or renewal of an existing license, attach the
additional conditions, as prerequisites to the issuance or maintenance of the
license, as are in the best interests of the public.



   (H)   Expiration. Each license shall expire one year from the date
of its issuance.



(2003 Code, § 6.34)  (Ord. 77, passed 5-22-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.06  GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GARBAGE.  All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and
carcasses of dead animals but excluding human excreta,  sewage and other
water-carried wastes.



      OTHER REFUSE.  Ashes, glass, crockery, cans, taper, boxes, rags
and similar non- putrescible wastes but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone,
concrete, trees, tree branches and wood.



   (B)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to haul
garbage or other refuse for hire without a license therefor from the city, or
to haul garbage or other refuse from his or her own residence or business
property other than as herein excepted.



   (C)   Exception. Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from
hauling garbage or other refuse from their own residences or business
properties provided the following rules are observed: that all garbage is
hauled in containers that are water-tight on all sides and the bottom and
with tight-fitting covers on top; that all other refuse is hauled in vehicles
with leak-proof bodies and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other
means or material so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of
cargo; and that all garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only
at the designated sanitary landfill.



   (D)   Hauler licensee requirements.



      (1)   Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition
that the licensee have packer-type vehicles in good condition to prevent loss
in transit of solid cargo, that the vehicle be kept clean and as free from
offensive odors as possible and not allowed to stand in any street longer
than reasonably necessary to collect garbage or refuse, and that the same be
dumped or unloaded only at the designated sanitary landfill, and strictly in
accordance with regulations relating thereto.



      (2)   The Council, in the interest of maintaining healthful
and sanitary conditions in the city, hereby reserves the right to specify and
assign certain areas to all licensees, and to limit the number of licenses
issued.



(2003 Code, § 6.36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.07  CHARITABLE GAMBLING.



   (A)   Each organization which is licensed by the state to conduct
lawful gambling, and which is required to file an annual financial report and
annual tax returns or other reports with the Charitable Gambling Control
Board, shall simultaneously file copies of the annual report(s) and tax
return(s), together with all attached schedules and work sheets, and a
summary explanation of the same, together with a list of donations and
recipients, with the City Manager, who shall make copies available to the
Council.



   (B)   The Council will not approve an application for license
renewal to the Gambling Control Board of any organization that has failed to
comply with the reporting requirements of this section.



(2003 Code, § 6.37)  (Ord. 13, passed 1-19-1990)



§ 111.08  SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION INSTALLER.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the work or
business of installing private sewer service lines and appurtenances for
others without a license therefor from the city.



   (B)   Any person desiring to engage in the work shall make
application to the city on forms to be supplied by the city together with a
fee adopted by resolution of the Council. All licenses issued shall be for
one year only and each renewal shall be made by application together with the
annual license fee. A plumber licensed by the State Board of Health shall pay
no fee to the city, but shall show evidence of the state license before the
city issues a license.



   (C)   Each applicant for license shall sign an agreement on the form
as may be delivered by the city agreeing to pay the city the actual cost of
repair for any damage caused to the city sewer system by the applicant or any
of his or her employees or agents. This agreement shall accompany the license
application.



   (D)   Each applicant shall accompany his or her application with a
certificate of insurance in a company acceptable to the city showing public
liability insurance coverage with limits of at least $250,000 per person;
$500,000 per occurrence and $10,000 for property damage. The certificate
shall specifically state that the insurance covers underground operations and
shall contain a provision that the coverage afforded under the policies will
not be cancelled or materially changed until at least 15 days prior written
notice has been given to the city.



(2003 Code, § 6.38)  (Ord. 7, passed 9-23-1988)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.09  COMMUNICATIONS PERMIT.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager or designated representative.



      COMPANY.  A natural or corporate person, business association,
political subdivision, public or private agency of any kind, its successors
and assigns, who or which seeks or is required to construct, install,
operate, repair, maintain, remove or relocate facilities in the city.



      FACILITIES.  Telecommunications equipment of any kind,
including, but not limited to, audio, video, paging, facsimile or similar
service, not governed by M.S. Chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to
time, including all trunks, lines, circuits, physical connections, switching
equipment, wireless communication equipment of all kinds, and any necessary
appurtenances owned, leased or operated by a company on, over, in, under,
across or along public ground.



      PUBLIC GROUND.  Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways,
utility easements and public grounds in the city.



   (B)   Permit procedure.



      (1)   Permit required. A company may not construct, install,
repair, remove or relocate facilities, or any part thereof, in, on, over,
under or along public ground without first obtaining a permit from the city.



      (2)   Application. Application for a permit shall be made to
the City Manager.



      (3)   Issuance of permit. If the City Manager determines that
the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, the City
Manager may issue a permit to the company. An applicant may contest a permit
denial, or the conditions of approval by written notice to the City Clerk
requesting a Council review within 14 days of the City Manager’s action.
The Council shall hear any contest of the City Manager’s actions under this
section within 45 days of the City Clerk’s receipt of the contest notice.
Nothing in this section precludes the city from requiring a franchise
agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to the issuance
of a permit set forth herein.



      (4)   Permit fee. The application must be accompanied by the
permit fee set by the Council by resolution.



      (5)   Security for completion of work. Prior to commencement
of work, the company must deposit with the city security in the form of
certified check, letter of credit or construction bond, in a sufficient
amount as determined by the City Manager for the completion of the work. The
securities will be held until the work is completed, plus a period of six
months hereafter to guarantee that restoration work has been satisfactorily
completed. Upon application of the company, providing the information as the
City Manager may require, if two or more work projects are to be constructed
during a calendar year, the City Manager may accept, in lieu of separate
security for each project, a single security for multiple projects in the
form and amount as determined, in the discretion of the City Manager, to be
sufficient to assure completion of all projects which may be in progress at
any one time during that calendar year and to guarantee that restoration work
will be satisfactorily completed. The security will then be returned to the
company with interest if required by law and then interest at the applicable
statutory rate.



      (6)   Inspection of work. When the work is completed, the
company must request an inspection by the City Manager. The City Manager will
determine if the work has been satisfactorily completed and provide the
company with a written report of the inspection and approval.



   (C)   Restoration and relocation.



      (1)   Restoration. Upon completion of the work, the company
must restore the general area of the work, including paving and its
foundations, to the same condition that existed prior to commencement of the
work and must exercise reasonable care to maintain the same condition for two
years thereafter. The work must be completed as promptly as weather permits.
If the company does not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all
dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and restore the public ground to the
same condition, the city may put it in the same condition at the expense of
the company. The company must, upon demand, pay to the city the direct and
indirect cost of the work done for or performed by the city, including, but
not limited to, the city’s administrative costs. To recover its costs, the
city will first draw on the security posted by the company and then recover
the balance of the costs incurred from the company directly by written
demand. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available to the
city.



      (2)   Company initiated relocation. The company must give the
city written notice prior to a company initiated relocation of facilities. A
company initiated relocation must be at the company’s expense and must be
approved by the city, the approval not to be unreasonably withheld.



      (3)   City required relocation. The  company must promptly,
and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions,
permanently relocate its facilities whenever the city requires the relocation.



      (4)   Relocation where public ground vacated. The vacation of
public ground does not deprive the company of the right to operate and
maintain its facilities in the city. If the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the company, the company must pay the relocation costs. If the
vacation proceedings are initiated by the city or other persons, the company
must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city, company
and other persons.



   (D)   Company default.



      (1)   Notice. If the company is in default in the performance
of the work authorized by the permit, including, but not limited to,
restoration requirements, for more than 30 days after receiving written
notice from the city of the default, the city may terminate the rights of the
company under the permit, the notice of default must be in writing and
specify the provisions of the permit under which the default is claimed and
state the grounds of the claim. The notice must be served on the company by
personally delivering it to an officer thereof at its principal place of
business in the state, or by certified mail to that address.



      (2)   City action on default. If the company is in default in
the performance of the work authorized by the permit, the city may, after the
above notice, to the company and failure of the company to cure the default,
take action as may be reasonably necessary to abate the condition caused by
the default. The company must reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable
costs, including costs of collection and attorney fees incurred as a result
of the company default. The security posted under division (B) above will be
applied by the city first toward payment for the reimbursement.



   (E)   Indemnification.



      (1)   Scope. The company will indemnify, keep and hold the
city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents free and harmless
from any and all claims and actions on account of injury or death of persons
or damage to property occasioned by the construction, installation,
maintenance, repair, removal, relocation or operation of the facilities
affecting public ground, unless the injury or damage is the result of the
negligence of the city, its officials, employees, officers or agents. The
city will notify the company of claims or actions and provide a reasonable
opportunity for the company to accept and undertake the defense.



      (2)   Claim defense. If a claim or action is brought against
the city under circumstances where indemnification applies, the company, at
its sole expense, shall defend the city if written notice of the claim or
action is given to the company within a period wherein the company is not
prejudiced in the defense of the claim or action by lack of the notice. If
the company undertakes the defense, the company shall have complete control
of the claim or action, but it may not settle without the consent of the
city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. This division is not, as to
third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the
city. In defending any action on behalf of the city, the company is entitled
to assert every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own
behalf.



   (F)   Other conditions of use.



      (1)   Use of public ground. Facilities must be located,
constructed, installed, maintained or relocated so as not to endanger or
unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary traffic, travel and use
of public ground. The facilities are subject to additional conditions of the
permit as established by the director, including, but not limited to, the
right of inspection by the city at reasonable times and places; the
obligation to relocate the facilities pursuant to division (C) above; and
compliance with all applicable regulations imposed by the State Public
Utilities Commission and other state and federal law, including prompt
compliance with the requirements of the Gopher State One Call program, M.S.
Chapter 216D, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   Location. The facilities must be placed in a location
agreed to by the city. The company shall give the city 45 days’ advanced
written notice of the company’s proposed location of facilities within the
public ground. No later than 45 days after the city’s receipt of the
company’s written notice the city will notify the company in writing of the
city’s acceptance or rejection of the proposed location. If the city
rejects the company’s proposed location, the city shall propose alternative
location. The city does not waive or forfeit its right to reject the location
of facilities by failure to respond within the 45 days.



      (3)   Emergency work. A company may open and disturb the
surface of the public ground without a permit where an emergency exists
requiring the immediate repair of its facilities, and in that event, the
company must request a permit not later than the second working day
thereafter and comply with the applicable conditions of the permit. In no
event may the company undertake such an activity which will result in the
closing of a street or alley without prior notification to the city.



      (4)   Street improvements, paving or resurfacing. The city
will give the company written notice of plans for street improvements where
permanent paving or resurfacing is involved. The notice must contain: the
nature and character of the improvements; the streets upon which the
improvements are to be made; the extent of the improvements, the time when
the city will start the work; and if more than one street is involved, the
sequence in which the work is to proceed.



      (5)   Company protection of facilities. The company must take
reasonable measures to prevent the facilities from causing damage to persons
or property. The company must take reasonable measures to protect its
facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons,
property or the elements. The company must take specific protective measures
when the city performs work near the facilities.



      (6)   Prior service connections. In cases where the city is
undertaking the paving or resurfacing of streets and the facilities are
located under the street, the company may be required to install service
connections prior to the paving or resurfacing, if it is apparent that
service will be required during the five-year period following the paving or
resurfacing.



   (G)   Effective date and applicability to existing facilities.
Companies with facilities in, on, over, under or along public ground on the
effective date of this section must take prompt action to comply with this
section and the permits authorized by this section. A company, however, is
not required to reapply for a permit obtained from the city prior to the
effective date of this section. A company is not required to pay the
difference between the permit fee of a previously obtained permit and the
equivalent newly obtained permit under this section. All other provisions of
this section apply to existing facilities, this section shall take effect
immediately from and after its passage and publication according to law.



   (H)   Acceptance of requirements. By receiving a permit pursuant to
this section, the company accepts and agrees to comply with all of the
requirements of this section.



   (I)   Public ground other than right-of-way. Nothing in this section
is intended to grant to the company authority beyond that given by M.S. §
222.37, as it may be amended from time to time, for use of the public
rights-of-way for construction and operation of facilities. If the city
allows the company to use its non-right-of-way public ground, the terms of
this section apply to the extent they are consistent with the contract,
statutory and common law rights the city owns in the property.



   (J)   Regulations permit schedules. The City Manager is authorized
and directed to prepare suitable regulations and schedules for the
administration of permits issued under this section.



(2003 Code, § 6.41)  (Ord. 101, passed 3-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   License



   112.04   Fees



   112.05   Basis for denial of license



   112.06   Prohibited sales



   112.07   Vending machines



   112.08   Self-service sales



   112.09   Responsibility



   112.10   Compliance checks and inspections



   112.11   Violations



   112.12   Nicotine delivery products



   112.13   Exceptions and defenses



   112.14   Tobacco; minors



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related services, and the sales, possession and use are violations of
both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the city hereby
accepts and adopts (i.e., CDC, Minnesota Department of Public Health/ASSIST)
have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age
of 18 years, and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without
having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and
because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health
problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of
government; this section shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession
and use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices for the
purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against
the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco
products and tobacco related devices, and to further official policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated
in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-1)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related
devices are following and complying with the requirements of this section.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this
section. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors to attempt to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices for
educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and
federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of
government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local
laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco
related devices.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.  The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale.



   INDIVIDUALLY WRAPPED TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Include, but will
not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose
tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing
tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or
other container as described in this definition shall not be considered
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.



   LOOSIES.  The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packed cigarette.



   MINOR.  Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.



   MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general
public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS shall include, but not be limited to, grocery
stores, convenience stores and restaurants.



   SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open displays of tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have
access to the tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices, without
the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee.
The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of
the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device between the customer
and the licensee or employee. SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING shall not include
vending machines.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any products containing, made or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other
means, or any component, part or accessory of a tobacco product, including,
but not limited to, cigars, little cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques,
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco,
snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine cut and other
chewing tobacco, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of
tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco, but does not include cigarettes
as defined in this section. TOBACCO PRODUCTS excludes any tobacco product
that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product or for
other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an
approved purpose.



   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES.  Any tobacco product as well as a pipe,
rolling papers or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used
in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or
tobacco products.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other
type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly
into the machine, the presence of any type of locking device, whether
electronic or otherwise, which must first be deactivated by the licensee or
an employee of a licensee, shall not exclude a device from being considered a
vending machine for the purposes of this section.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-2)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 157, passed
1-18-2011)



§ 112.03  LICENSE.



   No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to do so from
the city.



   (A)   Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco,
tobacco products and tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided
by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant,
the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone numbers,
the name of the business or which the license is sought, and any additional
information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed
application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the Council for
action at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the Clerk shall
determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the
application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make
the application complete.



   (B)   Action. The Council may either approve or deny the license, or
it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete
any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If
the Council shall approve the license, the Clerk shall issue the license to
the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall
be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s right to
appeal the Council’s decision.



   (C)   Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid on
a calendar year basis from January 1 to December 31 of each year. In the
event of an application made on the mid-year basis, the Council may direct
that the fee provided therefor is hereinafter noted be pro rated with the
initial license period to run from the date of approval to December 31 of the
year in which approved. Any subsequent or renewal license shall thereafter be
from January 1 through December 31.



   (D)   Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this
section may be revoked or suspended.



   (E)   Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be
valid only on the premises for which the license as issued and only for that
person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another
location or person shall be valid only with prior approval of the Council.



   (F)   Movable place of business. No license shall be issued to a
movable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible
to be licensed under this section.



   (G)   Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain
view of the general public on the licensed remises.



   (H)   Renewals.



      (1)   The renewal of a license issued under this section shall
be handled in the same manner as the original application.



      (2)   The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days
but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.



      (3)   The issuance of a license issued under this section
shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant
and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.



      (4)   Holders of existing licenses shall not be entitled to
automatic renewal of the license, but shall be required to apply for a new
license unless otherwise directed by the Council.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-3)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  FEES.



   No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate
license fee shall be paid in full (unless for a pro rated portion of the
year). The fee for a license shall be that as required by resolution adopted
by the Council from time to time with the resolution being kept on file with
the City Clerk.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-4)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.05  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a
license under this section; however, except as may otherwise be provided by
law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the
city must deny the license; if a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible
for the license under this section:



   (A)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



   (B)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of
any violation of a federal, state or local law or city code provision, or
other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices;



   (C)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of
the date of application;



   (D)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information; or



   (E)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or local law,
city code provision or other regulation from holding the license.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-5)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.06  PROHIBITED SALES.



   (A)   General violation. It is a violation of this section for any
person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco
related device:



      (1)   To any person under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   By means of any type of vending machine, except as may
otherwise be provided in this section;



      (3)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer
does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the
licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco
related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product or tobacco related device between the licensee or the
licensee’s employee and the customer. No person shall offer for sale
tobacco or tobacco related devices as defined in this chapter in open
displays which are accessible to the public without the intervention of a
store employee;



      (4)   By means of loosies as defined herein;



      (5)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or
controlled substances, except nicotine and other substances found naturally
in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process; or



      (6)   By any other means, or to any other person, or in any
other manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, city
code provision or other regulation.



   (B)   Promotional distribution. No person shall engage in the
promotional distribution of smokeless tobacco products or cigarettes, cigars,
pipe tobacco or other tobacco products as defined in this chapter, except
that single serving samples of tobacco may be distributed promotionally in
tobacco stores.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-6)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998; Ord. 157, passed
1-18-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.07  VENDING MACHINES.



   It is unlawful for any person licensed under this section to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices by the means of
a vending machine unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the
licensed establishment.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-7)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.08  SELF-SERVICE SALES.



   It is unlawful for a licensee under this section to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the
customer may have access to those items without having to request the item
from the licensee or the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a
physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product or the tobacco related
device between the licensee or his or her Clerk and the customer unless
minors are at all time prohibited from entering the licensed establishment
and unless 90% or more of the revenues of the licensed establishment are
generated by the sale of tobacco and tobacco related products.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-8)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions
of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an
item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing
in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also
subjecting the Clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this
section, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-9)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.10  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city
police or other authorized city official during regular business hours.



   (B)   From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall
conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their
parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years
to enter the licensed premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices.



   (C)   Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or
other designated city personnel.



   (D)   Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of
unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices,
when the items are obtained as part of the compliance check.



   (E)   No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a
false identification or theatrical makeup misrepresenting the minor’s age
and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall produce any
identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research or training
purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal
law.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-10)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.11  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged
violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets
forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of
his or her right to be heard on the accusation.



   (B)   Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so
requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be
published and provided to the accused violator.



   (C)   Hearing Officer. The Council shall serve as the Hearing
Officer.



   (D)   Decision. If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation
of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the Hearing Officer’s
reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under this
section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to
the accused violator. Likewise, if the Hearing Officer finds that no
violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the
findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused
violator.



   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the Hearing Officer
shall be filed in the District Court for the city in which the alleged
violation occurred.



   (F)   Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged
violation of this section.



   (G)   Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-11)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.12  NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS.



   It shall be illegal to sell nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a
minor unless the sale and delivery has been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for medical purposes.



(Ord. 157, passed 1-18-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.13  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products and tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully
recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.



(2003 Code, § 6.35-13)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-29-1998)



§ 112.14  TOBACCO; MINORS.



   (A)   Minor defined.MINOR is any natural person who has not yet
reached the age of 18 years.



   (B)   Possession by minor. It is unlawful for any minor to have in
his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.
This division (B) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance
check on behalf of the city.



   (C)   Use by minor. It is unlawful for any minor to smoke, chew,
sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.



   (D)   Procurement by or for minor. It is unlawful:



      (1)   For any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or
otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related device;



      (2)   For any person to purchase or otherwise obtain the items
on behalf of a minor;



      (3)   For any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco,
tobacco product or tobacco related device to any minor;



      (4)   For any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to
illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco related device; and



      (5)   This division (D) shall not apply to minors lawfully
involved in a compliance check on behalf of the city.



   (E)   False identification. It is unlawful for any minor to attempt
to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification,
whether the identification is that of another person or one in which the age
of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older
than the actual age of the person.



   (F)   Exceptions and defenses. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the providing of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices to a
minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural
ceremony. It is an affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a
person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.



(2003 Code, § 8.03)  (Ord. 80, passed 10-30-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Exceptions to definitions



   113.03   Licensing; exemptions



   113.04   License ineligibility



   113.05   License suspension and revocation



   113.06   License transferability



   113.07   Registration



   113.08   Prohibited activities



   113.09   Exclusion by placard



   113.10   Effectiveness



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of
this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the
same as the term HAWKER.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the City Hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state
law shall not be counted as REGULAR BUSINESS DAYS.



   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a
catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur
at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person
from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s
activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The
term shall mean the same as the term CANVASSER.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of
a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store
front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one location for more than 14 consecutive days.



§ 113.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold
by the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying
to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable
food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to
any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the
customers on his or her established regular delivery route.



   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly
known as garage sales, rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those
persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market,
shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse
any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or
restrict door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy
shall not be required to register as solicitors under § 113.07. The term
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as
vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas.



§ 113.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   County license required. No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first
having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.
Chapter 329 as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a
license for the activity.



   (B)   City license required. Pursuant to M.S. § 437.02, as it may
be amended from time to time, except as otherwise provided for by this
chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient
merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors
need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to §
113.07.



   (C)   Application. Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business.
Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications
shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the
following information:



      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers;



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features and the like);



      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence;



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent;



      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business
(if any);



      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the
applicant;



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license;



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
daily license;



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of
days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14
consecutive days);



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including
the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses;



      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;



      (15)   Proof of any requested county license;



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner’s agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided;



      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council;



      (19)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other
acceptable form of identification; and



      (20)   The license plate number, registration information and
vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with
the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.



   (D)   Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee as will from time to time be established by the City
Council.



   (E)   Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and
payment of the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days,
must determine if the application is complete. An application is determined
to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City
Clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must
inform the applicant of the required necessary information that is missing.
If the application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation,
including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided
with the application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a
complete application the City Clerk must issue the license, unless there
exist grounds for denying the license under § 113.04, in which case the
Clerk must deny the license. If the City Clerk denies the license, the
applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial,
and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20
days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City
Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of
the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing
can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of
certiorari.



   (F)   Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall
be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses
granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period
indicated on the license.



   (G)   License exemptions.



      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or
attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown,
produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.



      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street or other
type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising
that person’s State or Federal Constitutional rights, such as the freedom
of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be
lost if the person’s exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental
to a commercial activity.



      (3)   Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county license;



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application;



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years
from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person’s ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in an honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not
be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business
practices and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another
person;



   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant; and/or



   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation.
Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to,
the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months,
or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five
years.



§ 113.05  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally. Any license issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of
any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the
application form;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during
the course of the licensed activity;



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under § 113.04; or



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or
revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple
persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of
the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized
person’s authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant
on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued
under this chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written
notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right
to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or
by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address
provided on the license application.



   (D)   Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division
(C) above, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service
shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.
If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing
shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three
regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the
licensee of its decision.



   (E)   Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent
harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions
of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City
Council may immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of
the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C)
above.



   (F)   Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.06  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.07  REGISTRATION.



   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter under § 113.03, shall be required to register with the city.
Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register.
The term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and
other ideas. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a
license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon
completion of the registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the
registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration.
Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold
by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure;



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;



   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;



   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of
another person;



   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person; or



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by
the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long
and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No
Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants” or “Peddlers, Solicitors and
Transient Merchants Prohibited” or other comparable statement. No person
other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise
tamper with any sign or placard under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.10  EFFECTIVENESS.



   The provisions of §§ 113.01, 113.02, 113.08 and 113.09 shall
automatically apply upon adoption of this chapter. Sections 113.03, 113.04,
113.05, 113.06 and 113.07 shall not be effective until the adoption of a City
Council resolution or ordinance authorizing the licensing of persons covered
by those sections.



CHAPTER 114:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   114.01   Purpose



   114.02   Definitions



   114.03   License required



   114.04   Applications



   114.05   Renewal applications



   114.06   License fees



   114.07   Granting of license



   114.08   Persons ineligible for license



   114.09   Places ineligible for license



   114.10   Building standards



   114.11   Conditions of license



   114.12   Hours of operation



   114.13   Existing licensee compliance



§ 114.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing the
licensing of sexually oriented businesses classified as adult uses-principal
in the city and to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-1)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT USE - BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent to the body of a patron when the body is
wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - BOOKSTORE.  A building or portion of a building used for
the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture film if the building
or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one
or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age and if a
substantial or significant portion of the items are distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - CABARET.  A building or portion of a building used for
providing dancing or other live entertainment, if the building or portion of
a building excludes minors by virtue of age and if the dancing or other live
entertainment is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment which
excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of engaging
in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of
the establishment and a customer, if the service is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A parlor which excludes minors
by reason of age, and which provides the services of engaging in or listening
to conversation, talk or discussion, if the service is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A club which excludes minors by reason
of age, and if the club is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - HOTEL OR MOTEL.  A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and there material is presented which is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   ADULT USE - MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB.  A parlor or club which
restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
massage, if the service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or portion of a
building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material if the building or portion of a building, as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age, and if the material is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.



   ADULT USE - MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment whose major business is
the provision, to customers, if figure models who are so provided with the
intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the
customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by the customers.



   ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or portion of a
building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
if the building or portion of building as a prevailing practice excludes
minors by virtue of age, and if the material is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.



   ADULT USE - NOVELTY BUSINESS.  A business which has as a principal
activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which
are designed for sexual stimulation.



   ADULT USE - SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age,
and which, provides a steam bath or heating bathing room used for the purpose
of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USE - STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the building or portion of a
building restricts minors by reason of age, and if the service provided by
the steam room/bathhouse, facility is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   CHURCH.  A building or structure, or a group of buildings or
structures which, by design and construction, are primarily intended for the
conducting of organized religious services and associated accessory uses.



   ESCORT BUREAU.  Any person who offers to furnish an escort for
financial consideration.



   ESCORT.  Any person who receives financial consideration for
consorting with or escorting another person in any public or private place
within the city.



   SCHOOL.  A public school as defined by M.S. § 120A.20, as it may be
amended from time to time, or a non-public school, or a non-sectarian,
non-public school as defined in M.S. § 123.932, as it may be amended from
time to time.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Actual  or  simulated  sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the
context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented
acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;



      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence;



      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus or masturbation;



      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast;



      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom
are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who
are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of any such persons;



      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually
oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or
anal irrigation.



   YOUTH FACILITY.  A public playground, dayground, public swimming pool,
public library or licensed day care facility.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-2)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall operate a sexually oriented
business classified as an adult use type activity or business as hereinbefore
noted in § 114.02 without having first secured a license as hereinafter
provided.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-3)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.04  APPLICATIONS.



   In addition to applicable information as the city may require, an
application for the license required by this chapter shall include the
following information:



   (A)   The name, residence, phone number and birth date of the
applicant, if an individual; and if a corporation, the names, residences,
phone numbers and birth dates of those owners holding more than 5% of the
outstanding stock of the corporation;



   (B)   The name, address, phone number and birth date of the manager
of the operation, if different from the owners;



   (C)   The premises wherein the adult use is to be located;



   (D)   A statement detailing each gross misdemeanor or felony
relating to a sex offense and/or the operation of adult uses and related
activities of which the applicant or, in the case of a corporation, the
owners of more than 5% of the outstanding stock of the corporation, have been
convicted, and whether or not the applicant has ever applied for or held a
license to operate a similar type of business in other communities;



   (E)   The activities and types of business to be conducted;



   (F)   The hours of operation;



   (G)   The provisions made to restrict access by minors;



   (H)   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal
operations and activities;



   (I)   The property owner’s name and address and business owner’s
name and address; and



   (J)   A description of merchandise, services or entertainment for
sale, in the premises.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-4)



§ 114.05  RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for renewal licenses required by this chapter shall be
completed and filed with the City Clerk no later than November 30 of the year
preceding the year for which application is made. Any renewal application not
completed and filed by that date shall be treated as a non-renewal
application.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-5)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.06  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the city for payment in full of the required fee for the
license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the city. Upon
rejection of any applications for license, the city may refund the license
fee paid, minus the amount of costs necessary for application, investigation
and review, including, but not limited to, costs relating to administration,
planning, legal inspection and police investigation.



   (B)   All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in each
year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except that when
the application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the
year for a pro rata fee. In computing the fee, any unexpired fraction of a
month shall be counted as one month. Application for renewal of licenses
shall be required to be filed each year.



   (C)   The annual fee for an adult use-principal license shall be as
set by resolution of the Council. The Council shall not set this fee
arbitrarily but shall determine the amount in relation to its best estimate
of actual costs of administration, planning, legal inspection and police
investigations related to the application and ongoing operation of the
business.



   (D)   No part of the fee paid by any licensee shall be refunded,
except in the following instances upon application to the City Manager within
30 days for the happening of any of the following events. There shall be
refunded a pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the
license, computed on a monthly basis, when operation of the licensed business
ceases not less than one month before expiration of the license because of:



      (1)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire
or other catastrophe;



      (2)   The licensee’s disabling illness; and/or



      (3)   The licensee’s death.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-6)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.07  GRANTING OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designated representatives
shall investigate all facts set out in the application. After the
investigation, and within 30 days of the date of application, the Council
shall grant or refuse the application. Criteria for evaluating a license
shall include the following:



      (1)   Application shall be completed in full;



      (2)   A license shall not be issued to a person who is
ineligible for a license under § 114.08;



      (3)   A license shall not be issued to an applicant whose
place of business is ineligible for a license under § 114.09;



      (4)   A license shall not be issued to an applicant whose
place of business does not comply with § 114.10;



      (5)   A license shall not be issued to an applicant if
applicant does not comply with §§ 114.11 and 114.12;



      (6)   The adult use shall be in compliance with all applicable
city code regulations; and



      (7)   The place of business shall meet the city’s Building
and Fire Code regulations in effect as of the date of application.



   (B)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to another holder.  Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application. No license shall be
transferred to another place without the approval of the Council. Any
applicant whose application has been denied shall have the right of prompt
judicial review without the need to first appeal to the city.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-7)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.08  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted to or held by any person:



   (A)   Under 21 years of age;



   (B)   Who has been convicted of a felony or of violating any law of
this state or any city code provision relating to sex offenses and/or adult
uses; or



   (C)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-8)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.09  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   No license shall be granted for adult uses on any premises
where a licensee has been convicted of a violation or any crime that would
constitute a violation of this chapter, or where there have been convictions
for activities on the premises which would cause the building to constitute a
public nuisance under M.S. §§ 617.80 through 617.87, as they may be amended
from time to time, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause,
until one year has lapsed after the conviction or revocation.



   (B)   Except for uses lawfully existing on the effective date of
this chapter, no license shall be granted for any adult use which is not in
compliance with the city’s zoning regulations.



   (C)   No sexually oriented business shall locate in any place which
is also used to dispense or consume alcohol.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-9)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.10  BUILDING STANDARDS.



   (A)   No commercial building, structure, premises or part thereof,
or facilities therein used by a sexually oriented business classified as an
adult use-principal shall be so constructed, used, designed or operated for
the purpose of engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in sexual
activities as defined in § 155.14.



   (B)   No person shall own, operate, manage, rent, lease or exercise
control of any commercial building, structure, premises or portion or part
thereof, which contains:



      (1)   Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or
part of a building, structure or premises having an aperture which is
designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity between persons on
either side of the partition; or



      (2)   Booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room, or
individual rooms, used for adult uses, having doors, curtains or portal
partitions, unless the booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or
individual rooms so used shall have at least one side open to an adjacent
public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent
public room. Those areas shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the
area used for adult uses are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but the
lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of motion
pictures or other offered adult uses.



   (C)   All viewing areas or booths in movie arcades shall be
accessible from a continuous main aisle.



   (D)   All viewing areas or booths shall be located together along a
continuous, main aisle, to eliminate the possibility of secluded booths
elsewhere on the premises.



   (E)   No more than one person shall be permitted to enter or remain
in a viewing area or booth at any time.



   (F)   The viewing areas or booths shall be maintained at all times
in a clean and sanitary manner.



   (G)   All entrances to the business, with the exception of emergency
fire exits not usable to enter the business, shall be visible from a public
right-of-way. In addition, all windows and doors shall be so blocked or
covered to prohibit viewing of the interior of the premises from outside of
the premises.



   (H)   All performances shall be on a raised stage. The stage must be
raised from the surrounding floor by at least two feet and no patrons may be
on the stage at any time during any performance.



   (I)   All patrons shall be at least ten feet from the stage.



   (J)   No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron
shall fondle or caress any dancer.



   (K)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
dancer and no dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-10)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.11  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Every license shall be granted subject to all of the
conditions of the city code, and of any other applicable county, state or
federal law.



   (B)   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.



   (C)   No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises and the
licensee shall not employ any minors.



   (D)   Any designated inspection officer of the city shall have the
unqualified right to enter and inspect all public areas of the premises of a
licensee during regular business hours and non-business hours to determine
compliance with this chapter.



   (E)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or
her place of business and shall maintain conditions of order.



   (F)   Obviously, intoxicated persons shall not be allowed on the
premises. Minors shall be prohibited from entry or viewing into the portion
of the premises where the sexually oriented business occurs.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-11)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 114.12  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Sexually oriented businesses adult use-principal operations shall be
restricted from operating between the hours of 1:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. No
patrons shall be permitted on the premises between 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-12)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.13  EXISTING LICENSEE COMPLIANCE.



   All existing businesses shall be required to conform with this chapter
on or before January 1, 1998. Failure to comply will result in the license
being revoked effective 12:00 midnight January 1, 1998.



(2003 Code, § 6.40-13)  (Ord. 75, passed 12-12-1997)



CHAPTER 115:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Applications and licenses



   115.03   Renewal license applications



   115.04   Delinquent taxes and charges



   115.05   Conditional licenses



   115.06   Premises licensed



   115.07   Unlawful acts



   115.08   Conduct on licensed premises



   115.09   Sale by employee



   115.10   License condition and unlawful act



   115.11   License fees; fixing and refundment



   115.12   Financial responsibility of licensees



   115.13   Insurance certificate requirements



   115.14   Minors as defined herein; unlawful acts




General Regulations




   115.25   Gambling prohibited



   115.26   Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on
streets, public property and private parking lots to which the public has
access



   115.27   Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds



   115.28   License fee increase, notice and hearing



   115.29   Confections containing alcohol



   115.30   Liqueur-filled candy



   115.31   Brew-on-premises store; unlawful acts



   115.32   Beer license required



   115.33   Temporary beer license



   115.34   Hours and days of beer sales



   115.35   Beer license restrictions, regulations and unlawful acts



   115.36   Liquor license required



   115.37   Sports, convention or cultural facilities license



   115.38   Temporary liquor license



   115.39   Hours and days of liquor sales



   115.40   On-sale wine license required



   115.41   [Reserved]



   115.42   Liquor and on-sale wine license restrictions, regulations
and unlawful acts



   115.43   Club license restrictions, regulations and unlawful acts



   115.44   Municipal dispensary



   115.45   Consumption and display



   115.46   Consumption and display; one-day license



   115.47   Community festivals



   115.48   Nudity or obscenity prohibited



   115.49   Craft brew license



   115.50   Brewer taproom license




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, including, but not limited to, beer, wine and liquor as defined in
this section.



   APPLICANT.  Any person making an application for a license under this
chapter.



   APPLICATION.  A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in
and completed by the applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished
by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of
the issuance of a license for a business.



   BEER.  Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume nor
more than 3.2% alcohol by weight. This definition includes so-called “malt
coolers” with the alcoholic content limits stated herein.



   BREWER TAPROOM LICENSE. Means a license authorizing the on-sale of malt
liquor produced by a brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to
one brewer location owned by the brewer.



   BREW ON PREMISES STORE.  A facility that provides the ingredients and
equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store.



   BREWER.  A person who manufactures beer for sale.



   CLUB.  An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the
state for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, for intellectual
improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered
veterans’ organization, which: has more than 50 members; has owned or
rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is
suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; is directed by a
board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the
members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or
employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages
to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or
wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body. The club or
congressionally chartered veterans’ organization must have been in
existence for at least three years.



   COMMISSIONER.  The Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.



   CRAFT BREW LICENSE. Means a license authorizing the off-sale of malt
liquor produced by a brewer for consumption off the premises of the brewer
location.



   HOTEL.  An establishment where food and lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which has: a resident proprietor or manager; a
dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for
seating at least 30 guests at one time; and at least 20 guest rooms.



   LICENSE.  A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting
him or her to carry on and transact the business stated therein.



   LICENSE FEE.  The money paid to the city pursuant to an application
and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on the business
stated therein.



   LICENSED PREMISES.  The premises described in the issued license.



   LICENSEE.  An applicant who, pursuant to his or her approved
application, holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither
been revoked nor is then under suspension, from the city for carrying on the
business stated therein.



   LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous
and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight. This
definition includes so-called WINE COOLERS and MALT COOLERS with the
alcoholic content limits stated herein.



   MALT LIQUOR.  Any beer, ale or other beverage made from malt by
fermentation and containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.



   MANUFACTURER.  Every person who, by any process of manufacture,
fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending or by the
combination of different materials, prepares or produces alcoholic beverages
for sale.



   MINOR.  Any natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years.



   OFF-SALE.  The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the licensed premises only.



   ON-SALE.  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises only.



   PACKAGE and ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  Any container or receptacle holding
alcoholic beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped or
sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler.



   RESTAURANT.  An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control
of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly served at tables
to the general public, and having seating capacity for at least 20 guests.



   SALE, SELL and SOLD.  All barters and all manners or means of
furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons, including the furnishing in
violation or evasion of law.



   WHOLESALER.  Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse.



   WINE.  The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of
grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from
condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound,
ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry
and sake. This definition includes wine coolers with the alcoholic content
limits stated herein. For purposes of on-sale wine licenses, WINE may contain
up to 14% alcohol by volume for consumption with the sale of food. For all
other purposes, WINE is a product containing not less than 0.5% nor more than
24% alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use.



(2003 Code, § 5.01)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996; Ord. 167, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 115.02  APPLICATIONS AND LICENSES.



   (A)   Application. All applications shall be made at the office of
the City Clerk upon forms prescribed by the city, or if by the Commissioner,
then together with the additional information as the Council may desire.
Information required may vary with the type of business organization making
application. All questions asked or information required by the application
forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant.



   (B)   False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to
intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form.
Any false statement in the application, or any willful omission to state any
information called for on the application form shall, upon discovery of the
falsehood, work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall
render any license issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect
the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part
thereof.



   (C)   Action.



      (1)   Granting. The Council may approve any application for
the period of the remainder of the then current license year or for the
entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed license
periods must be consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any
application for a license, the applicant shall pay the license fee. Upon
rejection of any application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an
application before consideration by the Council, the license fee shall be
refunded to the applicant. Failure to pay any portion of a fee when due shall
be cause for revocation.



      (2)   Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Clerk
shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by
the city or the Commissioner, as the case may be, and upon payment of the
license fee. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise
specified herein. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other
than on the first day of the licensed year, the fee to be paid with the
application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses
shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described.



      (3)   Transfer. No license shall be transferable between
persons or to a different location. Any change in individual ownership,
incorporation or substitution of partners is a transfer. It is unlawful to
make any transfer in violation of this division (C).



      (4)   Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole
discretion and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No
license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or
business reputation. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or
revocation.



      (5)   Public interest. No license under this chapter may be
issued, transferred or renewed if the results of any investigation show, to
the satisfaction of the Council, that the issuance, transfer or renewal would
not be in the public interest.



      (6)   Revocation or suspension. For any license granted under
the provisions of this chapter, the Council may revoke, suspend for a period
not to exceed 60 days, impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000, or any
combination of these sanctions, for each violation on a finding that the
licensee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of the
city code relating to alcoholic beverages. The Council shall revoke the
license upon conviction of any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee
for violating any law relating to the sale or possession of beer, wine or
liquor upon premises of the licensee, or if the revocation is mandatory by
statute. If it shall be made to appear at the hearing thereon that the
violation was not willful, the Council may order suspension; provided that
revocation shall be ordered upon the third such violation or offense. No
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the
Council, or a hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, being M.S.
§§ 14.001 to 14.69, as may be amended from time to time, as may be
determined by the Council in action calling the hearing. The hearing shall be
called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in person or
by certified mail not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing
date, stating the time, place and purpose thereof. As additional restrictions
or regulations on licensees under this chapter, and in addition to grounds
for revocation or suspension stated in the city code or statute, the
following shall also be grounds for the action: that the licensee suffered or
permitted illegal acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the sale of beer,
wine or liquor; that the licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts upon
licensed premises, but failed to report the same to police; that the licensee
failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating the alleged
illegal acts upon licensed premises; or that the activities of the licensee
created a serious danger to public health, safety or welfare.



      (7)   Corporate applicants and licensees. A corporate
applicant, at the time of application, shall furnish the city with a list of
all persons that have an interest in the corporation and the extent of the
interest. The list shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares
held by each, either individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty
of each corporate licensee to notify the City Clerk in writing of any change
in legal ownership, or beneficial interest in the corporation or in the
shares. Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares
entitled to be voted at a meeting of the shareholders of a corporate
licensee, which results in the change of voting control of the corporation by
the persons owning the shares therein, shall be deemed equivalent to a
transfer of the license issued to the corporation, and any such license shall
be revoked 30 days after any such change in ownership or beneficial interest
of shares unless the Council has been notified of the change in writing and
has approved it by appropriate action. The Council, or any officer of the
city designated by it, may at any reasonable time examine the stock transfer
records and minute books of any corporate licensee in order to verify and
identify the shareholders, and the Council or its designated officer may
examine the business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to
disclose the interest which persons other than the licensee have in the
licensed business. The Council may revoke any license issued upon its
determination that a change of ownership of shares in a corporate licensee or
any change of ownership of any interest in the business of any other licensee
has actually resulted in the change of control of the licensed business so as
materially to affect the integrity and character of its management and its
operation, but no such action shall be taken until after a hearing by the
Council on notice to the licensee.



   (D)   Duplicate licenses. Duplicates of all original licenses under
this chapter may be issued by the City Clerk without action by the Council,
upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment
of a fee of $2 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked “DUPLICATE”.



   (E)   Posting. All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses
in their places of business.



   (F)   Resident manager or agent. Before a license is issued under
this chapter to an individual who is a nonresident of the city, to more than
one individual whether or not they are residents of the city, or to a
corporation, partnership or association, the applicant or applicants shall
appoint in writing a natural person who is a resident of the city as its
manager or agent. The resident manager or agent shall, by the terms of his or
her written consent: take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed
premises; and serve as agent for service of notices and other process
relating to the license. The manager or agent must be a person who, by reason
of age, character, reputation and other attributes, could qualify
individually as a licensee. If the manager or agent ceases to be a resident
of the city or ceases to act in the capacity for the licensee without
appointment of a successor, the license issued pursuant to the appointment
shall be subject to revocation or suspension.



   (G)   Persons disqualified.



      (1)   No license under this chapter may be issued, or renewed,
to:



         (a)   A person who within five years of the license
application has been convicted of any felony or a willful violation of a
federal or state law, or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale,
distribution or possession for sale or distribution, of alcoholic beverages;



         (b)   A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license
revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who at
the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than
5% of the capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise,
in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm in which any such
person is in any manner interested;



         (c)   A person under the age of 21 years; or



         (d)   A person not of good moral character and repute.



      (2)   No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a
manufacturer, brewer (except as provided by statute), wholesaler or importer,
may have a direct or indirect interest, in whole or in part, in a business
holding an alcoholic beverage license from the city.



(2003 Code, § 5.02)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.03  RENEWAL LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for renewal of all licenses under this chapter shall be
made at least 60 days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and
shall contain information as is required by the city. This time requirement
may be waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause.



(2003 Code, § 5.03)



§ 115.04  DELINQUENT TAXES AND CHARGES.



   No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on any
premises upon which taxes, assessments or installments thereof, or other
financial claims of the city, are owed and are delinquent and unpaid.



(2003 Code, § 5.04)



§ 115.05  CONDITIONAL LICENSES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place the special conditions and
restrictions, in addition to those stated in this chapter, upon any license
as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.



(2003 Code, § 5.05)



§ 115.06  PREMISES LICENSED.



   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid
only for the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating
to a sale under the license must take place within the space or structure.



(2003 Code, § 5.06)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996)



§ 115.07  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any
licensee to permit consumption of, beer, wine or liquor on licensed premises
after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.



   (B)   Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than a licensee
or his or her bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his
or her duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter after the legal
time for making licensed sales, unless the licensed establishment is open to
the public for serving food.



(2003 Code, § 5.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.08  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall
maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein.



(2003 Code, § 5.08)



§ 115.09  SALE BY EMPLOYEE.



   Any sale of an alcoholic beverage in or from any premises licensed
under this chapter by any employee authorized to make the sale in or from the
place is the act of the employer as well as of the person actually making the
sale; and every such employer is liable to all of the penalties, except
criminal penalties, provided by law for the sale, equally with the person
actually making the sale.



(2003 Code, § 5.09)  (Ord. 28, passed 4-26-1991)



§ 115.10  LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACT.



   (A)   All premises licensed under this chapter shall at all times be
open to inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this
chapter and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to
being issued the license, consent to the inspection by the officers and
without a warrant for searches or seizures.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a
licensee, to hinder or prevent a police officer from making the inspection.



(2003 Code, § 5.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.11  LICENSE FEES; FIXING AND REFUNDMENT.



   (A)   Fixing fees. Except as otherwise specifically provided, all
fees provided for in this chapter, including, but not by way of limitation,
license fees, shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by
resolution, and uniformly enforced. The fees may, from time-to-time, be
amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular
business hours. For the purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may
categorize and classify, provided, that the categorization and classification
shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.



   (B)   Refundment. A pro-rata share of an annual license fee for a
license to sell liquor or beer, either on-sale or off-sale, shall be refunded
to the licensee, or to his or her estate, if: the business ceases to operate
because of destruction or damage; the licensee dies; or the business ceases
to be lawful for a reason other than a license revocation or suspension.



(2003 Code, § 5.11)



§ 115.12  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.



   (A)   Proof. No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or
renewed unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial
responsibility, imposed by statute, by filing with the city:



      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect an insurance
policy or pool providing minimum coverages of: $50,000 because of bodily
injury to any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for
one person, in the amount of $100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more
persons in any one occurrence, and in the amount of $10,000 because of injury
to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence; and $50,000
for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and
subject to the limit for one person, $100,000 for loss of means of support of
two or more persons in any one occurrence; or



      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as
provided in division (A)(1) above; or



      (3)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee
has deposited with him or her $100,000 in cash or securities which may
legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.



   (B)   Exception. This section does not apply to on-sale beer
licensees with sales of beer of less than $10,000 for the preceding year, nor
to off-sale beer licensees with sales of beer of less than $20,000 for the
preceding year, nor does it apply to holders of on-sale wine licenses with
sales of wine of less than $10,000 for the preceding year. An affidavit of
the licensee shall be required to establish the exemption under this division
(B).



   (C)   Documents submitted to Commissioner. All proofs of financial
responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this
section shall be submitted by the city to the State Commissioner of Public
Safety.



(2003 Code, § 5.12)  (Ord. 22, passed 3-22-1991)



§ 115.13  INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance showing:



   (A)   The limits are at least as high as required;



   (B)   Coverage is effective for at least the license term approved;
and



   (C)   The insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30
days’ written notice served upon the City Clerk. Cancellation or
termination of the coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.



(2003 Code, § 5.13)



§ 115.14  MINORS AS DEFINED HEREIN; UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Consumption. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic
beverages on licensed premises; or



      (2)   Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the
household of the minor’s parent or guardian, and then only with the consent
of the parent or guardian.



   (B)   Purchasing. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Person to sell, barter, furnish or give alcoholic
beverages to a minor unless the person is the parent or guardian of the
minor, and then only for consumption in the household of the parent or
guardian;



      (2)   Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic
beverage; or



      (3)   Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure any
alcoholic beverage.



   (C)   Possession. It is unlawful for a minor to possess any
alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the
household of the minor’s parent or guardian. Possession of an alcoholic
beverage by a minor at a place other than the household of the parent or
guardian is prima facie evidence of intent to consume it at a place other
than the household of his or her parent or guardian.



   (D)   Entering licensed premises. It is unlawful for any minor, as
defined in this chapter, to enter licensed premises, or the municipal liquor
store, for the purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It
is not unlawful for any person who has attained the age of 18 years to enter
licensed premises for the following purposes: to perform work for the
establishment, including the serving of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise
prohibited by statute; to consume meals; and to attend social functions that
are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold. It is
unlawful for a licensee to permit a person under the age of 18 years to enter
licensed premises unless attending a social event at which alcoholic
beverages are not served, or in the company of a parent or guardian.



   (E)   Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic
beverage.



   (F)   Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming
alcoholic beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s license or
identification card issued by the state, another state, or a province of
Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed
person; or by a valid military identification card issued by the United
States Department of Defense; or, in the case of a foreign national, from a
nation other than Canada, by a valid passport.



(2003 Code, § 5.14)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 115.25  GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, possess or operate, or permit
the keeping, possession or operation on licensed premises of dice or any
other gambling device, or permit raffles to be conducted, except as are
licensed by the Charitable Gambling Control Board.



(2003 Code, § 5.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.26  CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON STREETS,
PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HAS ACCESS.



   It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed
container, any alcoholic beverage on any city park, street, public property
or private parking lot to which the public has access, except on the premises
when and where permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the
Council; provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an
unsealed container in a motor vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk
of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of
the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a
utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied
by the driver or passengers.



(2003 Code, § 5.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.27  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.



   It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in his or her
possession upon, or in, any school ground, or any schoolhouse or school
building, any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories and
except for those organizations who have been issued temporary licenses to
sell beer, and for any person to possess beer as a result of a purchase from
those organizations holding temporary licenses.



(2003 Code, § 5.17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.28  LICENSE FEE INCREASE, NOTICE AND HEARING.



   No license fee for on-sale or off-sale beer, on-sale or off-sale liquor
(including clubs), or on-sale wine, shall be increased except after notice
and hearing thereon. Notice of the proposed increase shall be mailed at least
30 days before the hearing date to all then-current licensees and persons, if
any, whose applications for the licenses are then pending before the Council.



(2003 Code, § 5.18)  (Ord. 28, passed 4-26-1991)



§ 115.29  CONFECTIONS CONTAINING ALCOHOL.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell a confection containing alcohol
to any person under the age of 21 years. For purposes of this section,
CONFECTION CONTAINING ALCOHOL means a confection containing or bearing not
more than 5% alcohol by volume where the alcohol is in a non-liquid form by
reason of being mixed with other substances in the manufacture of the
confection, does not include “liqueur-filled candy” as herein defined,
and may be sold only by an exclusive liquor store licensed under this chapter
or a business establishment that derives more than 50% of its gross sales
from the sale of confections.



(2003 Code, § 5.19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.30  LIQUEUR-FILLED CANDY.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell liqueur-filled candy to any
person under the age of 21 years. For purposes of this section,
LIQUEUR-FILLED CANDY means any confectionery containing more than 0.5%
alcohol by volume in liquid form that is intended for or capable of beverage
use, and may be sold only by an eligible licensee under this chapter and by
the municipal dispensary.



(2003 Code, § 5.20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.31  BREW-ON-PREMISES STORE; UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It is unlawful:



   (A)   To sell or otherwise provide alcoholic beverages to customers
of a brew-on-premises store unless the owner of the brew-on-premises store
holds an appropriate liquor license;



   (B)   For a customer to re-sell malt liquor brewed in a
brew-on-premises store or use it for any purpose other than personal use; or



   (C)   For a minor to be a customer of a brew-on-premises store.



(2003 Code, § 5.21)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.32  BEER LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of
beer, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from
the city. This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to
wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holding beer licenses from
the city. Annual on-sale beer licenses may be issued only to restaurants,
hotels, clubs and establishments used exclusively for the sale of beer with
the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.



(2003 Code, § 5.30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.33  TEMPORARY BEER LICENSE.



   (A)   Applicant. A club or charitable, religious or non-profit
organization shall qualify for a temporary on-sale beer license.



   (B)   Conditions.



      (1)   An application for a temporary license shall state the
exact dates and place of proposed temporary sale.



      (2)   No applicant shall qualify for a temporary license for
more than a total of seven days in any calendar year.



      (3)   The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any
obligation whatsoever to, grant a temporary beer license on premises owned or
controlled by the city. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified or
restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned
or under the control of the city, the applicant shall file with the city,
prior to issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance
coverage in at least the sum of $50,000 for injury to any one person and
$100,000 for injury to more than one person, and $10,000 for property damage,
naming the city as an insured during the license period. The license shall be
issued only on the condition that the applicant will not sell in excess of
$10,000 (retail value) worth of beer in any calendar year, and thereupon
shall be exempt from proof of financial responsibility as provided for herein.



(2003 Code, § 5.31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.34  HOURS AND DAYS OF BEER SALES.



   No sale of beer shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday inclusive. Neither shall any
beer sale be made on any Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.



(2003 Code, § 5.32)  (Ord. 178, passed 12-5-2016) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.35  BEER LICENSE RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   No on-sale license shall be granted within 600 feet of any
school, nor within 300 feet of any church.



   (B)   The number of licensees on Prentice Street shall not exceed
four.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Person who has not attained the age of 18 years to be
employed to sell or serve beer in any on-sale establishment;



      (2)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal
sale or purchase of beer;



      (3)   Licensee to sell or serve beer to any person who is
obviously intoxicated;



      (4)   Licensee to fail, where doubt could exist, to require
adequate proof of age of a person upon licensed premises;



      (5)   Licensee to sell beer on any day, or during any hour,
when the sales are not permitted by law;



      (6)   Licensee to allow consumption of beer on licensed
premises on any day when sales of beer are not permitted by law; or



      (7)   Person to purchase beer on any day, or during any hour,
when sales of beer are not permitted by law.



(2003 Code, § 5.33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.36  LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense
or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of
liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from
the city. This section shall not apply: to the potable liquors as are
intended for therapeutic purposes and not as a beverage; to industrial
alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage purposes; to wine
in the possession of a person duly licensed under this chapter as an on-sale
wine licensee; to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such
by the Commissioner; to sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor
licenses from the city; or to the municipal liquor store. The voters of the
city having authorized such issuance at a special election called for that
purpose, the city may issue on-sale liquor licenses to: hotels; restaurants;
and clubs or congressionally chartered veterans’ organizations, provided
that liquor sales will be made only to members and bona fide guests.



(2003 Code, § 5.50)



§ 115.37  SPORTS, CONVENTION OR CULTURAL FACILITIES LICENSE.



   The Council may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor license
issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to sell liquor at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention or cultural facility owned by the city, or
instrumentality thereof having independent policy-making and appropriating
authority and located within the city. The licensee must be engaged to sell
liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to use the
premises, and may sell liquor only to persons attending the event. The
licensee shall not sell liquor to any person attending or participating in
any amateur athletic event. The sales may be limited to designated areas of
the facility. All the sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto.
The licensee shall provide proof of the extension of financial responsibility
coverage to the premises on which the sales are to be made.



(2003 Code, § 5.51)



§ 115.38  TEMPORARY LIQUOR LICENSE.



   (A)   License authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of the city
code to the contrary, the Council may issue a license for the temporary
on-sale of liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by the
licensee. The license may provide that the licensee may contract with the
holder of a full-year on-sale license, issued by the city.



   (B)   Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must
be a club or charitable, religious or other non-profit organization in
existence for at least three years, or a political committee registered under
M.S. § 10A.14, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Terms and conditions of license.



      (1)   No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.



      (2)   No license shall be issued for more than four
consecutive days.



      (3)   No temporary license shall be issued until the city is
furnished with written proof that the licensee has dram shop coverage in the
amount provided for in this chapter, and that the coverage is in force on the
premises where liquor is to be served.



      (4)   All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions
of statutes and the city code relating to liquor sale and licensing. The
licensee shall provide proof of financial responsibility coverage and, in the
case of catering by a full-year on-sale licensee, the caterer shall provide
proof of the extension of the coverage to the licensed premises.



      (5)   Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than
those owned or permanently occupied by the licensee.



      (6)   No more than three temporary licenses for the sale of
alcoholic beverages may be issued to any one organization, or for any one
location in a 12-month period.



   (D)   Insurance required. The Council may, but at no time shall it
be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a temporary liquor license on
premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such license may be
conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises
to be licensed are owned or under the control of the city, the applicant
shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the license, a certificate of
liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $100,000 for injury to
any one person, $300,000 for injury to more than one person, and $10,000 for
property damage, naming the city as an insured during the license period.



(2003 Code, § 5.52)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996)



§ 115.39  HOURS AND DAYS OF LIQUOR SALES.



   No sale of liquor shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday and after 2:00 a.m. on Sundays
except as provided by M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 3.



(2003 Code, § 5.53) (Ord. 174, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 178, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 115.40  ON-SALE WINE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any
pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise
dispose of wine on-sale, as part of a commercial transaction, without a
license therefor from the city. On-sale wine licenses shall be issued with
the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to theaters, restaurants
that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time and meeting
the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404(5), as it may be amended from time to time,
and which meet the definition of restaurant in § 115.01; to licensed bed and
breakfast facilities which meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.401(1), as it
may be amended from time to time, and as otherwise provided in this city
code; and to theaters, if not otherwise precluded herein, that meet the
criteria of M.S. § 340A.404(B) as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   The fee for an on-sale wine license shall be established by
the Council from time to time, but shall not exceed one-half of the license
fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license.



   (C)   The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an
on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a
content over 3.2% (strong beer) without an additional license.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to: sales by manufacturers to
wholesalers duly licensed as such by the Commissioner; sales by wholesalers
to persons holding on-sale or off-sale liquor licenses from the city; sales
by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine licenses from the city; or
sales by on-sale liquor licensees on days and during hours when on-sale
liquor sales are permitted.



(2003 Code, § 5.60)  (Ord. 156, passed 1-3-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.41  [RESERVED]



§ 115.42  LIQUOR AND ON-SALE WINE LICENSE RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS AND
UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Licenses in connection with premises of another. A license may
not be issued to a person in connection with the premises of another to whom
a license could not be issued under the provisions of this chapter. This
division (A) does not prevent the granting of a license to a proper lessee
because the person has leased the premises of a minor, a non-citizen who is
not a resident alien, or a person who has been convicted of a crime other
than a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Employment of minors. No person under 18 years of age may be
employed in a place where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises,
except persons under 18 years of age may be employed as musicians or in
bussing or washing dishes in a restaurant or hotel that is licensed to sell
liquor and may be employed as waiters or waitresses at a restaurant or hotel
where only wine is sold, provided that the person under the age of 18 may not
serve or sell any wine.



   (C)   On-sale wine licenses. On-sale wine licenses shall be granted
only to restaurants as defined in this chapter; provided, however, for
purposes of this section, the restaurant shall have appropriate facilities
for seating not less than 25 guests at one time.



   (D)   Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any:



      (1)   Licensee to sell, offer for sale or keep for sale,
liquor in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled;



      (2)   Licensee to display liquor to the public during hours
when the sale of liquor is prohibited;



      (3)   Person to hold more than one license. For the purpose of
this division (D), any person owning a beneficial interest of 5%, or more, of
any licensed establishment shall be considered a licensee;



      (4)   Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal
sale or purchase of liquor or wine;



      (5)   Licensee to sell liquor or wine on any day, or during
any hour, when sales of liquor or wine are not permitted by law;



      (6)   Person to purchase liquor or wine on any day, or during
any hour, when sales of liquor or wine are not permitted by law; or



      (7)   Licensee to sell or serve liquor or wine to any person
who is obviously intoxicated.



   (E)   Schools and churches. No license shall be granted for any
building within 600 feet of any public elementary or secondary school
structure or within 300 feet of any church structure.



(2003 Code, § 5.70)  (Ord. 23, passed 3-22-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.43  CLUB LICENSE RESTRICTIONS, REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GUEST.  A person not a member of the club but present on the
club licensed premises in the company of a host member.



      HOST MEMBER.  A member who is entertaining a guest who is in the
member’s company at all times the guest is on the licensed premises.



      MEMBER.  Any person in good standing according to rules and
regulations of the licensed club, wherever located, having evidence of
current membership upon his or her person.



   (B)   Number of licenses. No more than three club licenses shall be
issued.



   (C)   Daily register. In addition to all other general provisions,
restrictions and regulations set forth in this chapter, relating to beer or
liquor licensees, as the case may be, all club licensees shall keep a daily
register showing the names of guests present and the name of the host member.
The register shall be open to inspection by police officers at all times.



   (D)   Unlawful acts. The following are in addition to all other
unlawful acts set forth in this chapter relating to sales and purchases of
beer or liquor, as the case may be.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a club licensee to sell liquor or
beer to any person not a member of the licensed club.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any club licensee to serve beer or
liquor to any non-member of the licensed club unless the non-member is a
guest.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person who is not a member of the
licensed club to purchase liquor or beer from the club.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any club licensee to hinder or
prevent a police officer from determining compliance with this section and
chapter, and all other laws.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to refuse, upon request of
a licensee or police officer, to provide information as to whether he or she
is a member, guest or host member, or to give false, fraudulent or misleading
information in response to the request.



(2003 Code, § 5.75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.44  MUNICIPAL DISPENSARY.



   (A)   Establishment. A municipal dispensary is hereby established to
be operated within the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The
dispensary shall be at such place or places as the Council shall determine
and may be either leased or owned by the city. It shall be in the charge of a
person known as the Manager who shall have such assistants as may be
necessary. All employees, including the Manager, shall hold their positions
at the pleasure of the City Manager.



   (B)   Dispensary Fund. A Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created
into which all revenues received from the operation of the dispensary shall
be paid, and from which all operating expenses shall be paid. Any surplus
accumulating in this Fund may, from time to time, be transferred to the
General Fund by resolution of the Council, and expended for any municipal
purpose.



(2003 Code, § 5.80)



§ 115.45  CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY.



   (A)   Consumption and display license required. It is unlawful for
any business establishment or club, not holding an on-sale liquor license to
directly or indirectly, or on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter,
keep for sale or otherwise dispose of any liquid for the purpose of mixing
the same with liquor, or permit its members to bring and keep a personal
supply of liquor in lockers assigned to the members, without a license
therefor from the city.



   (B)   Consumption and display restrictions and regulations.



      (1)   Eligible licensees. If the applicant is otherwise
eligible, licenses may be issued only to: persons who have not, within five
years prior to application, been convicted of a felony or of violating
provisions of this chapter or other law relating to the sale or furnishing of
alcoholic beverages; a restaurant; a hotel; a beer licensee; a resort as
defined by statute; or a club or an unincorporated club otherwise meeting the
definition of a club, provided, that no license may be issued to a club
holding an on-sale liquor license.



      (2)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful to sell liquor on licensed
premises.



      (3)   License expiration. In order to coordinate the
expiration of a consumption and display license with a state permit, all
licenses shall expire on March 31 of each year.



      (4)   State permit required. Licenses shall be issued only to
holders of a consumption and display permit from the Commissioner.



      (5)   Lockers. A club to which a license is issued under this
section may allow members to bring and keep a personal supply of liquor in
lockers on the club’s premises. All bottles kept on the premises must have
attached labels signed by the member. No minor may keep a supply of liquor on
club premises.



      (6)   Hours and days. No licensee may permit a person to
consume or display liquor, and no person may consume or display liquor,
between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays, and between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday through Saturday.



(2003 Code, § 5.90)  (Ord. 63, passed 5-31-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.46  CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY; ONE DAY LICENSE.



   (A)   License required. Any non-profit organization desiring to
serve liquids for the purpose of mixing with liquor and permitting the
consumption and display of liquor in conjunction with a social activity
sponsored by it, shall first obtain a license therefor from the city. It is
unlawful for any such organization to fail to obtain the license.



   (B)   Term. The term of the license shall be one day only.



   (C)   Limitation on number. The city shall issue no more than ten
licenses in any calendar year.



   (D)   License fee. The fee for the one-day license is $25.



   (E)   Approval. In addition to Council approval, the license must be
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



(2003 Code, § 5.91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.47  COMMUNITY FESTIVALS.



   (A)   The Council, without obligation, may grant permission to a
holder of a retail on-sale liquor license to dispense liquor at a community
festival held within the city limits.



   (B)   The authorization shall specify the area in which the liquor
shall be dispensed and consumed and shall require that the license holder
provide the city with proof of liability insurance as prescribed by M.S. §
340.404(4)(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to cover the event and
to comply with other requirements as the Council may specify, including, but
not limited to, those as may be recommended by any organization board of
directors, or management, which organization is the sponsor, license holder
or primary organizer and operator of the festival for which a retail on-sale
license is requested hereunder.



(2003 Code, § 5.92)  (Ord. 110, passed 1-10-2003)



§ 115.48  NUDITY OR OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NUDITY.  Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal
human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a
female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and
the areola only are covered.



      OBSCENE PERFORMANCE.  A play, motion picture, dance, show or
other presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an
audience and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes
obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual
conduct.



      OBSCENITIES.  Those slang words currently generally rejected for
regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female
breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have
no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual
or excretory meaning.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female
genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation,
or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct
or nudity.



   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license
provided for in this chapter to permit upon licensed premises any nudity,
obscene performance or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee,
patron or other person.



(2003 Code, § 5.95)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.49  CRAFT BREW LICENSE.



   Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee
under § 115.50 (brewer taproom license) below, or that produces fewer than
3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria
established at M.S. § 340A.301(6)(d) and (7)(b), as it may be amended from
time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for
off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale
must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time
at exclusive liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be
packaged in the manner required by M.S. § 340A.301(7) as it may be amended
from time to time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per
year. If a brewer licensed under this section possesses a license under §
115.50 (brewer taproom license) below, the brewer's total retail sales at
on-sale or off- sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that
off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.



(Ord. 167, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 115.50  BREWER TAPROOM LICENSE.



   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be
issued to brewers who meet the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.301(6)(d)
and (7)(b), as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license
at on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed
under this section possesses a license for off-sale under § 115.49 (craft
brew license) above, the brew pub's total combined retail sales at on sale or
off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may
not total more than 500 barrels. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
holder of a brewer taproom license from also holding a license to operate a
restaurant at the taproom location.



(Ord. 167, passed 5-5-2014)



CHAPTER 116:  PAWN SHOPS



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   License required



   116.03   Fees



   116.04   License requirements



   116.05   Regulations



   116.06   Prohibited acts



   116.07   Violation a misdemeanor



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTOMATED PROPERTY SYSTEM. A computerized data collection system which
mandates the collection of data and digitized images via modem for the
purpose of regulation and review of licensed pawn dealers by city license
inspectors, law enforcement officials, and authorized subscribers.



   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on
items previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession is
a billable transaction.



   PAWNBROKER. Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as a
principal, or agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge
of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing
of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part
thereof so mortgaged.



   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in
which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade,
or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, is reportable except:



      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established
place of business, and the retail sale of such merchandise, provided the
pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase or consignment which
describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner that relates it to
that transaction record.



      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally
received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 116.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall exercise, carry on or be engaged in the trade or
business of pawnbroker in Granite Falls without a license.  No pawnbroker
license may be transferred from location to location or from person to person.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 116.03  FEES.



   (A)   The fee required for a license defined under this chapter
shall be established by resolution as may be adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   The billable transaction fee shall reflect the cost of
processing transactions as determined by the Director of the Department of
Safety and Inspections (hereafter, in this chapter, “Director”) and the
Chief of Police (hereafter, in this chapter, “Chief”) or their designees.
These fees shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Council.
The billable transaction fee shall be required of all licensees as defined
under this chapter except:



      (1)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the
required reports via modem, the licensee must provide the Police Department
printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the videotape(s) for
that date, by 12:00 noon the next business day, and must be charged for
billable transactions at a rate to be determined by the automated property
system (hereafter, in this chapter, “APS”) for manual processing.



      (2)   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee’s
system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following
the failure, the licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in §
116.05(A), and may do so for up to ten consecutive days without penalty. 
However, after the tenth day, if the licensee still cannot report via modem,
the licensee may, at the discretion of the Director and the Chief, be fined
$100 per day not to exceed 20 days. If the licensee cannot report via modem
after 30 days from the first date of failure, the license may be revoked.



      (3)   If the problem is determined to be outside the
licensee’s system, the licensee must provide the required reports as
detailed in § 116.05(A), and will be charged for billable transactions until
the error is corrected. If the regulatory agency is unable to collect the
required data via modem, no additional charges will be assessed against the
pawnbroker.



      (4)   The licensee who has consistently reported via modem,
and is unable to capture, digitize, or transmit the photographs as required
under § 116.05, must immediately take all required photographs with a still
camera, immediately develop the pictures, cross reference the photographs to
the correct transaction, and deliver them to the Police Department by 12:00
noon on the next business day. Such failures shall follow the same time lines
and presume the same penalties as identified in § 116.03.



      (5)   The Director, in conjunction with the Chief, upon
presentation of extenuating circumstances, may extend the grace period for a
qualifying licensee beyond ten days or may extend the penalty beyond 20 days,
notwithstanding other provisions as outlined in § 116.03.



   (C)   Licensees shall be notified in writing at least 30 days before
any fee adjustment is implemented. Billable transaction fees shall be billed
monthly and are due and payable within 30 days. Failure to do so is a
violation of this chapter and may result in the following actions:



      (1)   Fees due past 30 days may result in up to a $250 fine.



      (2)   Fees due past 60 days may result in up to a $500 fine.



      (3)   Fees due past 90 days may result in a license suspension.



      (4)   Fees due past 120 days may result in a license
revocation.



      (5)   Any and all adverse actions taken against licensees and
their licenses as defined in this chapter shall be ordered by the City
Council and implemented by the Department of Safety and Inspections. All
judgments made by the City Council shall be final.



   (D)   Any applicant for a new license under this chapter shall be
required to deposit a fee established by resolution adopted by the City
Council at the time of original application. Such deposit shall be used to
cover the cost of application verification and any additional expense
associated with investigations performed to assure compliance with this
chapter. If, however, the costs of investigations exceed the original
deposit, the Department of Safety and Inspections may recover the actual
investigation costs not to exceed $10,000.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 116.04  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application; investigation, and the like.  Any person
desiring a pawnbroker license shall file with the license inspector an
application containing such information as the license inspector shall
require. The application shall be made under oath and furnishing false
information therein shall be a violation of this chapter in addition to any
other laws or ordinances. Before such person shall be licensed to conduct
such business in the city, a copy of the application for such license shall
be delivered to the Chief or an officer duly detailed by the Chief for such
purpose shall investigate the applicant and report the result of such
investigation to the inspector together with the approval or the disapproval
of such application by the Chief; provided, however, that no person shall be
licensed under the terms hereof who, at any time prior to the issuance of
such license, has been duly convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction
of having violated any law relating to theft, burglary, receiving stolen
property, sale of controlled substance, or of any infraction of the terms and
provisions of this chapter or of any of the ordinances of the City of Granite
Falls regulating the business of pawnbroking; further provided, that in
denying any license based upon such conviction, the inspector shall follow
the procedures in these chapters and in Laws of Minnesota for 1974, Chapter
298 (M.S. Chapter 364). CONVICTED shall include a plea of guilty even though
no judgment of conviction is or has been entered or imposition of sentence
has been stayed.



   (B)   Bond.  Before any person shall be licensed as a pawnbroker,
such applicant shall file a bond in the amount of $5,000 with a duly licensed
surety company as surety thereon, such surety bond to be approved as to form
by the City Attorney, conditioned that such licensee shall observe the
ordinances of the city in relation to the business of pawnbroker and that
such licensee will conduct said business in conformity therewith and will
account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any goods,
wares or merchandise, article or thing which may have come into the
possession of such licensee as pawnbroker or in lieu thereof such licensee
shall pay in money to such person or persons the reasonable value thereof.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 116.05  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Records required. At the time of any reportable transaction
other than renewals, extensions or redemptions, every licensee must
immediately record the following in a computerized record approved by the
Police Department or the licensing inspector, or if the computer is
temporarily unavailable in a book or journal which has page numbers that are
preprinted and in an indelible ink, record the following information:



      (1)   A complete and accurate description of each item as well
as all of the following, if applicable: any trademark, identification number,
serial number, model number, brand name, or any other unique identifying mark;



      (2)   The date, time and place the item of property was
received by the licensee, and the unique transaction number that
distinguishes it from all other transactions;



      (3)   The full name, date of birth, residence address and
phone number of the person from whom the item was received;



      (4)   An accurate physical description of the person from whom
the item was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes,
and color of hair. If this information is transcribed from a photo ID there
must be a notation that the information recorded actually matched the person
from whom the item was received;



      (5)   The identification number and state or country of
issuance, as well as a legible photocopy of one of the following forms of
identification of the seller:



         (a)   Current valid photo driver’s license issued
within the United States;



         (b)   Current valid photo state identification card
issued within the United States;



         (c)   Current valid United States military photo
identification card; or



         (d)   Current valid passport;



      (6)   The amount of money paid, loaned, or pledged therefor;



      (7)   A list of all fees and charges which the transaction may
be subject to;



      (8)   The last regular day of business by which the item must
be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;



      (9)   The unique identifier of the licensee or employee that
conducted the transaction.



   (B)   Daily reports to police.  At the close of each business day,
the licensee must provide the above records to the Police Department by
transferring it from their computer to the automated pawn system (APS) via
modem using the current version of the APS interchange file specification.
All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately. Any
transaction that does not meet the APS interchange file specification must be
corrected and resubmitted the next business day. The licensee must inform all
patrons, both orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a
conspicuous place on the premises, that all transactions are reported to the
Police Department daily.



   (C)   Photographic records.



      (1)   The licensee must also take a color video recording or
digitally-captured photo image of the following:



         (a)   Each customer involved in a reportable
transaction; and



         (b)   Every item received that does not have a unique
serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.



      (2)   If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must
zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an
identifiable close-up of that person’s face. Items photographed by video
must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated
with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.



      (3)   If a digital color photograph is taken it must be of
sufficient quality resolution so that persons and items photographed are
clearly identifiable. The major portion of the photograph must include an
identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold the item.
Items photographed must be accurately depicted. Further, the photographs must
be maintained in such a manner as to be readily matched and correlated with
all of the records of the transaction to which it relates.



      (4)   The licensee must inform the person that they are being
photographed and/or videotaped by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a
conspicuous place on the premises.



   (D)   Retention of records. Data entries must be retained for at
least three years from the date of transaction. Photographs, videos, and
digitized images must be retained for a minimum of 90 days from the date of
transaction.



   (E)   Renewals, extensions and redemptions.  For renewals,
extensions, and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original
transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of
transaction.



   (F)   Inspection of records and premises.  At all times during the
terms of the license, the licensee must allow any representative of the
department of safety and inspections and/or the Police Department to enter
the premises where the licensed business is located, including all off-site
storage facilities as authorized in § 116.05, during normal business hours,
except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and
inspecting all items and records therein to verify compliance with this
chapter and other applicable laws.



   (G)   Labeling required. Licensees must attach a label to every item
at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any
reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number
or the name that identifies the transaction in the pawnshop’s records, the
transaction date, the name of the item, the model and serial number as they
were reported to the police department, if applicable, and the date the item
is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. The label must be of a type
that can be attached to a variety of surfaces and remains easily removable,
but of such construction that it may not be easily removed in one piece.
Labels shall not be reused.



   (H)   Receipts required. Every licensee must provide a receipt to
the party identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a
duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least
the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed
business.



      (2)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.



      (3)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of
the transaction.



      (4)   An accurate description of each item received including,
but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number,
model number, brand name or other identifying mark on each item.



      (5)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or
employee who conducted the transaction.



      (6)   The amount advanced or paid.



      (7)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all
pawn fees and charges.



      (8)   If the item was pawned, the last regular day of business
by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item
will be sold, and the full amount necessary to redeem the item on that date.



      (9)   The full name, current residence address, current
telephone number and date of birth of the pledger or seller.



      (10)   The identification number and state or country of
issuance from any of the following forms of identification of the pledger or
seller:



         (a)   Current valid photo driver’s license issued
within the United States;



         (b)   Current valid photo state identification card
issued within the United States;



         (c)   Current valid United States photo military
identification card; or



         (d)   Current valid passport.



      (11)   Description of the pledger or seller including sex,
race, color of eyes and hair and approximate weight and height.



      (12)   The statement “The pledger of this item attests that
it is not stolen, it has no liens of encumbrances against it, and the pledger
has the right to sell or pawn the item.”



      (13)   Signature and thumbprint of pledger or seller.



   (I)   Report of suspicious items. No licensee shall receive or
accept any item of property that contains an altered, obliterated, or
obviously removed serial number or unique identifier, or any item that the
licensee has reason to believe has been lost or stolen. Further, the licensee
shall immediately report to the Police Department any attempt to sell, trade,
or barter such items. If probable cause exists that specific items are stolen
or have been used in the commission of a crime and a representative of the
Police Department notifies the licensee of such fact, the licensee shall not
sell or permit to be sold, remove or permit to be removed, such items until
such time as the licensee is notified by the Chief or his or her
representative.



   (J)   Redemption period. A person pledging, pawning, or depositing
an item for security shall have a minimum of 90 days from the date of that
transaction or any renewal or extension, to redeem the item before it may be
forfeited and sold. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to
anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued unless:



      (1)   Such person has written approval of the Chief of Police
or the Chief’s designee; or



      (2)   Such person is identified in a written and notarized
designation of that person’s interest in the property identified in the
receipt; or



      (3)   In the event of the death of the person to whom the
receipt was issued, by a person presenting a receipt with proper
identification as required under M.S. § 344.04(a), and a certified copy of
such person’s death certificate.



   (K)   Nonredemption. A pledger shall have no obligation to redeem
pledged goods or make any payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not
redeemed within 90 days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or
extension will automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified
right, title, and interest in and to the goods shall automatically vest in
the pawnbroker.



   (L)   Risk of loss. In the event pledged good are lost or damaged
while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the
pledger, in cash or replacement of goods acceptable to the pledger, for the
fair market value of the lost or damaged goods. Proof of compensation shall
be a defense to any prosecution or civil action.



   (M)   Holding periods. Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a
licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred for 30 days from the date
of the transaction. Motor vehicles shall be exempt from this requirement.



   (N)   Police order to hold/confiscate.



      (1)   Whenever the Chief of Police, the Chief’s designee, or
a licensed law enforcement official from another jurisdiction notifies a
licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the
licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Chief, the Chief’s
designee, or the licensed law enforcement official instituting the hold. The
order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless the
Chief, the Chief’s designee, or a licensed law enforcement official
determines that the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in
writing. If an item is identified as stolen or as evidence in a criminal
case, the Chief, the Chief’s designee, or a licensed law enforcement
official from another jurisdiction may:



         (a)   Physically confiscate and remove the item from the
shop;



         (b)   Place the item on permanent hold and leave it in
the shop;



         (c)   Leave the item in the shop and authorize its
release to the owner or an authorized person pursuant to the requirements of
M.S. § 609.523.



      (2)   When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall
provide identification to the licensee along with the name and phone number
of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related to
the confiscation. When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary,
the Chief, the Chief’s designee, or the licensed law enforcement official
initiating the hold shall so notify the licensee.



   (O)   Burglar alarm. Licensees shall maintain an electronic burglar
alarm system for the licensed premises. Such system must be duly licensed by
the city and maintained in working order. Such system must also be centrally
monitored and must be backed by a battery power source.



   (P)   Business at only one place. A license under this chapter
authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent place
of business designated on the license. However, upon written request, the
license inspector may approve an off-site locked and secured storage
facility. The licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance
with § 116.05(F). All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping
and reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be
stored in compliance with all provisions of the city code. The licensee must
either own the building in which the business is conducted and any approved
off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the business premises which
extends for more than six months.



   (Q)   Required signage.



      (1)   A licensee must post adequate signage and separate
written notice informing persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
leave or deposit goods with the licensee of the requirements of this chapter.
For the purpose of this division (Q), ADEQUATE SIGNAGE shall, at a minimum,
mean at least one sign of not less than four feet square in surface area,
comprised of lettering not less than three-quarters of an inch in height,
posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and stating the
following: TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY: YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE YOU
MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY THE PROPERTY MUST BE FREE OF ALL
CLAIMS AND LIENS YOU MUST PRESENT VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION VIOLATION OF ANY
OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME ALL TRANSACTIONS ARE RECORDED BY VIDEO ALL
TRANSACTIONS ARE REPORTED TO POLICE DAILY.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division (Q), SEPARATE WRITTEN
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean either the receipt, as required in M.S. §
344.04(h), or a printed form, incorporating a statement to the effect that
the person pawning, pledging, selling, consigning, leaving, or depositing the
article is at least 18 years of age; is the true owner of the article; and
that the article is free of all claims and liens. The separate written notice
must be signed by the person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave,
or deposit the article with the licensee and the notice must be kept in the
files of the licensee along with the other records of the transaction.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.06  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Licensees. No licensee shall:



      (1)   Receive any goods from a person under the age of 18
years.



      (2)   Receive any goods from an intoxicated person or a person
of unsound mind.



      (3)   Receive any goods from a person unless the person
presents valid identification as required by § 116.05(A)(5).



      (4)   Receive any item of property that possesses an altered,
obliterated or removed serial number.



      (5)   Knowingly possess stolen goods without contacting and
reporting such to the police.



      (6)   Purchase, accept or receive an article of property from
a person knowing, or having reason to know, that the person is not the true
owner of the property; nor shall the licensee purchase, accept, or receive an
article of property knowing, or having reason to know, that the article is
encumbered by a security interest.



      (7)   Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired.



      (8)   Keep the business open for the transaction of business
on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.



      (9)   Lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that
allowed by law.



      (10)   Make any false entry in the records of pawn
transactions or use any pawn ticket not meeting the requirements of this
chapter.



      (11)   Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place
of business, the records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee’s
pawn transactions.



      (12)   Refuse to allow a law enforcement agency or a
prosecutor to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods in the licensee’s
possession during the ordinary hours of business or at other times acceptable
to both parties.



      (13)   Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for
three years.



      (14)   Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of
a pledger or seller, or waiving any provisions of this chapter, or providing
for a maturity date less than 90 days after the date of pawn.



      (15)   Fail to return pledged goods to a pledger or seller, or
provide compensation as provided in M.S. § 325J.09, upon payment of the full
amount due the pawnbroker unless either the date of redemption is more than
60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension and the
pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods, or the pledged goods have been taken
into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency.



      (16)   Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or
purchased goods back to the pledger or seller in the same, or a related,
transaction.



      (17)   Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection
with a pawn transaction.



      (18)   Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or
other storage place approved by a municipality at any time before the
expiration of the redemption period. However, a pawnbroker is permitted to:



         (a)   Return pledged goods to the borrower at any time
during the redemption period;



         (b)   Sell the pledged goods or remove the pledged goods
from the pawnshop premises or other storage at any time after the expiration
of the redemption period; and



         (c)   Sell or remove purchased goods not involving a
pawn transaction from the pawnshop premises or other storage facility 31 days
or later from the purchase transaction date.



      (19)   Fail to maintain order in the business.



   (B)   Patrons. No person shall:



      (1)   Pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any
licensee if the person is under the age of 18 years of age.



      (2)   Give a false or fictitious name; nor give a false date
of birth; nor give a false or out-of-date address of residence or telephone
number; nor present a false or altered identification, or the identification
of another; to any licensee when seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
leave, or deposit any article of property.



      (3)   Pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any
article of property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
consign, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with permission
or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or
deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest;
with any licensee.



      (4)   Make false statements or representations regarding the
ownership of items to be sold or pawned.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.07  VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 181, passed 3-20-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



      131.   CURFEW; MINORS



      132.   DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES



      133.   SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS



      134.   DRUG LAB SITES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Storage, deposit and disposal of refuse



   130.02   Disorderly conduct generally



   130.03   Noisy parties; disorderly conduct



   130.04   Drug paraphernalia



   130.05   Lurking, loitering and prowling



§ 130.01  STORAGE, DEPOSIT AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any premises where a commercial or
industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include
restaurants, clubs, churches and schools where food is prepared or served.



      MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any building used for residential purposes
consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen
facilities for each.



      REFUSE.  Includes all organic material resulting from the
manufacture, preparation or serving of food or food products, and spoiled,
decayed or waste foods from any source, bottles, cans, glassware, paper or
paper products, crockery, ashes, rags and discarded clothing, tree or lawn
clippings, leaves, weeds and other waste products, except human waste or
waste resulting from building construction or demolition.



      RESIDENTIAL DWELLING.  Any single building consisting of one
through four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.



   (B)   Storage.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on
residential dwelling premises for more than one week. All the storage shall
be in five- to 30-gallon metal or plastic containers with tight-fitting
covers, which shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;
provided, that tree leaves, weeds and grass clippings may be stored in
plastic bags and tree limbs must be stored in bundles weighing no more than
75 pounds and no longer than four feet.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on
multiple dwelling premises for more than one week. The storage shall be in
containers as for residential dwelling premises, except that so-called
“dumpsters” with close-fitting covers may be substituted.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on
commercial establishment premises for more than 48 hours. The storage shall
be in containers as for residential dwelling premises, except that so-called
“dumpsters” with close-fitting covers may be substituted.



      (4)   It is unlawful to store organic refuse unless it is
drained and wrapped.



   (C)   Deposit. It is unlawful for any person to deposit refuse from
any source, rubbish, offal or the body of a dead animal, in any place other
than a sanitary landfill.



   (D)   Fire danger. It is unlawful for any person to store, deposit
or dispose of any refuse which is in flames or heated to the point where it
could cause danger of fire in other refuse.



(2003 Code, § 8.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  DISORDERLY CONDUCT GENERALLY.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place,
knowing or having reasonable grounds to know, that it will, or will tend to,
alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the peace,
to do the following:



      (1)   Engage in brawling or fighting;



      (2)   Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its
character;



      (3)   Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in
boisterous and noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others;



      (4)   Willfully and lewdly expose his or her person or the
private parts thereof, or procure another to so expose himself or herself;
and any open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of public
indecency;



      (5)   Whether or not posted with signs so prohibiting,
voluntarily enter the waters of any river or public swimming pool at any time
when the waters are not properly supervised by trained life-saving personnel
in attendance for that purpose, or enter the waters without being garbed in a
bathing suit sufficient to cover his or her person and equal to the standards
generally adopted and accepted by the public;



      (6)   Urinate or defecate in a place other than:



         (a)   If on public property then in a plumbing fixture
provided for that purpose;



         (b)   If on the private property of another then in a
plumbing fixture provided for that purpose; or



         (c)   If on private property not owned or controlled by
another, then within a building.



      (7)   Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise
by shouting or by any other means or mechanism including the blowing of any
automobile or other vehicle horn;



      (8)   Use a sound amplifier upon streets and public property
without prior written permission from the city;



      (9)   Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or
endanger others;



      (10)   Cause defacement, destruction or otherwise damage to
any premises or any property located thereon;



      (11)   Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit
any refuse, garbage or rubbish onto any premises except into receptacles
provided for that purpose;



      (12)   Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent
of the owner or operator; or



      (13)   Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after
being requested or ordered, whether orally or in writing, to do so, by the
owner, or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or
official



   (B)   Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any
person who is owner or tenant of the premises involved nor to any law
enforcement or other government official who may be present thereon at that
time as part of his or her official duty, nor shall it include the spouse,
children, employee or tenant of the owner or occupier.



(2003 Code, § 8.41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  NOISY PARTIES; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any
private lands because of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of such nature as to
disturb the peace, quiet or repose of other persons. Any owner or person in
lawful possession or control of the private lands who has knowledge of the
disturbance and fails to immediately abate the disturbance shall be guilty of
a violation of this section.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any
private lands of another because of, or participate in, any party or
gathering of people in the absence of the owner of the private lands being
present, without first having obtained written permission from the landowner
or other person in lawful possession of the private lands. The written
permission shall at all times be in the possession of one or more persons at
the site of the congregation. The document containing the written permission
must bear the signature of the landowner and date of the permitted use.
Failure to display written permission upon request shall be considered prima
facie evidence of an absence of permission from the owner.



   (C)   A violation of divisions (A) or (B) above shall give a peace
officer the authority to order all persons present, other than persons
identifying themselves as the owner or person in lawful possession or control
of the land, to immediately disperse. Any person who shall refuse to leave
after being ordered to do so by a peace officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.



(2003 Code, § 8.42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Definitions; terms; evidence. For the purpose of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      (1)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and
materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use,
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended
from time to time. It includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species
of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of controlled substances;



         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine,
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for
use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana;



         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers
used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body;



         (l)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine,
hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic
or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold
burning material such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs; and



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



      (2)   Other terms. Other terms are as defined in M.S. §
152.01, as it may be amended from time to time.



      (3)   Evidence. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use;



         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to
any controlled substance;



         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of this section;



         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled
substances;



         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object;



         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons
whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to
time; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to
a direct violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to
time, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia;



         (g)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use;



         (h)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use;



         (i)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



         (j)   The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



         (k)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the
object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



         (l)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



         (m)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and



         (n)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



   (B)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any
person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (2)   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is
unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or
manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Chapter 152, as it may be amended
from time to time.



      (3)   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18
years of age or over who violates division (B)(2) above, by delivering drug
paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years
his or her junior is guilty of a special offense.



      (4)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for
any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication
any advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to
promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.



   (C)   Civil forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia as defined by
division (A) above is subject to forfeiture, subject to the provisions set
forth in M.S. § 609.531, as they may be amended from time to time, in the
same manner as if the forfeiture were pursuant to M.S. Chapter 152, as it may
be amended from time to time.



(2003 Code, § 8.60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  LURKING, LOITERING AND PROWLING.



   (A)   Loitering; circumstances cause alarm.



      (1)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to lurk,
loiter or prowl in any place, in any time or in any manner not usual by
law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity.



      (2)   Circumstances causing alarm. Among the circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact
that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses
to identify himself or herself or endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
an object.



      (3)   Authority to detain. A police office may stop and
briefly detain a person suspected of violating division (A)(1) above, if the
person’s behavior reasonably causes suspicion of criminal activity. The
officer’s reasonable suspicion must be based on objective, articulable
facts and reasonable inferences drawn from all the circumstances surrounding
the person’s behavior.



      (4)   Opportunity to dispel alarm.



         (a)   Unless flight by the person or other circumstances
make it impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for a
violation of division (A)(1) above, allow the person an opportunity to dispel
any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him or her to
identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct.



         (b)   An explanation of the person’s presence and
conduct shall be sufficient to dispel alarm if it shows that the person was
engaging in, and planning to continue engaging in, lawful activity consistent
with his or her actions and all the circumstances surrounding his or her
behavior.



         (c)   The person may identify himself or herself by
presenting any of the following:



            1.   A state-issued identification card or
driver’s license containing the person’s photograph;



            2.   An employer-issued identification card which
verifies the person’s employment and includes the person’s photograph;



            3.   A currently valid passport;



            4.   A certified copy of the person’s birth
certificate; and/or



            5.   Verification of the person’s identity by
another person who can establish his/her own identity by one of the documents
listed above.



      (5)   Requisites for conviction. A person shall not be
convicted of violating division (A)(1) above, if:



         (a)   No police officer gave the person the opportunity
provided in division (A)(1) above, to dispel the alarm created by his or her
actions; or



         (b)   The finder of fact determines that the police
officer should have accepted the person’s explanation as sufficient to
dispel alarm.



   (B)   Loitering; intent to commit crime. It is unlawful for any
person, in any public or private place, to lurk, loiter, prowl, lie in wait
or be concealed with intent to commit any act prohibited by law.



   (C)   Loitering; obstructing public passage. It is unlawful for any
person to loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public property, private
sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walk-way area, parking lot, mall, steps,
window sill, wall, bench, fence or other portion of private property open for
public use, so as to unreasonably block, obstruct, partially obstruct or
block or hinder free passage of the public. It is also unlawful for any
person to block, obstruct, partially obstruct or hinder free access to the
entrance of any building or part of a building open to the public without
consent of the owner or occupant. No person shall be arrested or convicted
under this provision until after a police officer has informed the person
that his or her action violates this section and has asked the person to move
to a location, if one is available, which would not violate this section.



   (D)   Loitering; signs prohibiting. It is unlawful for any person to
loiter, stand, sit or lie in an area where a sign prohibiting loitering has
been posted.



(2003 Code, § 8.61)  (Ord. 45, passed 12-23-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  CURFEW; MINORS



Section



   131.01   Curfew for minors



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor’s household. The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by reference
to the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT.  Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the
minor. The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be
another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age
of 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day,
official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages
of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following
day, official city time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in
the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession or
occupation and the minor’s residence. Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor’s presence at work;



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution or
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor’s parent, guardian or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew;



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city’s designated law enforcement provider about the
minor’s presence; or



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent,
guardian or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor shall
permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



   (I)   A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has
an affirmative defense before making an arrest.



Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of § 131.01 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of § 131.01
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 180, passed 3-6-2017)



CHAPTER 132:  DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES



Section



   132.01   Acts prohibited



   132.02   Exception



   132.03   Discharge of firearms and explosives



   132.04   Exception



   132.05   Possession and sale of fireworks



   132.06   Exposure of unused container



   132.07   Use of bow and arrow



§ 132.01  ACTS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or
explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;



   (B)   Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or
killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;



   (C)   Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known
as a slung-shot or sand club;



   (D)   Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch
blade knife opening automatically;



   (E)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the
purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another;



   (F)   Sell or have in his or her possession any device designed to
silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm;



   (G)   Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14 years of
age to handle or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, a
firearm or air gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive;



   (H)   Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun,
ammunition or explosive without the written consent of his or her parent or
guardian or of the Police Department; or



   (I)   Possess, sell, transfer or have in possession for sale or
transfer, any weapon commonly known as a throwing star, nun chuck or sharp
stud. For the purposes of this division (I): a THROWING STAR means a circular
metallic device with any number of points projecting from the edge; a NUN
CHUCK means a pair of wood sticks or metallic rods separated by chain links
attached to one end of each such stick or rod; and a SHARP STUD means a
circular piece of metal attached to a wrist band, glove, belt or other
material which protrudes one-fourth inch, or more, from the material to which
it is attached, and with the protruding portion pyramidal in shape, sharp or
pointed.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.02  EXCEPTION.



   Nothing in § 132.01 shall prohibit the possession of the articles
therein mentioned if the purpose of the possession is for public exhibition
by museums or collectors of art.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-2)



§ 132.03  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.



   It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun,
pistol or other firearm, firecracker, skyrocket or other fireworks, air gun,
air rifle or other similar device commonly referred to as a B-B gun.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.04  EXCEPTION.



   Nothing in § 132.03 shall apply to a display of fireworks by an
organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by the Council,
or to a peace officer in the discharge of his or her duty, or to a person in
the lawful defense of his or her person or family. This chapter shall not
apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized in writing by the
Council.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-4)



§ 132.05  POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or have in possession
for the purpose of sale, except as allowed in § 132.04, any firecrackers,
sky rockets or other fireworks.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.06  EXPOSURE OF UNUSED CONTAINER.



   It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or
control thereof, to permit an unused refrigerator, ice box or other
container, sufficiently large to retain any child and with doors which fasten
automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without
removing the doors, lids, hinges or latches.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.07  USE OF BOW AND ARROW.



   It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the
physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty,
a community-wide supervised class or event specifically authorized by the
Chief of Police, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the Council.



(2003 Code, § 8.04-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 133:  SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS



Section



   133.01   Title and authority



   133.02   Purpose and findings



   133.03   Definitions



   133.04   Prohibited acts



   133.05   Exceptions



   133.06   Enforcement



   133.07   Violation



§ 133.01  TITLE AND AUTHORITY.



   The City Council desires to protect the health, safety and welfare of
all persons living in and visiting the city. The use of alcohol by persons
under the age of 21 is prohibited by state statute. This chapter prohibits
and establishes penalties for any person hosting an event or gathering where
alcohol is present and being possessed or consumed by persons under 21 years
of age. This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 340A.90, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 133.02  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City Council intends to discourage underage possession and
consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private
residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events
or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol
regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the
alcohol.



   (B)   The City Council finds that:



      (1)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property
where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are
harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health
requiring prevention or abatement;



      (2)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect
underage persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to
alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic
collisions;



      (3)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used
irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it, as well as
those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user;



      (4)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage
possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents; however,
there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity,
and in some circumstances provide the alcohol;



      (5)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage
person is a crime, it is difficult to prove and an ordinance is necessary to
help further combat underage consumption; and



      (6)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
possession or consumption occurs.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 133.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled spirits, including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.



   EVENT or GATHERING.  Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   HOST.  To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control
or permit a gathering or event, whether that host is present or not.



   PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



      (1)   As natural, adoptive parent or step-parent;



      (2)   As a legal guardian; or



      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation or
any association of one or more individuals.



   RESIDENCE or PREMISES.  Any home, land, apartment, condominium, hotel
or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, or any
other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied as a dwelling or
for any social function, and whether owned, leased or rented.



   UNDERAGE PERSON.  Any individual under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 133.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to: host or allow an event or
gathering at any residence, premises or on any other private or public
property; where alcoholic beverages are present; when the person knows or
reasonably should know that an underage person will or does: consume any
alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it; and the person fails to take reasonable steps
to prevent possession or consumption by the underage person(s).



   (B)   A person is criminally responsible for violating this section,
if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with
or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an
underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent’s
household.



   (B)   This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.



   (C)   This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503(1)(a)(1), as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (D)   This chapter does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of employment.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 133.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter can be enforced by any police officer or other duly
authorized law enforcement officer.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)



§ 133.07  VIOLATION.



   Violation of § 133.04 is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 159, passed 6-20-2011)



CHAPTER 134:  DRUG LAB SITES



Section



   134.01   Title and statutory authority



   134.02   Purpose



   134.03   Jurisdiction



   134.04   Interpretation and application



   134.05   Disclaimer of liability



   134.06   Fees



   134.07   Definitions



   134.08   Administration



   134.09   Exceptions



§ 134.01  TITLE AND STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known and referenced as the “Cleanup
of Clandestine Drug Lab Sites Ordinance”.



   (B)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the powers specified in
M.S. § 145A.10, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.02  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Professional reports, based on assessments, testing and
investigations, show that chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs
can condense, penetrate and contaminate on the land, surfaces, furnishings
and equipment in or near structures where clandestine drug labs are located.



   (B)   These conditions present health and safety risks to occupants
and visitors of the structures and land through fire, explosion and skin and
respiratory exposure to chemicals.



   (C)   This chapter establishes responsibilities and guidelines for
involved parties to assure that:



      (1)   People are not unnecessarily exposed to the dangers of
these contaminated structures or land; and



      (2)   Proper steps are taken to remove contaminants and assure
appropriate tests are completed to verify that affected structures and land
are sufficiently cleaned for human contact.



   (D)   This chapter assists and guides appropriate public
authorities, property owners and occupants to prevent injury and illness to
members of the public, particularly children.



   (E)   This chapter is intended to reduce exposure to chemicals used
at clandestine drug lab operations in structures, including dwellings,
buildings, motor vehicles, trailers, appliances or the land where they are
located.



   (F)   This chapter is intended to minimize the cost to the city for
clean up of clandestine drug lab sites.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.03  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all land within the boundaries of
the city.



   (B)   Where either Chippewa County or Yellow Medicine County has
lawfully passed an ordinance to regulate and enforce the cleanup of
clandestine drug labs that is more restrictive, the city shall coordinate
regulation and enforcement with the applicable county.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.04  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and
applied as the minimum requirements necessary to protect public health,
safety and welfare.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable provisions
imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution or regulation of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall apply.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.05  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   Liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the city, or
any employee or agent thereof, for any damages that may result from reliance
on this chapter shall be eliminated or limited as provided by M.S. § 466.02,
as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.06  FEES.



   Fees for the administration of this chapter may be established and
amended periodically by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.07  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION SITE.  A clandestine drug lab site that is
under notice and order for cleanup and/or remediation as a public health
nuisance, as authorized by M.S. Chapter 145A, as it may be amended from time
to time, and this or other applicable city ordinance.



   CHILD.  Any person less than 18 years of age.



   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB OPERATION.  The unlawful manufacture or attempt
to manufacture a controlled substance within any area of a structure, such as
a dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other structure or
appliance.



   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE.  Any parts of a structure, such as a
dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer or appliance, occupied or affected
by conditions and/or chemicals, typically associated with a clandestine drug
lab operation.



   CLEANUP.  Proper removal and/or containment of substances hazardous to
humans and/or the environment at a chemical investigation site. CLEANUP is a
part of remediation.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  A drug, substance or immediate precursor in
M.S. § 152.02, Schedules I through V, as they may be amended from time to
time. The term shall not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages,
intoxicating liquors or tobacco.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part,
the land and/or structures, such as buildings, motor vehicle, trailer, boat
or other appliance, at a clandestine drug lab site.



   PUBLIC HEALTH AUTHORITY.  The Public Health Director and the Deputy
Public Health Director, or their designees, or other designated individuals
or agents who are authorized to act as agents of the City Council members in
their role as the Community Health Board, pursuant to the Local Public Health
Act, M.S. §§ 145A.09 to 145A.12, as they may be amended from time to time
(hereinafter designated as “Public Health”).



   PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.  Has the meaning attributed to it in M.S. §
145A.02(17), as it may be amended from time to time.



   REMEDIATION.  Methods, such as assessment, evaluation, testing,
venting, detergent scrubbing, enclosure, encapsulation, demolition and/or
removal of contaminated materials from a chemical investigation site.



   STRUCTURE.  A dwelling, building, motor vehicle, trailer, boat,
appliance or any other/area or location, either fixed or temporary.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.08  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Declaration of site as a chemical investigation site public
health nuisance. Clandestine drug lab sites, as defined herein, are declared
by this chapter to be “chemical investigation site public health
nuisances”.



   (B)   Medical guidelines for assessing health status of exposed
persons. Medical guidelines for assessing the health status and determining
medical care needs of persons, particularly children, that are found or known
to be occupants or frequent visitors at a clandestine drug lab site, may be
established and updated as necessary by such “medical consultants” who
provide consultation services under contract, or otherwise, to the city.



   (C)   Law enforcement notice to affected public, public health and
child protection authorities.



      (1)   Law enforcement authorities who identify a clandestine
drug lab site, or clandestine drug lab operation, shall notify the
appropriate governmental departments or agencies responsible for public
health and child protection within one working day of identifying the lab
site.



         (a)   The obligation to promptly notify may be delayed
to accomplish appropriate law enforcement objectives, but only to the extent
that public health and child protection responsibilities are not
unnecessarily compromised.



         (b)   The notice shall include sufficient information to
inform the recipients of the following:



            1.   Property location by street address and other
identifiable location;



            2.   Property owner’s and occupant’s
identities, especially the identities of any children and women of
child-bearing age found or known to be associated with the site;



            3.   Chemicals found and indications of chemical
residues;



            4.   Presumed duration of the lab;



            5.   Equipment in a dwelling or structure that is
typically associated with the manufacture of a controlled substance; and



            6.   Conditions typically associated with a
clandestine drug lab site or operation, including weapons, illicit drugs,
filth, fire or electrical shock and other harmful conditions as determined by
state law.



      (2)   Upon identification of the clandestine drug lab site or
operation, law enforcement agencies may treat, store, transport or dispose of
all hazardous waste found at the site in a manner consistent with State
Department of Health, State Pollution Control and local county, city and
other applicable rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, such
ordinances as may hereafter be adopted providing for Hazardous Waste
Management Regulation.



      (3)   When a law enforcement agency completes its work under
division (C)(2) above, and is prepared to leave those sites, the agency shall
affix a warning sign to the entrance of the affected part of the structure.
The warning sign shall be those that have been prepared in advance for the
situations through the collaboration of city and county law enforcement,
public health and city officials, as applicable. The warning sign shall be of
a size and contain information sufficient to alert visitors or returning
occupants that the site is a chemical investigation site public health
nuisance, may be dangerous to enter and must not be entered, except by
authorization of the Public Health Authority and/or law enforcement agency
identified on the sign.



   (D)   Notice of chemical investigation site public health nuisance
to owner and occupant.



      (1)   After the Public Health Authority receives notice from a
law enforcement agency that they’ve identified a clandestine drug lab site
and posted the appropriate Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance
warning sign, the Public Health Authority shall serve the known lawful
occupants and owners of the site pursuant to M.S. § 145A.04(8)(b), as it may
be amended from time to time, with notice of their responsibilities relative
to the chemical investigation site public health nuisance.



      (2)   The public health authority shall notify and order the
property owner of record and known occupant or agent to have the public
health nuisance removed or abated within ten days as provided in M.S. §
145A.04, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter. Public
Health notice and order shall include the following:



         (a)   A replica of the Chemical Investigation Site
Public Health Nuisance declaration that is posted at the site’s entrance(s);



         (b)   Information about the potentially hazardous
condition of the chemical investigation site;



         (c)   A summary of the property owner’s and
occupant’s responsibilities under this chapter; and



         (d)   Information on locating professional services
necessary to remove and abate the chemical investigation site public health
nuisance status as provided in this chapter and M.S. § 145A.04, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (3)   The public health authority shall endeavor to provide
information in writing about the Chemical Investigation Site Public Health
Nuisance declaration and potential hazard(s) to the following additional
concerned parties:



         (a)   Neighbors within close proximity that can be
reasonably affected by the conditions found;



         (b)   The City Clerk;



         (c)   Local and immediate area law enforcement (police
and sheriff offices); and



         (d)   Other state and local authorities, such as the
State Pollution Control Agency and State Department of Health, that may have
public and environmental protection responsibilities at the site.



   (E)   Notice filed with property record and/or motor vehicle record.



      (1)   If, after ten days’ notice and order, Public Health is
unable to obtain any reasonable assurance or plan from the property owner or
occupant that the structure is being properly vacated, cleaned, remediated
and tested, Public Health may provide a copy of the Chemical Investigation
Site Public Health Nuisance notice and order to the County Recorder and to
the lien and mortgage holders of the affected structure and/or properties.
The County Recorder is authorized to file that information with the property
record, to notify other persons with interest in the property about the
property’s chemical investigation site public health nuisance status.



      (2)   When the affected property is a motor vehicle, boat or
trailer, Public Health shall notify the appropriate state and local agency
that maintains motor vehicle, boat or trailer records, and the holders of
liens or security interests against the vehicle or trailer.



   (F)   Property owner’s and occupant’s responsibility to act.



      (1)   Property owner(s) and occupant(s) provided with a
notice, which also includes the posted warning sign informing them about the
chemical investigation site public health nuisance, shall promptly act to
vacate occupants from those parts of a structure that are a chemical
investigation site public health nuisance. This includes dwellings,
buildings, motor vehicles, trailers, boats, appliances or any other affected
area or location.



      (2)   Within ten business days of receiving the Public Health
notice and order to cleanup the Chemical Investigation Site Public Health
Nuisance, the property owner(s) and/or occupant(s) shall take the following
actions:



         (a)   Notify the City Public Health Authority or its
designated agents that the affected parts of the dwellings, buildings and/or
motor vehicles have been and will remain vacated and secured until the Public
Health Authority provides notice that the public health nuisance no longer
exists;



         (b)   Contract with one or more acceptable environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firms (acceptable firms are those that have
provided assurance of appropriate equipment, procedures and personnel, as
determined by the State and/or City Departments of Health), or other
designees, to accomplish the following:



            1.   A detailed on-site assessment of the extent
of contamination at the site and the contamination of the personal property
therein;



            2.   Soil testing of the site and testing of all
property and soil in proximity to the site that the environmental hazard
testing and cleaning firm determines may have been affected by the conditions
found at the site;



            3.   A complete clean-up of the site (including,
but not limited to, the clean-up or removal of contaminated plumbing,
ventilation systems, fixtures and contaminated soil) or a demolition of the
site and a complete clean-up of the demolished site;



            4.   A complete clean-up or disposal at an
approved dump site, of all personal property in the site;



            5.   A complete clean-up of all property and soil
in proximity to the site that is found to have been affected by the
conditions found at the site; and



            6.   Remediation testing and follow-up testing to
determine that all health risks are sufficiently reduced, according to State
Department of Health guidelines, to allow safe human occupancy and use of the
site and use of the personal property therein.



         (c)   Provide City Public Health Authority with the
identity of the testing and cleaning firm the owner or occupant has
contracted with for remediation of the structure(s) as described above;



         (d)   Provide the City Public Health Authority with the
contractor’s plan and schedule for remediation that will abate the chemical
investigation site public health nuisance declaration; and



         (e)   The property owner or occupant may request an
extension of time to consider options for arranging cleanup or removal of the
affected parts of the structure. The owner or occupant must show good cause
for any such extension. Any such extension shall be dependant on the
owner’s assurance that the affected parts of the structure will not be
occupied pending appropriate cleanup or demolition.



   (G)   Property owner’s responsibility for costs and opportunity
for recovery.



      (1)   Consistent with M.S. Chapter 145A, as it may be amended
from time to time, the property owner shall be responsible for: private
contractor’s fees, cleanup, remediation and testing of chemical
investigation site public health nuisance conditions; and city fees and costs
of administering notices and enforcing, vacating, cleanup, remediation and
testing of affected parts of the property.



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the
property owners, agents, occupants or the city’s right to recover costs or
damages, from persons contributing to the public health nuisance, such as the
operators of the clandestine drug lab and/or other lawful sources.



      (3)   The city’s administrative and enforcement services,
referenced in division (G)(1) above, include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   Posting warning notices or signs at the site;



         (b)   Notification of affected parties;



         (c)   Securing the site, providing limited access to the
site and prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site;



         (d)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs,
including the assessment process;



         (e)   Laboratory fees;



         (f)   Clean-up services;



         (g)   Administrative fees; and



         (h)   Other associated costs.



   (H)   Special assessment to recover public costs.



      (1)   The city is authorized under M.S. § 145A.04(8)(c), as
it may be amended from time to time, to proceed within ten business days of
service of a notice for abatement or removal of the Public Health Nuisance to
initiate the assessment and cleanup when: the property owner is not located;
or the Public Health Authority determines that the owner refuses to, or
cannot pay the costs, or arrange timely assessment and cleanup that is
acceptable to the designated Public Health Authority.



      (2)   The City Council (or its formally identified designee)
shall be fully authorized to act, consistent with state law, on behalf of the
city to direct funds to assure prompt remediation of chemical investigation
sites.



      (3)   When the estimated cost of testing, cleanup and
remediation exceeds seventy-five percent of the county assessor’s market
value of the structure and land, the City Council (or its formally identified
designee) is authorized to notify the property owner of the city’s intent
to remove and dispose of the affected real property instead of proceeding
with cleaning and remediation.



      (4)   The property owner shall be responsible for all costs,
including those of the city, incurred to abate the public health nuisance,
including contractor’s fees and public costs for services that were
performed in association with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump
site clean-up. The city’s costs may also include, but shall not be limited
to, those set forth in division (G)(3) above. Fees and costs specified above
that are not paid for in any other way may be collected through a special
assessment on the property as allowed by M.S. § 145A.08, as it may be
amended from time to time, or by any other applicable federal, state and
local laws, ordinances and/or applicable City Council resolution(s).



      (5)   Payment on the special assessment, shall be at the
annual rate of at least $1,000 or more as needed to assure full payment to
the city within ten years. This amount shall be collected at the time real
estate taxes are due. The amount due and/or payment rate may be adjusted by
action of the City Council.



      (6)   The city may also seek recovery of costs through other
methods allowed by federal or state law.



   (I)   Authority to modify or remove declaration of chemical
investigation site public health nuisance.



      (1)   The designated Public Health Authority may modify
conditions of the declaration and order removal of the declaration of
Chemical Investigation Site Public Health Nuisance.



      (2)   The modification or removal shall occur only after the
Public Health Authority has determined that levels of contamination are
sufficiently reduced through remediation to warrant modification or removal
of the declaration. The Public Health Authority may rely on information from
competent sources, including those supplied by the property owner and/or
others, such as state and local health, safety, law enforcement and pollution
control authorities to reach those decisions.



      (3)   When the declaration is modified or removed, the Public
Health Authority shall forward that information to the County Recorder for
addition to the property record if notice of the nuisance declaration was
previously filed with the Recorder as described above. Similarly, notice
shall be provided to the motor vehicle or other license records agencies and
lien holders if a notice had previously been provided to them.



   (J)   Waste generated from cleaning up a clandestine drug lab. Waste
generated from chemical investigation site public health nuisances shall be
treated, stored, transported and disposed in accordance with applicable State
Department of Health, State Pollution Control Agency and city, and all other
applicable rules and regulations for solid waste and for hazardous household
and other hazardous wastes.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



§ 134.09  EXCEPTIONS.



   Administration of this chapter, including guidance for, challenges to
and penalties, shall be according to the authorities provided in M.S. Chapter
145A, as it may be amended from time to time, other applicable state law,
ordinances and all other applicable rules and regulations.



(Ord. 123, passed 10-18-2004)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING/CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



      151.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



      152.   MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS



      153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      154.   AIRPORT SAFETY ZONING



      155.   ZONING CODE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING/CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   State Building Code adopted



   150.02   Permit fees



   150.03   Permits and special requirements for moving buildings



   150.04   Special requirements in new construction



   150.05   Additional construction standards



   150.06   Walls, fences and hedges on private property



   150.07   Contiguous territory



   150.08   Swimming pool construction regulation



   150.09   Completion of work



   150.10   Rental Dwelling Licensing Code




Housing Maintenance Code




   150.25   Title



   150.26   Purpose



   150.27   Discrimination and privacy



   150.28   Definitions



   150.29   Applicability



   150.30   General responsibilities of owners



   150.31   Smoke and carbon monoxide detection



   150.32   Conditions of components or systems of existing residential
structures



   150.33   Conditions of residential housing other than components and
systems




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The State Building Code, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101
to 326B.194, as it may be amended from time to time, including all of the
amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from
time to time by the State Commissioner of Administration, to the Building
Codes and Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference, with the
exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
section. The State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this section as if
fully set out herein.



   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement. The application,
administration and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with the
State Building Code. The code shall be enforced within the extra territorial
limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121(d), as it may be amended from time to
time. The Code Enforcement Agency of this municipality is the City Building
Official, also known as City Building Inspector. This code shall be enforced
by the State Certified Building Official designated by this municipality to
administer the code (M.S. § 326B.133(1), as it may be amended from time to
time).



   (C)   Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized by M.S. § 326B.121(d), as it may be amended
from time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this
code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted and modified by the city in
by resolution as amended from time to time, said resolution on file at the
office of City Clerk. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all
permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance M.S. § 326B.148,
as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Violations. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (M.S. §
16B.69 , as it may be amended from time to time).



   (E)   Building Code option chapters. The State Building Code,
established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be
amended from time to time, allows a municipality to adopt by reference and
enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the State
Building Code. The following optional provisions identified in the most
current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of the Building Code for this municipality: none.



(Ord. 142, passed 1-7-2008)



§ 150.02  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated
construction value at the time of application, except for fixed fees.



      (2)   Permit valuation shall include the total value of all
construction work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is
being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and
permanent systems.



      (3)   The Building Official shall make the final determination
of value.



      (4)   Valuation is based on the building valuation data dated
May 2008, or the most current valuation provided by the ICC via State
Building Codes and Standards Division or contract bid price.



      (5)   The Building Official shall make the final determination.



      (6)   Exceptions: building permit valuations for the following
structures shall be based on the valuation of on-site work only:



         (a)   Manufactured homes containing a Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) certification label;



         (b)   Prefabricated buildings with a State Building
Codes and Standards Division prefabrication label; and



         (c)   Industrialized/modular buildings with an
Industrialized Building Commission (IBC) label.



   (B)   Plan review fees. When submittal documents are required by the
Building Official, a plan review fee shall be paid. The plan review fee shall
be 65% of the building permit fee. The plan review fees are separate fees
from the permit fees and are in addition to the permit fees. When submittal
documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review,
fees shall be charged at a rate shown in Table 1-A, which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk. Plan review fees for similar plans falling under
Minn. Rules 1300.0160, subd. Part 6, shall be 25% of the building permit fee.



   (C)   Fixed fees.



      (1)   Demolition: $50, plus $1 surcharge.



      (2)   Other maintenance or minor projects as determined by the
Building Official: $25, plus $0.50 surcharge.



      (3)   All other permit fees based on valuation (labor and
materials) using the fee schedule.



      (4)   M.S. § 326B.153, as it may be amended from time to
time: $15 or 5% of the cost of the improvement, installation or replacement,
whichever is greater, for the improvement, installation or replacement of a
residential fixture or appliance that:



         (a)   Does not require modification to electric or gas
service;



         (b)   Has a total cost of $500 or less, excluding the
cost of the fixture or appliance; and



         (c)   Is improved, installed or replaced by the
homeowner or licensed contractor.



   (D)   Payment of fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees
prescribed by the municipality have been paid.



   (E)   Work commencing before permit issuance. If work for which a
permit is required by the Code has been commenced without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued
for the work. An investigation fee shall be collected and is in addition to
the required permit fee and equal to the permit fee.



   (F)   Fee refund. The Building Official may authorize refunding of
any fees paid hereunder which were erroneously paid or collected.



   (G)   Building Official. The Building Official may authorize
refunding of not more than 80% of the permit fee or plan review fee paid when
no work has been done under a permit issued. The Building Official shall not
authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application followed by
the original permit fee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.



   (H)   Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when the portion of work for which inspection is
called for is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. To
obtain a reinspection, the permit applicant shall pay the reinspection fee in
accordance with Table 1-A in the fee schedule adopted by this municipality,
which is on file in the office of the City Clerk. In instances where
reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspections of the work
will be performed until the required fees have been paid.



   (I)   Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official shall
expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work
authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of
the permit, or if the building or work authorized by the permit is suspended
or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180
days. Before the work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first
obtained to do so and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required
for a new permit for the work, excluding plan review fee, provided no changes
have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for
the work. The Building Official may grant, in writing, one or more extensions
of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.



   (J)   Expiration of plan review. Applications for which no permit is
issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by
limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be
returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. In order to
renew action on an application after exploration, the applicant shall
resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. In the event of a hardship and
at the discretion of the Building Official, a new plan review fee may be
waived.



(Ord. 144, passed 6-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.03  PERMITS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMBINED MOVING PERMIT.  A permit to move a building on both a
street and a highway.



      HIGHWAY.  A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a
state trunk highway, county state-aid highway or county road.



      HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT.  A permit to move a building on a highway
for which a fee is charged which does not include route approval, but does
include regulation of activities which do not involve the use of the highway;
which activities include, but are not limited to, repairs or alterations to a
municipal utility required by reason of the movement.



      MOVING PERMIT.  A document allowing the use of a street or
highway for the purpose of moving a building.



      STREET.  A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is
not a state trunk highway, county state-aid highway or county road.



      STREET MOVING PERMIT.  A permit to move a building on a street
for which a fee is charged which does include route approval, together with
use of the street and activities including, but not limited to, repairs or
alterations to a municipal utility required by reason of the movement.



   (B)   Application. The application for a moving permit shall state
the dimensions, weight and approximate loaded height of the structure or
building proposed to be moved, the places from which and to which it is to be
moved, the route to be followed, the dates and times of moving and parking,
the name and address of the mover, and the municipal utility and public
property repairs or alterations that will be required by reason of the
movement. In the case of a street moving permit or combined moving permit,
the application shall also state the size and weight of the structure or
building proposed to be moved and the street alterations or repairs that will
be required by reason of the movement. All applications shall be referred to
the Public Works Department. All applications for street and combined moving
permits shall also be referred to the Police Department and no such permits
shall be issued until route approval has been obtained from the Departments.



   (C)   Permit and fee. The moving permit shall state date or dates of
moving, hours, routing, movement and parking. Permits shall be issued only
for moving buildings by building movers licensed by the state, except that a
permit may be issued to a person moving his or her own building, or a person
moving a building which does not exceed 12 feet in width, 25 feet in length
or 16 feet in loaded height. Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of
the following: a moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route
approval; and a fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate
the city for any municipal utility and public property (other than streets)
repairs or alterations occasioned by the movement. All permit fees shall be
paid in advance of issuance.



   (D)   Building permit and code compliance. Before any building is
moved from one location to another within the city, or from a point of origin
without the city to a destination within the city, regardless of the route of
movement, it shall be inspected and a building permit shall have been issued
for at least the work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the
State Building Code.



   (E)   Unlawful acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any
street without a moving permit from the city.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any
highway without a highway moving permit from the city.



      (3)   It is unlawful to move any building (including a
manufactured home) if the point of origin or destination (or both) is within
the city, and regardless of the route of movement, without having paid in
full all real and personal property taxes, special assessments and municipal
utility charges due on the premises of origin and filing written proof of the
payment with the city.



(2003 Code, § 4.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.04  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN NEW CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Private sewage disposal systems. All buildings for which
permits are issued after adoption of this section shall be connected to the
city sewerage disposal system unless to do so would require the installation
of a lift station.



   (B)   Roof and surface water, sump pumps and other natural
precipitation. No water from the roof, surface, sump pump or other natural
precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system from a
building for which a permit is issued after adoption of this section.



   (C)   Remote registers on water meters. All buildings for which
permits are issued after adoption of this section shall have remote registers
on water meters.



(2003 Code, § 4.20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.05  ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   Any structure designed to be used as a dwelling shall have, in addition
to all other requirements, the following:



   (A)   All principal dwellings and principal structures shall be
placed on a permanent continuance perimeter foundation of not less than 20
feet in width;



   (B)   A minimum of 800 square feet for a single-family unit;



   (C)   Conventional siding, lapping the foundation by minimum of one
inch;



   (D)   Storage in accordance with state statutes; and



   (E)   A pitched roof with a minimum slope of three inches of rise
per each 12 inches of horizontal run, the same covered with shingles, tile or
approved metal roofing or other approved material with a minimum of 12-inch
eaves.



(2003 Code, § 4.21)  (Ord. 92, passed 2-22-2001)



§ 150.06  WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Restrictions. A wall, fence or hedge may occupy part of the
required front yard, but no wall or fence more than three feet high shall be
constructed without a special use permit. The required front yard of a corner
lot shall not contain any wall, fence or other structure, tree, shrub or
other growth which may cause danger to traffic on a street or public road by
obscuring the view. The required front yard of a corner lot shall be
unobstructed above a height of three feet in a triangular area, two sides of
which are the lines running along the side streets lined between the street
intersection and a point ten feet from the intersection and the third side of
which is the line between the latter two points.



   (B)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to construct
walls, fences or other structures, or permit the growth of trees or shrubs
contrary to the provisions of this section.



(2003 Code, § 4.22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.07  CONTIGUOUS TERRITORY.



   The city hereby extends its enforcement of the State Building Code to
contiguous unincorporated territory within the extraterritorial limits
permitted by M.S. § 326B.121(d), as it may be amended from time to time, in
all directions from the corporate limits of the city.



(2003 Code, § 4.23)  (Ord. 92, passed 2-22-2001)



§ 150.08  SWIMMING POOL CONSTRUCTION REGULATION.



   (A)   Purpose of section. The purpose of this section is to provide
minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public
welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
materials, use and occupancy and location and maintenance of all swimming
pools within the city, and certain equipment specifically regulated herein.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FENCE HEIGHT.  Measured at a point six inches below the top of
the supporting posts, or the height of the material between the support
posts, whichever is greater.



      STORAGE SWIMMING OR WADING POOLS.  The pools constructed on or
above ground that are capable of holding water to a maximum depth of 42
inches with non-metallic, molded, polymeric walls or inflatable fabric walls,
regardless of dimension.



      SWIMMING POOL.  Includes any enclosure, above or below ground,
having water surface area exceeding 100 square feet and a water depth greater
than 18 inches at any point.



   (C)   Enforcement of section. The City Building Inspector/Building
Official shall be charged with the enforcement of this section, and is hereby
authorized to issue citations for violation of or refusal to comply with the
provisions of this section.



   (D)   Building permit required.



      (1)   No swimming pool may be constructed, excavated or
erected within the city without first obtaining a building permit, except
storable swimming or wading pools, provided that the pools are set up or
placed in operation in the spring and taken out of operation and placed in
storage during the fall of each year so as to not remain permanently in
place. In the event the pools are permanently left in place, all other
provisions otherwise applicable to swimming and wading pools shall then apply
to the pools.



      (2)   The application for the building permit shall include:



         (a)   The type and size of pool; and



         (b)   A site plan indicating the following: location of
pool; location of house, garage, fencing and other improvements on the lot;
location of filter unit, pump and wiring indicating the type of the units;
location of structure on adjacent lots; location of back flush and drainage
outlets; grating plan; finished elevation and final treatment (decking,
landscaping and the like) around pool; location of existing overhead or
underground wiring, utility easements, trees and similar features; and
location of any water heating unit.



   (E)   Requirements.



      (1)   In all districts, the following shall apply.



         (a)   The pool shall not be located within ten feet
measured horizontally from overhead or underground utility lines of any type.



         (b)   Pools shall not be located within any private or
public utility, walkway, drainage or other easement.



         (c)   In the case of underground pools, precaution shall
be taken during construction to:



            1.   Avoid damage, hazards or inconvenience to
adjacent or nearby property; and



            2.   Assure that proper care shall be taken in
stockpiling excavated materials to avoid erosion, dust or other infringement
upon adjacent property.



         (d)   All access for construction shall be over the
owner’s land and due care shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets
and adjacent private or public property. The owner shall be liable for damage
caused to any public or private property.



         (e)   To the extent feasible, back flush water or water
from pool drainage shall be directed onto the owner’s property or into
approved public drainage ways and shall not drain onto adjacent private land.
Drainage onto public streets or other public drainage ways shall require
permission of the appropriate city officials.



         (f)   Pool lighting shall be directed toward the pool
and not toward adjacent property.



         (g)   The pool area shall be enclosed with fencing to
effectively prevent the entrance of children and be without hand or foot
holds that would enable a child to climb over it or pass through it. The
fence shall be at least five feet in height, but not exceeding six feet, to
prevent uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent property. For
horizontal fence members that are less than 45 inches apart, vertical spacing
shall not exceed 1% inches. Where horizontal members are equal to or more
than 45 inches apart, vertical spacing shall not exceed four inches, spaced
so that a four-inch sphere cannot pass through. The spacing between the
bottom of the fence and grade shall not exceed four inches. Fences shall be
completely installed prior to the filling of the pool. Spacing between the
bottom of fence gates and grade shall not exceed four inches. The gate
latching mechanism shall be placed a minimum of 48 inches above the bottom of
the gate. Where the fences enclose only the swimming pool area, adequate
screening, including, but not limited to, landscaping, shall be placed
between the pool area and adjacent single-family district lot lines.



         (h)   Retaining walls shall be designed to resist the
lateral pressure of the retained material in accordance with accepted
engineering practice. Wall retaining drained earth may be designed for
pressure equivalent to that exerted by a fluid weighing not less than 30
pounds per cubic foot and having a depth equal to that of the retained earth.



         (i)   Pool water shall be maintained in a suitable
manner to avoid health hazards of any type. The water shall be subject to
periodic inspection by the local health officer.



         (j)   All wiring, insulation, heating units, grading,
insulation of pipes and all other installation and construction shall be
subject to inspection.



         (k)   Nuisances such as undue noise, lighting of
adjacent property, health and safety hazards, damage to nearby vegetation and
the like shall not be permitted.



         (l)   Any proposed deviation from these standards and
requirements shall require a variance in accordance with normal zoning
procedures.



      (2)   Pool and accessory equipment, setbacks, Single-Family
Residential Districts: private swimming pools in single-family residential
districts shall adhere to the following regulations: pools shall not be
located within the setback area for structures applicable to the zoning
applicable to the residential property where the pool is located. Pools shall
not be located within any required front yard. The filter unit, pump, heating
unit and any other noise making mechanical equipment shall be located at
least 25 feet from any adjacent or nearby residential structure and not
closer than eight feet to any lot line.



      (3)   Private swimming pools which are intended for and used
by the occupants of a multi-family dwelling and the guests of the occupants
of the dwelling shall adhere to the following regulations: no part of the
water surface of the swimming pool shall be closer than 50 feet to any lot
line.



         (a)   Pumps, filters or other apparatus used in
connection with or to service a swimming pool shall be located closer than 40
feet to any lot line.



         (b)   All deck areas, adjacent patios and other similar
areas used in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be located at least 40
feet from any lot line and adjacent single-family residence.



(Ord. 115, passed 5-19-2003; Ord. 138, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 150.09  COMPLETION OF WORK.



   (A)   Any person or entity constructing, altering, repairing,
remodeling or adding to any structure, including single-family,
multiple-family dwellings or other structures located within the city limits
and areas subject to the provisions of this Code, including an attached or
detached garage or accessory structure, shall complete all work with respect
to the same within 180 days after the date required for completion of the
work as authorized by the terms of the original building permit.



      (1)   Completion of work includes completing the structure and
all interior and exterior finishes, including, but not limited to, siding,
windows, roofing, driveways, retaining walls, decks, patios, interior
finishes, to include plumbing, wiring and all related matters.



      (2)   The City Building Official may extend the time for
completion upon written request by the permitee establishing that
circumstances beyond the control of the permitee prevented the completion of
the work for which the building permit was initially authorized.



      (3)   In the event a building permit has initially been issued
and expires or is revoked and the structure remains in the same condition for
a period beyond 90 days after the expiration or revocation of the permit and
the failure to obtain an extension, then in the event a complaint is filed,
the structure may be declared by the City Building Inspector to be a public
nuisance and in addition to any and all other remedies as may be provided by
law, the structure may then be ordered removed or other actions taken.



   (B)   The continued violation of this provision shall constitute a
separate offense for each and every day that the violation shall continue. In
addition to other remedies as may be provided by this Code and the State
Building Code for violation, the city shall not be precluded from other
criminal, civil or injunctive relief, to include enforcement of each and
every day that a violation continues as a misdemeanor pursuant to the terms
of this Code.



   (C)   Procedure for undertaking an action under § 150.09(A). This
division is intended to have a retroactive effect because it is only intended
to give clarification to city ordinances currently in effect.



      (1)   In the event a written, verbal, or electronically
communicated complaint is filed with the city, the city may:



         (a)   Issue a City Council resolution authorizing the
Building Inspector to complete an inspection of the property in question;



         (b)   The building inspector shall inspect the property;



         (c)   If an inspection request is denied by the owner
three times, this shall constitute good cause to issue an order to declare a
nuisance property;



      (2)   Following an inspection, the Building Inspector shall
mail a letter via the U.S. Postal Service with his or her findings within 30
days of the inspection;



      (3)   If the Building Inspector finds that the property in
question needs work to be completed, the letter shall indicate that the owner
has 30 days to apply for a building permit and submit a timetable for
completion of the property;



      (4)   Once the 30 days has passed, the Building Inspector may
declare the property a public nuisance and recommend its removal in a letter
to the owner and the City Council;



      (5)   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Building
Inspector to declare the building a public nuisance, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing and vote to either declare the property a public
nuisance or allow more time for the owner to finish or complete the project;



      (6)   The property owner shall receive written notice of the
hearing in § 150.09(C)(5) and shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard.
If the City Council declares the property a public nuisance by passing a
resolution, then, in addition to any and all other remedies as may be
provided by law, the structure may then be ordered removed or other actions
taken;



      (7)   Once the City Council has passed a resolution to declare
the property a public nuisance, the City Attorney’s Office shall file with
the District Court an order to remove the public nuisance building, giving
personal notice to the property owner of the petition pursuant to Minnesota
Rules of Civil Procedure.



(Ord. 155, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 188, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 150.10  RENTAL DWELLING LICENSING CODE.



   (A)   Inspection and licensing of rental dwellings.



      (1)   Rental dwellings license. No person may operate, let or
cause to be let, a rental dwelling unit without first having obtained an
operating license or temporary permit to do so from the city as hereinafter
provided.



         (a)   The owner of a rental dwelling unit must obtain a
temporary permit if he, she or they have not received an operating license.
There is no fee necessary for a temporary permit. The City Building Official
may waive the need for an inspection at his or her discretion. A temporary
permit is valid until an operating license is obtained or for a period of
time after its issuance as authorized in its issuance by the City Building
Official, whichever is earlier. In no case shall a temporary permit be issued
for a period longer than 24 months, subject, however, to the enforcement
officer’s authority to extend the permit expiration date in those cases as
the enforcement officer/Building Official deems appropriate in his or her
sole discretion.



         (b)   Each operating license shall be valid for a period
of five years (60 months) and shall expire at the end of the five years (60
months).



         (c)   A license renewal application shall be filed at
least 60 days prior to license expiration date, unless the city has already
renewed that license based upon a scheduled inspection conducted pursuant to
division (A)(3)(a) below.



      (2)   Permit and license exemption.



         (a)   The owner of a rental dwelling unit is exempted
from the permitting and licensing requirements of this section if the renter
of the dwelling unit is related to the owner as a parent, child, sibling,
grandparent, grandchild, stepparent, stepchild, step-grandparent or
step-grandchild and the owner files an affidavit with the city, stating that
the renter is one of these relations. The affidavit required in this division
(A)(2)(a) must also state the address of the dwelling and must be renewed at
least every five years (60 months).



         (b)   The owner must notify the city in writing within
30 days of this exemption being lost because the renter is not related to the
owner as one of the above referenced relations.



      (3)   Rental dwelling inspections. No operating license may be
issued or renewed unless the city determines, following an inspection
conducted pursuant to this section, unless otherwise waived by the city
enforcement officer for good cause or as otherwise determined by the officer
in his or her discretion, that the rental dwelling unit and its premises
conform to the Housing Maintenance Code (“HMC”). As more specifically
provided below, the enforcement officer and his or her agents may cause
inspections, follow up inspections and reinspections on rental dwelling units
on all classes of property within the city on a scheduled basis, and on
rental dwelling units or owner occupied residential units on all classes of
property when reason exists to believe that a violation of an applicable
subdivision of the HMC exists, has been or is being committed.



         (a)   The city enforcement officer and his or her agents
are authorized to contact owners, tenants and managers of rental dwellings to
schedule inspections of rental dwellings at reasonable times. They are also
authorized to conduct those inspections once scheduled. These scheduled
inspections will be conducted to determine whether the unit and its premises
conform to the HMC so as to inform the city’s decision of whether to issue
an operating license. The authority to schedule and to conduct these
inspections is available even if the owner or owner’s agent holds a
temporary permit, and without regard to whether the owner or owner’s agent
has filed an application for an operating license.



         (b)   In addition, except as herein provided above, upon
receipt of a properly executed application for an operating license, the
enforcement officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises to
determine whether the structure is in compliance with the HMC. Inspections
performed pursuant to the authority in divisions (A)(3)(a) above or (A)(3)(c)
below are hereinafter described as “Licensing Inspections”.



         (c)   In addition, the city enforcement officer and his
or her agents are authorized to conduct inspections on rental dwelling units
or owner-occupied residential units on all classes of property when reason
exists to believe that a violation of an applicable subdivision of the HMC
exists, has been or is being committed. A complaint or complaints from a
tenant of a rental dwelling unit shall be an adequate basis for a
reinspection of a rental dwelling unit.



         (d)   To increase the awareness by owners of the likely
timing of requested inspections and to conserve public resources, the city
enforcement officer may schedule and conduct inspections pursuant to division
(A)(3)(a) above according to the area of the city in which the unit is
located, dividing the city into zones and endeavoring to perform inspections
pursuant to division (A)(3)(a) above in one zone before beginning them in a
different zone.



         (e)   If a structure or rental dwelling unit is not in
compliance, one or more follow up inspections or reinspections may be
conducted to verify that conditions and any corrections conform to the
provisions of the HMC.



         (f)   When the basis for the inspection pursuant to this
section is information observed or obtained during a licensing inspection,
the reinspection or follow up inspection shall be conducted on a scheduled
basis.



         (g)   Owners of rental dwelling units shall report to
the city the full names, telephone numbers and addresses of the principal
tenant of all rental dwelling units under their ownership or control, and
update information as needed to ensure that it is accurate and current.



         (h)   When scheduling licensing inspections pursuant to
this section, the city enforcement officer or his or her agents will seek the
consent of the owner of the property (if not already received) to inspect
those areas outside of rental dwelling units that are not accessible to the
general public (including any internal rooms that are inaccessible to the
public, such as storage or mechanical rooms) and to unrented dwelling units,
and the consent of the primary tenant of the rental dwelling unit (if not
already received) to inspect that unit. If the property owner demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the city enforcement officer or his or her agents that
one or more tenants have consented in writing to the inspection of their
units, individual contacts by the city with those tenants may be deemed
unnecessary.



         (i)   If the city is unsuccessful in securing consent
for an inspection pursuant to this section, the city shall seek permission
from a judicial officer through an administrative warrant, for its
enforcement officer or his or her agents to conduct an inspection. Nothing in
this Code shall limit or constrain the authority of the judicial officer to
condition or limit the scope of the administrative warrant.



         (j)   The scope of a licensing inspection shall be
limited to what is necessary to determine in accordance with this division
(A)(3)(j), whether the unit and its premises conform to the HMC. This shall
not preclude the enforcement officer from relying upon observations from a
licensing inspection in seeking one or more of the remedies provided in
division (B) below.



         (k)   A licensing inspection must be scheduled during
ordinary business hours (or as otherwise arranged with the owner or tenant).
Owners and their agents and tenants may, at their option, request that
licensing inspections above take place only when they are present, so long as
the request identifies at least one date or time within the two weeks
following the date of the request when the requesting party agrees to be
present.



         (l)   During inspections conducted pursuant to an
administrative warrant, photographs and video recordings may not be taken of
areas inside the building, absent further court permission or consent of the
tenant (for areas inside the unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the
building but outside a tenant’s unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit).



         (m)   Inspectors are not authorized to open containers,
drawers or medicine cabinets, unless the containers, drawers or medicine
cabinets are opened with the consent of the tenant (for areas inside the
unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant’s
unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit). For purposes of this division
(A)(3)(m), a medicine cabinet is a covered cabinet located in a dwelling
unit’s bathroom.



         (n)   Inspectors are authorized to open cabinets (other
than medicine cabinets) or closets only when it is reasonably necessary in
order to inspect for the existence of one or more conditions that violates
the HMC, or when the cabinets or closets are opened with the consent of the
tenant (for areas inside the unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the
building but outside a tenant’s unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit).



         (o)   The information regarding the condition of the
unit or its occupants that inspectors retain after recording it in any
inspection logs or forms shall be limited to descriptions of conditions
constituting a violation of the HMC. Inspectors may record a list of
conditions that the landlord or tenant is encouraged to repair or change but
which do not constitute a violation of the HMC, if that list is not retained
by the inspector or city but is instead simply given to the landlord or
tenant.



         (p)   The city may not upload to a GIS system any data
regarding the results of inspections conducted pursuant to this section.



         (q)   The city will not share information regarding the
condition of the unit or its occupants obtained through inspections conducted
pursuant to this section with any current member of the City Police
Department or any law enforcement agency of another jurisdiction, or enable
their discovery by the person or agency, unless:



            1.   The disclosure is required by law;



            2.   The disclosure to the person or agency is
needed to abate an active or inactive methamphetamine lab, mistreatment of
one or more minors in violation of M.S. §§  609.377 or 609.378, as they
may be amended from time to time, mistreatment of one or more vulnerable
adults in violation of M.S. §§ 609.23 through 609.233, as they may be
amended from time to time, or mistreatment of one or more animals in
violation of M.S. § 343.21, as it may be amended from time to time; or



            3.   If an owner or occupant of a unit has made an
express or implied threat of bodily harm, causing the inspector to be
concerned for his or her welfare, and the disclosure is made for the purpose
of enabling one or more law enforcement officers to accompany the inspector
in the completion of the inspection or the full performance of his or her
duties.



      (4)   Inspection not required. Inspection for the issuance or
renewal of a license may be waived by the city if the owner of a dwelling
unit proves that within the previous 12 months the dwelling unit passed an
inspection required by the city, state or federal regulations that is at
least as stringent as the inspection required under this section. The city
has sole discretion to determine when an inspection program is at least as
stringent as the inspection required under this section. Inspections
conducted as the result of a complaint made to the city may not be waived
under this provision.



      (5)   Application contents. Owners of one or more rental
dwelling units who have not yet received a temporary permit or operating
license are responsible for applying with the city for either a temporary
permit or an operating license. Before any portion of a property is used as a
rental dwelling unit, the owner must first secure either a temporary permit
or an operating license. With either application, the owner must supply:



         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of dwelling
owner, owning partners if a partnership, corporate officers if a corporation;



         (b)   Name, address and telephone number of designated
resident agent, if any;



         (c)   Name, address and telephone number of vendor, if
the dwelling is being sold through a contract for deed;



         (d)   Legal address of the dwelling;



         (e)   Number of dwelling units within the dwelling;



         (f)   At least one emergency telephone number; and



         (g)   The names, telephone numbers and addresses of
principal tenants, if any, are required in division (A)(3) above.



      (6)   Following acquisition. A new owner must register a newly
acquired rental residential property within ten days after acquiring it, by
applying for either a temporary license or an operating license. The
enforcement officer must be notified of any address change within ten days.



      (7)   Administrative charge. Failure to obtain either a
temporary permit as required by this section, or an operating license, will
subject the owner of a dwelling unit to an administrative service charge up
to $250.



      (8)   License and inspection fees. The license and inspection
fees are charged at the time of the issuance of the respective license and
are due within 30 days of the date of the invoice; in the cases of newly
constructed residential unlicensed rental dwelling units, license fees are
due upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy; in the cases of licensing
periods of less than two years, license fees will be pro rated monthly. A
license fee paid later than ten working days after the prescribed date is
subject to an additional administrative service charge double the amount of
the license. Once issued, a license is nontransferable and the licensee is
not entitled to a refund of any license fee upon revocation or suspension, or
transfer of ownership. License and inspection fees shall be as established by
the City Council by resolution as adopted and/or modified from time to time.



      (9)   Resident agent required. An operating license may not be
issued or renewed for a nonresident owner of rental dwelling units (one who
does not reside within the city limits) unless the owner designates in
writing to the enforcement officer the name, address and telephone number of
his or her resident agent (one who does reside within a 50-mile radius of the
city limits) who is responsible for maintenance and upkeep and who is legally
constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of violation of the
provisions of the city code and to receive orders or process pursuant to law.
The enforcement officer must be notified in writing of any change of resident
agent or agent address or telephone number change within ten days. This
requirement may be waived if, in the enforcement officer’s determination,
the owner not living within the city limits is nonetheless sufficiently
accessible for the purposes of the HMC.



      (10)   Posting of permit or license. The current temporary
permit or operating license of a multiple dwelling unit, or a legible copy
thereof, must be conspicuously posted in the main entry way or a conspicuous
exterior location of the respective multiple dwelling unit. In the case of
one-family and two-family dwelling units, a legible copy of the current
temporary permit or operating license must be given to the renter of each
unit.



      (11)   License not transferable. A temporary permit or
operating license is not transferable to another person or to another rental
dwelling. Every person holding a temporary permit or operating license must
give notice in writing to the enforcement officer within 72 hours after
having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any
permitted or licensed rental dwelling. The notice must include the name and
address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the rental
dwelling or dwellings. The person succeeding to the ownership or control of
the rental dwelling or dwellings must obtain a temporary permit or operating
license in order to continue operating the rental dwelling or dwellings. An
inspection is not required to obtain this temporary permit or operating
license unless the rental dwelling or dwellings have not been inspected
within five years (60 months) of the transfer of ownership or control.



      (12)   Violation. Any person that maintains a rental dwelling
unit without having either a valid temporary permit or a valid operating
license, or permits new occupancy in violation of this subdivision, is guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine and imprisonment
as prescribed by state law. In addition to, or in lieu of, charging a
misdemeanor, the city may impose an administrative fee in an amount set in
the city fee schedule. An administrative fee may be appealed pursuant to
division (C) below. Upon the failure to appeal an administrative fee within
the period established in division (C) below, the city may post the dwelling
unit as illegal for habitation. Thereafter, the dwelling unit may not be
occupied by anyone other than the primary homestead owner and that person’s
immediate family until: the administrative fee has been paid; and a rental
license is obtained or the city is satisfied that the dwelling unit will not
be used as a rental dwelling unit. Each day of each violation constitutes a
separate offense.



   (B)   Administration and enforcement.



      (1)   Administration and enforcement. The enforcement officer
and his or her agents administer and enforce the provisions of the HMC. They
may enforce the standards of the HMC through the licensing and inspection
programs set forth in division (A) above and, where appropriate, through the
powers set forth below.



      (2)   Authority. In the absence of a timely appeal under the
HMC or any other applicable provision of law, the enforcement officer is the
final authority in the determination of a violation under the HMC.



      (3)   License suspension and revocation. A temporary permit or
operating license is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council
if the holder fails to operate or maintain permitted or licensed rental
dwellings and units therein consistent with the provisions of the city code
and the laws of the state. In the event that a permit or license is suspended
or revoked by the City Council, or expires without renewal, it is unlawful
for the owner or his or her duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any
new occupancy of vacant or thereafter vacated rental dwelling units until a
time as a valid license may be obtained or restored by the City Council.



      (4)   Compliance order. Whenever an enforcement officer
determines that any rental dwelling unit, or the premises surrounding any of
these, fails to meet the provisions of the HMC, the officer may issue a
compliance order setting forth the violations of the code and ordering the
owner, occupant, operator or agent to correct the violations. The compliance
order must:



         (a)   Be in writing;



         (b)   Describe the location and nature of the violations
of the HMC;



         (c)   Establish a reasonable time, not to exceed 90
days, for the correction of the violations.



            1.   When a violation of the HMC constitutes an
imminent peril to life, health or property, an immediate and exact time for
the correction of the violation constitutes a “reasonable time” for
correction for purposes of this subchapter. When this is the case, no stay of
proceedings in furtherance of action will be granted on appeal.



            2.   A reasonable time may be longer than 90 days
if correction is not possible because of prevailing weather conditions or
other mitigating circumstances as determined by the enforcement officer;



         (d)   Include information regarding the owner’s right
to appeal the order and the procedure to be followed in filing such an appeal
pursuant to division (C) below;



         (e)   State that in the event the violations are not
corrected within the time set in the compliance order, the license may be
suspended or that the necessary work may be performed by the city at the
expense of the owner and that if the owner does not pay for the expense, the
cost of the work will be assessed against the property; and



         (f)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent or
the occupant, as the case may require. The notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon the owner or agent, or upon any such occupant, if a copy
thereof is:



            1.   Served personally;



            2.   Deposited in the U.S. Post Office addressed
to the owner at his or her last known address with postage prepaid; or



            3.   Upon failure to affect notice by personal
service or by mail, posted at a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
which is affected by the notice.



      (5)   Emergency cases. For purposes of division (B)(4)(c)
above, situations which constitute an imminent peril to life, health or
property include, but are not limited to the following:



         (a)   Heating systems that are unsafe as defined in §
150.28, due to burned out or rusted out heat exchanges (fire box); burned out
or plugged flues; not being vented; being connected with unsafe gas supplies;
or being incapable of adequately heating the living space;



         (b)   Water heaters that are unsafe as defined in §
150.28, due to burned out or rusted out heat exchanges (fire box); burned
out, rusted out or plugged flues; lack of proper venting; being connected
with unsafe gas supplies; or lack of temperature and pressure relief valves;



         (c)   Electrical systems that are unsafe as defined in
§ 150.28, due to dangerous overloading; damaged or deteriorated equipment;
improperly tapped or spliced wiring; improper or overloaded fuses; expose
uninsulated wires; distribution systems of extension cords or other temporary
methods; ungrounded appliances in a hazardous condition;



         (d)   Plumbing systems that are unsanitary as defined in
§ 150.28, due to:



            1.   Leaking waste systems fixtures and traps;



            2.   Lack of a water closet;



            3.   Lack of washing and bathing facilities; and/or



            4.   Cross-connection of pure water supply with
fixtures or sewage lines.



         (e)   Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings,
roofs, foundations and floor systems that are unsafe as defined in § 150.28;



         (f)   Refuse, garbage, human waste, decaying vermin or
other dead animals, animal waste, other materials rendering it that are
unsanitary as defined in § 150.28; and



         (g)   Infestation of rodents, insects and other vermin.



      (6)   Follow-up inspection. At the end of the period allowed
for the correction of a violation specified in the compliance order, the
enforcement officer shall make, or attempt to make, a follow up inspection of
the premises to determine whether corrective actions have been sufficient to
bring the violation(s) into compliance.



         (a)   If the premises are in compliance with the
requirements of this section at the time of the follow up inspection, a
license may be issued in accordance with the requirements of this section.



         (b)   If the enforcement officer determines that the
violation(s) has not been corrected and the rental unit(s) has not been
vacated, the enforcement officer shall suspend any existing license. The
enforcement officer also may issue a citation or may file a formal complaint
summoning the responsible party into court. The citation shall reiterate the
charge and the ordinance section(s) violated. The city may also take action
to correct violations under the provisions of division (B)(9) below.



         (c)   After a suspension, the property owner may pay a
re inspection fee and request a re inspection and reinstatement of the
license. If the enforcement officer determines that the violation(s) has been
corrected and the rental unit(s) and building comply with HMC, the license
shall be reinstated. Fees for a reinspection may apply as outlined in the
city fee schedule.



      (7)   Execution of compliance orders by public authority. Upon
the failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set therein,
the rental unit(s) not being vacated, and no appeal having been taken, the
criminal penalty established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council may
by resolution direct the enforcement officer to remedy the deficiency
(deficiencies) cited in the compliance order. The cost of the remedy shall be
a lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a
special assessment in the manner provided by M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be
amended from time to time. The action will not be taken, however, without a
good faith effort on the part of the city to provide the property owner with
advance notice of its intention to proceed with repairs and assessment of the
costs of repairs to taxes.



      (8)   No warranty by city. By enacting and undertaking to
enforce the HMC neither the city nor its Council, agents or employees warrant
or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the city.
Owners or occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to
protect their interests, health, safety and welfare. A warning in
substantially the foregoing language shall be printed on the face of the
license.



   (C)   Appeals.



      (1)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by a compliance
order may appeal the compliance order to the City Council. The appeals must
be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied
by a filing fee in cash or cashier’s check and must be filed with the City
Clerk within ten business days after service of the compliance order. If an
appeal is not filed within the timelines and in the manner specified herein,
the enforcement officer’s decision shall be final. The filing fee is set by
Council resolution. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless such a stay would cause
imminent peril to life, health, property or public safety.



      (2)   City Council decision. Upon at least five business
days’ notice to the appellant of the time and place for hearing the appeal,
and within 30 days after the appeal is filed, the City Council or the
individual or committee designated by the Council as the appeal body, must
hold a hearing thereon, at which the applicant may appear and present
evidence as to why the compliance order, or any portion thereof, should not
be issued. If an individual or committee other than the City Council hears
the appeal, it shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council may reverse, modify or affirm, in whole or in part, the compliance
order and shall order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal
is upheld. The City Council or appeal committee or officer may postpone a
meeting and hold hearing at a later date, not to exceed 60 days after the
appeal is filed, when it is necessary to do so.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)




HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE




§ 150.25  TITLE.



   This section may be known, cited and referred to as the “City of
Granite Falls Housing Maintenance Code” or “HMC”.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.26  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the HMC is to protect, preserve and promote the public
health, safety and the general welfare of the people of the city, to prevent
housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect
the life, safety, general welfare and health, including the physical, mental
and social well being of persons occupying dwellings within the city, and to
provide, to the extent permitted by state law, for the enforcement of minimum
standards for components or systems of residential structures; to provide for
the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy; and to preserve
the value of land and buildings throughout the city.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.27  DISCRIMINATION AND PRIVACY.



   The HMC is to be enforced in a nondiscriminatory manner and exclusively
for the purpose of promoting public as opposed to private welfare. Except as
may be specifically provided herein or incidental to the enforcement hereof,
the HMC is not intended to interfere with personal privacy or with private
legal rights and liabilities, including, without limitation, landlord/tenant
and lessor/lessee relationships, and in enacting and enforcing the HMC, the
city neither expressly nor by implication assumes any obligations or
liabilities respecting the private rights or disputes, including those which
involve or arise out of the nonconformity of any premises in the city to the
provisions of the HMC.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.28  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a
term used herein is not defined herein but is defined in an applicable State
Building Code, that term shall have the meaning as defined in that Code.
Terms that are not defined in this subchapter, or as otherwise referred to in
other sections of this Code or not defined in an applicable State Building
Code section, shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context
in which they are used, with reference to the most recent unabridged
Webster’s Dictionary of the English Language.



   ABANDONMENT.  Unless otherwise defined more strictly within city code,
abandonment means the consequence of ceasing to assert or exercise an
interest, right or title to that building or structure, with the intent of
never again resuming or reasserting it.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure not greater than 1,400 square feet
in floor area and not over two stories in height, the use of which is
customarily accessory to and incidental to that of the dwelling(s) and which
is located on the same lot.



   ADEQUATE.  Sufficient.



   BASEMENT.  The portion of a building or structure located either
totally or partially underground.



   BUILDING.  A constructed edifice designed to stand more or less
permanently, covering a space of land, designed for occupancy and intended
for use in one place.



   COMMON AREAS.  Halls, corridors, passageways, utility rooms,
recreational rooms and extensively landscaped areas in or adjacent to a
multiple dwelling, not under the exclusive control of one person or family.



   COMPONENT.  A constituent part.



   CONDOMINIUM.  A form of individual ownership within a multi-family
building which entails joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs; in
the CONDOMINIUM each apartment or townhouse is owned outright by its occupant.



   CORRECTED.  Brought into conformance with all applicable standards of
the HMC and all other applicable standards of the city code.



   COOPERATIVE HOUSING.  A multi-family dwelling owned and maintained by
the residents: the entire structure and real property is under common
ownership as contrasted to a condominium dwelling where individual units are
under separate individual occupant ownership.



   DAMAGE.  Injury or harm.



   DEGRADATION.  Impairment in respect to some physical property,
including damage by weakening or loss of some property, quality or capability.



   DILAPIDATION.  A condition of decay or partial ruin.



   DISASTER.  A sudden or great misfortune.



   DWELLING UNIT.  As defined in § 155.02, a single unit providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   EXCLUDE DAMPNESS.  To shut out moisture.



   EXIT.  A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to the outdoors
and includes intervening doors, doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways,
smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit courts and
yards.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the designated city official, and in the absence of a
specifically designated health officer.



   FIRE HAZARD.  A thing or condition that might operate against safety
from fire, including a possible source of peril, danger, duress or
difficulty, or that tends to create or increase the possibility of loss due
to fire.



   GARBAGE.  Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, including those
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, as
well as otherwise defined within the city code, including § 111.06.



   HABITABLE ROOM.  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, but excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries,
utility rooms, foyers, corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces,
workshops, hobby and recreation areas, and basements lacking required
ventilation, required electrical outlets or required exit facilities.



   HAZARD.  A thing or condition that might operate against safety,
including a possible source of peril, danger, duress or difficulty, or that
tends to create or increase the possibility of loss.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The legally designated health officer of the city, or
his or her authorized representative.



   HOTEL or MOTEL.  Except as otherwise defined within the city code,
means a building or structure or enclosure, or any part thereof, kept, used
as, maintained as or advertised as, or held out to the public to be an
enclosure where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public and
furnishing accommodations for periods of less than one week.



   INADEQUATE.  Not adequate.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or pests.



   KITCHEN.  A space used or intended to be used for food preparation,
which contains a sink, adequate space for installing cooking and
refrigeration equipment, and space for the storage of cooking utensils.



   MAINTAINED.  Preserved from failure or decline.



   MAINTENANCE.  Preservation from failure or decline.



   NUISANCE.



      (1)   A public nuisance which may prove detrimental to
children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, the abandonment of any
well, cistern, shaft, basement or excavation; the abandonment of any
refrigerator or freezer in a hazardous condition; an unlicensed or inoperable
motor vehicle; or any lumber, garbage, rubbish or debris which may become a
hazard for inquisitive minors; or



      (2)   Overcrowding a room or portion of a dwelling with long
term storage so as to prevent upkeep, maintenance or regular housekeeping. A
room may be considered “overcrowded” when storage covers an excessive
amount of the floor area of a room, constitutes a potential excessive fire
load, prevents access to windows or doors, prevents access to or obstructs
mechanical systems or air movement, effectively eliminates use and access to
required electrical devices, impedes access and movement of emergency
personnel, blocks hallways or limits the operation of doors or provides
potential pest harborage.



   OBSOLESCENCE. The process of becoming neglected or the condition of
being nearly neglected or worn out.



   OCCUPANT. Any person, over one year of age, (including owner or
operator) living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession
of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   OPERATOR or RESIDENT AGENT. The owner or owner’s agent who has
charge, care, control or management of a building, or part thereof, in which
dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.



   OWNER. A person who alone, jointly or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this subchapter, and of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were the owner.



   OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLING. A dwelling unit occupied by the property
owner, including for purposes of the HMC, a single-family dwelling or the
discrete portion of a two-family or multi-family dwelling where the owner
resides in one unit.



   PREMISES.  Platted lot(s) or unplatted parcel(s) of land, or any
portion thereof, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or
non-dwelling structure, including the building, accessory structure or other
structure thereon.



   PUBLIC AREAS. Those areas which are normally open to the general public
or the occupants of more than one dwelling unit of a multi-family dwelling.



   RENTAL DWELLING or RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit not occupied
by the primary homestead owner of record. Such a unit may be a single-family
dwelling, a separate and independent housekeeping unit within a single-family
dwelling, a group home, one unit of a two-family dwelling or a portion of a
multi-family dwelling, any of which are provided or available for actual or
potential occupancy whether occupied or vacant by lease, by use, by rent or
for any other good and valuable consideration, excluding the portion of a
homestead property occupied by a qualified relative, or residential property
seasonally occupied by what is commonly referred to as a “house sitter”
while the owner of the property is residing elsewhere for a period not to
exceed six months. Manufactured homes that are occupied by the owner of the
home do not constitute RENTAL DWELLING UNITS even though the underlying lot
may be leased by the owner occupant.



   RODENT HARBORAGE.  A place where rodents are living, nesting or
seeking shelter, or likely to live, nest or seek shelter.



   RODENT-PROOF.  A condition where a structure and all parts thereof are
protected from rodent, insect and vermin Infestation by eliminating ingress
and egress openings such as cracks in walls and holes in screens. For the
purpose of the HMC, the term RODENT-PROOF shall be construed as though it
included “insect-proof’ and “vermin-proof”.



   ROOMING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
and eating purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Non putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and
shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery and
similar materials.



   SAFE.  Secure from threat of danger, harm or loss, including, but not
limited to, the threat of unsafe conditions as defined below.



   SAFETY.  The condition of being safe.



   SANITARY.  Free from or effective in preventing or checking an agent
(such as filth or infection) injurious to health.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished or provided, by or under the control
of, the owner or operator.



   SYSTEM.  A group of devices or artificial objects or an organization
forming a network especially for distributing something or serving a common
purpose.



   UNSAFE.  Not safe, and includes, but is not limited to, the following
applications:



      (1)   When referring to a building or structure, one that is
structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, that constitutes a
fire hazard, or that is otherwise dangerous to human life;



      (2)   When referring to a use of a building or a structure, a
use that constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster,
damage or abandonment; and



      (3)   When referring to parapet walls, cornices, spires,
towers, tanks, statuary or other appendages or structural members that are
supported by, attached to or a part of a building, one that is in
deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads that
are specified in the Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Existing Structures as
modified by Minn. Rules Chapter 1300.



   YARD.  All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other open space
constituting part of the same premises.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.29  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   A building and its premises used in whole or in part as a
residence, or as an accessory structure thereof, except rest homes,
convalescent homes, nursing homes, hotels and motels, must conform to the
requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable provisions of the
city code.



   (B)   Licensing and inspections of rental dwellings and their
premises are governed by § 150.10.



   (C)   Enforcement action, under the HMC, against owner occupied
dwellings is limited to violations of § 150.33(B) through (F).



   (D)   This limit does not apply to rental dwellings, rented portions
of dwellings, common areas or areas that are under the exclusive control of a
rental dwelling owner, such as mechanical rooms, storage rooms or vacant
rental units.



   (E)   These rental dwellings, portions of dwellings, common areas,
areas under the exclusive control of a rental dwelling owner and vacant
rental dwelling units, shall comply with this section in its entirety.



   (F)   Condominium and cooperative housing public areas shall be
subject to the requirements applicable to rental dwellings if one or more
dwellings in such a building is a rental dwelling.



   (G)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, the HMC
establishes minimum standards for erected dwelling units, accessory
structures and related premises, which may also be subject to other and
additional provisions of city code.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.30  GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.



   The owner of a structure is responsible for ensuring that it meets the
applicable provisions of the HMC. The duty to comply with the HMC cannot be
transferred to another person. A contract purporting to transfer the duty of
compliance with the HMC to another person does not relieve the owner,
operator or occupant of any duty imposed by the HMC.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.31  SMOKE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   Those terms defined in M.S. § 299F.362(1), as it may be
amended from time to time, shall also carry those meanings when they appear
below in smoke detector regulations.



      (2)   Those terms defined in M.S. § 299F.50, as it may be
amended from time to time, shall also carry those meanings when they appear
below in carbon monoxide detector regulations.



      (3)   For purposes of this section only, the phrases
SINGLE-FAMILY HOME and SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT mean a dwelling unit
occupied by a person living alone, or any of the following groups living
together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit and sharing common living,
sleeping, cooking and eating facilities:



         (a)   Any number of people related by blood, marriage,
adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship;



         (b)   Three unrelated people; or



         (c)   Two unrelated people and any children related to
either of them.



      (4)   When inspecting for compliance with this section, city
inspectors shall presume that any dwelling with only one dwelling unit is a
single-family home and a single-family dwelling unit for purposes of this
subdivision and will not inquire regarding the relationships between
occupants, but this presumption may be rebutted by information volunteered by
an owner or occupant.



   (B)   In single-family homes or single-family dwellings.



      (1)   Single and multiple station smoke alarms shall be
installed in the following locations:



         (a)   In each room used for sleeping purposes;



         (b)   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms; and



         (c)   In each story within a dwelling unit, including
basements, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In
dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less
than one full story below the upper level.



      (2)   Smoke detectors improperly located or mounted may be
required to be relocated or remounted; and



      (3)   The dwelling must have an approved and operational
carbon monoxide alarm installed within ten feet of each room lawfully used
for sleeping purposes.



   (C)   In residential structures other than single-family homes:



      (1)   For every other dwelling unit within an apartment house
or within a dwelling that is not a single-family home:



         (a)   Each dwelling unit must be provided with a smoke
detector meeting the requirements of the State Fire Code, Minn. Rules Chapter
7511;



         (b)   Smoke detectors must be mounted in the location or
locations set forth in division (B)(1) above;



         (c)   When actuated, the detector must provide an alarm
in the dwelling unit; and



         (d)   Where the occupant is not the owner of the
dwelling unit, the owner is responsible for maintenance of the smoke
detectors. The occupant of a dwelling unit must inform the owner of the
dwelling unit of a non-functioning smoke detector within 24 hours of
discovering that the smoke detector in the dwelling unit is not functioning.



      (2)   The following regulations apply to multi-family
dwellings:



         (a)   Subject to the exception in division (C)(2)(b)
below, every dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling must satisfy at least
one of these two standards:



            1.   It must have an approved and operational
carbon monoxide alarm installed within ten feet of each room lawfully used
for sleeping purposes; or



            2.   It must have approved and operational carbon
monoxide alarms installed between 15 and 25 feet of carbon monoxide producing
central fixtures and equipment, provided there is a centralized alarm system
or other mechanism for responsible parties to hear the alarm at all times.



         (b)   An owner of a multi-family dwelling that contains
minimal or no sources of carbon monoxide may be exempted from the
requirements of division (C)(2)(a) above, provided that the owner has
certified to the Commissioner of Public Safety that the multi-family dwelling
poses no foreseeable carbon monoxide risk to the health and safety of the
dwelling units.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.32  CONDITIONS OF COMPONENTS OR SYSTEMS OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL
STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Scope. This section shall govern the conditions of components
and systems of existing residential structures.



   (B)   Certified historic structures. In a certified historic
structure as defined in Minn. Rules part 1311.0301, the requirements of this
section are subject to modifications specifically set forth in Chapter 6 of
the Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings, as modified by Minn.
Rules Chapter 1311.



   (C)   Modifications. Where there are practical difficulties involved
in carrying out the provisions of this section, the city may accept
compliance alternatives or grant modifications for individual cases, provided
the city shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict
compliance impractical and that the compliance alternative or modification is
in conformance with the intent and purpose of this subchapter and any and all
other applicable code provisions and that the compliance alternative or
modification does not lessen health, life and the intent of any fire safety
requirements or any degree of structural integrity of the property. The
details of any action granting modification or the acceptance of a compliance
alternative shall be recorded and entered in city files.



   (D)   Safe and sanitary condition required. All buildings and
structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition.



   (E)   Additional requirements applicable to electrical components or
systems.



      (1)   The electrical service, lines, switches, outlets,
fixtures and fixture coverings, and supports in every building or structure
shall be in good repair.



      (2)   Broken, loose, frayed, inoperative, defective or missing
portions of electrical components or systems shall be repaired or replaced.



      (3)   All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.



   (F)   Additional requirements applicable to plumbing components or
systems.



      (1)   Leaking drain or supply lines shall be repaired or
replaced.



      (2)   All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.



      (3)   Any cross connections or siphonage between fixtures
shall be corrected.



   (G)   Additional requirement applicable to mechanical systems.
Mechanical systems shall have any unsafe conditions corrected.



   (H)   Means of egress. The structure must meet those requirements of
§§ 403.1 through 403.18 of GREB as modified by Minn. Rules Chapter 1311
that, by their wording or phrasing, apply to existing structures without
regard to whether alteration, repair or other work is being performed on the
structure.



   (I)   Boiler/central heating plant equipment rooms and storage
rooms. In residential occupancies containing more than two dwelling units
(including apartment buildings):



      (1)   Rooms containing boilers or central heating plants, and
storage rooms with floor area exceeding 100 square feet in size, shall be
separated from the rest of the building by not less than a one hour occupancy
separation.



         (a)   When approved by a Building Official, existing
wood lath and plaster in good condition or two-inch (12.7-mm) gypsum
wallboard may be accepted where one hour occupancy separations are required.



         (b)   In a certified historic structure as defined in
Minn. Rules part 1311.0301, where the existing wall and ceiling finish is
wood lath and plaster, one hour fire resistant construction is not required
and need not be provided.



      (2)   A separation need not be provided for the rooms with
equipment serving only one dwelling unit.



   (J)   Structural safety.



      (1)   The minimum design loads for the structure shall be the
loads applicable at the time the building was constructed, provided that no
dangerous condition is created. Structural members that are found to be
unsound or dangerous shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
State Building Code for new construction.



      (2)   A building, structure or an individual structural member
that has any of the conditions or defects described below, as determined by a
licensed design professional, shall be replaced or strengthened when:



         (a)   The stress in any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half the
working stress or stresses allowed in the State Building Code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;



         (b)   Any portion of the building, structure or member
has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to
such an extent that its structural strength or stability is materially less
than it was before the catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements
of the State Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location;



         (c)   Any portion of the building, structure or member
has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other
structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes
than is required in the case of similar new construction;



         (d)   The building or structure, or any portion of it,
is likely to partially or completely collapse because of: dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or
instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting the building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or any other cause;



         (e)   The exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of
the base;



         (f)   The building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls, or coverings; or



         (g)   Any building or structure, which, whether or not
erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength; fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics; or weather resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of newly constructed building or
like area, height and occupancy in the same location.



   (K)   Weather protection.



      (1)   Every building shall be weather protected to provide
shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness.



      (2)   The roof of every building or structure shall provide
weather protection for the building.



      (3)   All devices that were provided or are required to
prevent ponding or flooding or to convey the roof water shall be capable of
fulfilling that purpose.



      (4)   All weather exposed surfaces of every existing building
or structure shall provide weather protection.



   (L)   Maintenance and degradation.



      (1)   All systems, devices or safeguards that were required by
a State Building Code under which the building was constructed shall be
maintained in conformance with the requirements of that Code.



      (2)   Failure to correct degradation of any system, device or
equipment that a State Building Code required at the time of its construction
is prohibited.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 150.33  CONDITIONS OF RESIDENTIAL HOUSING OTHER THAN COMPONENTS AND
SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Scope. This section shall govern the conditions in residential
housing other than components and systems of a structure.



   (B)   Accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish or garbage. An owner,
operator or occupant of a dwelling unit may not allow the accumulation of
dirt, filth, rubbish or garbage on the premises occupied or controlled in a
manner that could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the
general public.



   (C)   Rodent harborages in occupied areas.



      (1)   Joint responsibility. An owner, occupant or operator may
not allow formation of rodent harborages in or about the premises he or she
occupies or controls.



      (2)   Occupant responsibility for extermination. The occupant
of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit is responsible for the
extermination of rodents, insects or vermin on the premises. Every occupant
of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit is
responsible for the extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one
infested.



      (3)   Owner responsibility for extermination. Whenever
infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
reasonable rodent-proof condition, extermination is also the responsibility
of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling
units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling
containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof is also the
responsibility of the owner.



      (4)   Standard. Where divisions (C)(2) or (C)(3) above give
rise to a duty to undertake extermination, it is a violation of this code if
the inspection does not demonstrate that the extermination has been
undertaken at least to a degree that is proportionate to the need for it.



   (D)   Nuisance. An owner, operator or occupant of any dwelling unit
may not allow the formation or presence of any nuisance in or about the
premises.



   (E)   Yard cover. Exposed areas surrounding (or within) a principal
or accessory structure, including street boulevards which are not devoted to
parking, drives, sidewalks, patios or other such uses, must be landscaped
with grass, shrubs, trees or other ornamented landscape material. The
landscaping shall be maintained in good condition and free of noxious weeds.



   (F)   Snow, ice and stormwater management.



      (1)   Property owners and occupants shall be responsible to
abate the snow and ice from the public sidewalk located on the city boulevard
that abuts or fronts their property within 12 hours after the snow or ice has
ceased to be deposited.



      (2)   In no case may storm water be channeled into the
sanitary sewer system. Storm water, ice or snow may not be directed onto, or
channeled across walkways or streets where it is likely to be a safety hazard.



   (G)   Minimum temperature standards for rental properties. When the
temperature outside the structure is below 60°F, it is the responsibility of
the owner that a minimum temperature of 68°F be maintained in a dwelling
unit at a point three feet above the floor and two feet from exterior walls
in all habitable rooms, unless the occupant of that unit chooses to maintain
a lower temperature. The installation of one or more portable space heaters
shall not be used to achieve compliance with this section.



   (H)   Electrical cords in rental properties. Temporary wiring,
extension cords or drop cords may not be used as permanent wiring.



   (I)   Discontinuance of basic services or utilities in rental
properties. An owner, operator or occupant may not permit any service or
utility needed for a furnace to provide heat to be shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied,
except for the temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies.



   (J)   Occupancy standards. The maximum permissible occupancy of a
rental dwelling unit is determined as follows.



      (1)   Minimum space. For the first two occupants, 220 square
feet of habitable room floor space and for every additional occupant thereof,
at least 100 square feet of habitable room floor space.



      (2)   Maximum occupancy. The total number of occupants may not
exceed two times the number of habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling
unit.



(Ord. 163, passed 7-1-2013)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.03   Establishment of official zoning map



   151.04   Regulatory flood protection elevation



   151.05   Interpretation



   151.06   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.07   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   151.08   Definitions



   151.09   Annexations



   151.10   Establishment of zoning districts



   151.11   Floodway District (FW)



   151.12   Flood Fringe District (FF)



   151.13   Subdivisions



   151.14   Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges



   151.15   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and
placement of recreational vehicles



   151.16   Administration



   151.17   Nonconforming uses



   151.18   Violations



   151.19   Amendments



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in
M.S. Chapters 103F and 462, as they may be amended from time to time,
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as
follows.



   (B)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   Generally. The flood hazard areas of the city are
subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss
of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.



      (2)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This chapter is
based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent
with the standards established by the State Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This
chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. Parts 59 through 78, as
amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.



   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize those
losses described in division (B)(1) above by provisions contained herein.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.02  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the
city, shown on the official zoning map and/or the attachments thereto as
being located within the boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe
districts.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The official zoning map, together with all materials attached thereto,
is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
attached material shall include:



   (A)   The flood insurance study of the city, Yellow Medicine and
Chippewa Counties and the latest flood insurance rate map and flood boundary
and floodway map therein, and prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;



   (B)   The flood insurance study, Yellow Medicine County, Minnesota
Unincorporated Areas, dated May 1978, and flood insurance rate maps with
Community Panel Numbers 270544 0050 B and 270544 0175 B and the flood
boundary and floodway map with Community Panel Number 270544 0002 therein,
all of these maps being dated November 15, 1978, and prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development/Federal insurance Administration;
and



   (C)   The flood insurance study, Chippewa County (unincorporated
areas) flood boundary and floodway Map Panels 270066 0160 and 270066 0170,
dated June 17,1986. The more restrictive of these sets of maps and supporting
data shall take precedence for determining the extent of the floodplain,
floodway and flood fringe boundaries, and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the site. The official zoning map shall be on file in the
office of the City Clerk and City Manager.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.04  REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.



   The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no
lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any
increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that
result from designation of a floodway.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.05  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



   (B)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the
official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal
appeal of the decision of the City Manager, the Board of Adjustment shall
make the necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations
on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed
on the site at the time the community adopted its initial floodplain
ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map
showing the area within the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other
available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district
boundaries shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to
the Board of Adjustment and to submit technical evidence.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.06  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.07  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts
or land uses permitted within the districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
city, or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.08  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use
or structure.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A specific type of structure or land use listed in
the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:



      (1)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance
exist; or



      (2)   The structure and/or land use conform to the
comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the
existing neighborhood.



   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT.  A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



   FLOOD.  A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in
the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in flood
insurance studies prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development/Federal Insurance Administration or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



   FLOOD PROOFING.  A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake
or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.



   FLOODWAY.  The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational
vehicle”.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across
or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory floodplain which
may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water.



   PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE.  All uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.



   REACH.  A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made
obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two
consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be
synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.



   REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
“base flood” used in a flood insurance study.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in § 151.15(C)(1), and
other similar items.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures that have incurred “substantial damage” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of an “historic structure”, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as an “historic structure”. For the purpose of this chapter, “historic
structure” shall be as defined in 44 C.F.R. Part 59.1.



   VARIANCE.  A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an
alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as
defined and elaborated upon in a community’s respective planning and zoning
enabling legislation.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.09  ANNEXATIONS.



   The flood insurance rate map and flood boundary and floodway map panels
adopted by reference into § 151.03 may include floodplain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, at the time of adoption of
this chapter. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the
city, after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed
floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
immediately upon the date of annexation into the city.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.10  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Districts.



      (1)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include
those areas designated as floodway on the flood boundary and floodway map and
flood insurance rate map panels adopted in § 151.03.



      (2)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall
include those areas designated as floodway fringe on the flood boundary and
floodway map panels adopted in § 151.03 and those Zone AE areas on the flood
insurance rate map panels adopted in § 151.03 that are located outside of
the floodway.



   (B)   Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used
and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction
of this chapter. Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not
listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in §§ 151.11 and 151.12,
respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here
that:



      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes
and certain recreational vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this chapter and specifically § 151.15;



      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming
structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically § 151.17; and



      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed
structures must be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques
must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as specified in the general provisions of this chapter and
specifically as stated in § 151.16.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.11  FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop
harvesting;



      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas and
airport landing strips;



      (3)   Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving
ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas,
parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas,
and single or multiple purpose recreational trails; and



      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.



   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.



      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.



      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district if one exists.



      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.



   (C)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A)
above and the uses listed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(8) below;



      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel and other
materials;



      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves and water
control structures;



      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines
and pipelines;



      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials;



      (6)   Placement of fill or construction of fences;



      (7)   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of § 151.15(C); and



      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes
and flood walls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect
agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the
ten-year frequency flood event.



   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.



      (1)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill
(including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of
materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use
that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood
or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (2)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the
procedures and standards contained in § 151.16(D).



      (3)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the
underlying zoning district if one exists.



      (4)   Fill.



         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials
deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by
vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.



         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations
shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan
is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to
the plan.



         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division
(D)(4)(b) immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel
operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials
which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional
flood but only after the governing body has received an appropriate plan
which assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title
registered with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.



      (5)   Accessory structures.



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for
human habitation.



         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of flood waters:



            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow; and



            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be
placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or
structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood
proofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must
be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:



            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;



            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a
structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood proofed; and



            3.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
pressure, there must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the
outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There
must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to
the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to
flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.



      (6)   Storage of materials and equipment:



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited; and



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



      (7)   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall
be subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 103G, as it may be amended from
time to time. Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to
remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the
floodway.



      (8)   A levee, dike or flood wall constructed in the floodway
shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.12  FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any
residential or non residential structure or use of a structure or land shall
be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided the use does not
constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the
standards for Flood Fringe District “permitted uses” listed in division
(B) below and the “standards for all flood fringe uses” listed in
division (E) below.



   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.



      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation
for structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill shall extend at the elevation at least 15
feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.



      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory
structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500
square feet at its largest projection may be internally flood proofed in
accordance with § 151.11(D)(5)(c).



      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time
in excess of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless the fill is specifically intended
to elevate a structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above.



      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be
elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (5)   The provisions of division (E) below shall apply.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill
or flood proofed in accordance with divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above, and or
any use of land that does not comply with the standards in divisions (B)(3)
and (B)(4) above shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application
for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in divisions (D) and (E) below, and §
151.16(D) below.



   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.



      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill
may be utilized to elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of
stilts, pilings, parallel walls and the like, or above-grade, enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed
area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or
lowest floor if: the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the
structure; it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood
resistant materials; and it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject
to the following additional standards:



         (a)   Design and certification. The structure’s design
and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design
standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.



         (b)   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed
areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under
garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must
stipulate:



            1.   A minimum area of openings in the walls where
internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be
a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade. The
automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net
area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and



            2.   That the enclosed area will be designed of
flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications
in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access,
parking of vehicles or storage.



      (2)   Basements, as defined by § 151.08, shall be subject to
the following:



         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation; and



         (b)   Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with division (D)(3) below.



      (3)   All areas of nonresidential structures including
basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall
be flood proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing
must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure water-tight with
the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to
the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.



      (4)   When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as
on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads,
dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an
erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is
enforcing a state approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of
a state approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods
to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of
the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified
by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual
acceptable to the governing body. The plan may incorporate alternative
procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood
warning time exists.



      (5)   Storage of materials and equipment:



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human,
animal or plant life is prohibited; and



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



      (6)   The provisions of division (E) below shall also apply.



   (E)   Standards for all flood fringe uses.



      (1)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access
at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board
of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.



      (2)   Commercial uses - accessory land uses, such as yards,
railroad tracks and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation; however, a permit for the facilities
to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when
multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the
product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood.



      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses - measures shall be
taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along
streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such
as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements
set out in division (E)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in floodplain areas.



      (4)   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established
criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation -
FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation
if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



      (5)   Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit
has not been specified on the official zoning map.



      (6)   Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in §
151.15(C).



      (7)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.13  SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is
unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or
sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall
be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have
water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



   (B)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.14  PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.



   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as
gas, electrical, sewer and water supply systems to be located in the
floodplain shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code
or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads and
bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with §§ 151.11 and
151.12. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where the facilities
are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary
roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health
or safety.



   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems.



      (1)   Where public utilities are not provided:



         (a)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



         (b)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment
systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and
they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of
flooding.



      (2)   Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with
the state’s current state-wide standards for on-site sewage treatment
systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.15  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by § 151.13.



   (B)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are
located in floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be
placed only if elevated in compliance with § 151.12.



      (1)   If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured
home parks is not provided in accordance with § 151.12(E)(1), then
replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property
owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the governing
body.



      (2)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



   (C)   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (C)(1) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) below.



      (1)   Exemption. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
division (C)(2) below and further they meet the following criteria:



         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use;



         (b)   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks
and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions
attached to it; and



         (c)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must
be permissible in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.



      (2)   Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles.



         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record.



         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds.



         (c)   Existing condominium type associations.



      (3)   Other. Recreational vehicles exempted in division (C)(1)
above lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding
$500 for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500
for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The
recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be
treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood
proofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§
151.11 and 151.12. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel
or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the
recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.



      (4)   New parks/subdivisions. New commercial recreational
vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and
condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use
exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will
be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, provided the
recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory
flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists
in accordance with § 151.12(E)(1). No fill placed in the floodway to meet
the requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year
or regional flood; and



         (b)   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not
meeting the criteria of division (4)(a) above may, as an alternative, be
allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions
and the provisions of § 151.16(D). The applicant must submit an emergency
plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year
flood. The plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified
individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry
out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of divisions
(C)(1)(a) and (C)(1)(b) above will be met. All attendant sewage and water
facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or
constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding
in accordance with § 151.14(C).



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.16  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   City Manager. The City Manager or other official designated by
the governing body shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the City
Manager finds a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager
shall notify the person responsible for the violation in accordance with the
procedures stated in § 151.18.



   (B)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Permit required. A permit issued by the City Manager in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be secured prior to the
erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal
maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building, structure or portion
thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or land;
prior to the construction of a dam, fence or on-site septic system; prior to
the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a
structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado or any other source;
and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage
of materials or equipment within the floodplain.



      (2)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall
be made in duplicate to the City Manager on forms furnished by the City
Manager and shall include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate
drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of
the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill or storage of materials; and
the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel.



      (3)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the City
Manger shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state
and federal permits.



      (4)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered or
nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the City
Manager stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications,
plans, permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits,
conditional use permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the
basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement
and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction
at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter,
and punishable as provided by § 151.18.



      (6)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood
proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect.



      (7)   Record of first floor elevation. The City Manager shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in
the floodplain. The City Manager shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood proofed.



      (8)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The City
Manager shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community
authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant
has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 103G, as it may be amended from time to time, this shall suffice
as adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of the
notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



      (9)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or
decrease the 100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not
later than six months after the date the supporting information becomes
available, the City Manager shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA
of the changes by submitting a copy of the technical or scientific data.



   (C)   Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the
conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on the
boards by state law.



      (2)   Administrative review. The Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.



      (3)   Variances.



         (a)   The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal
in specific cases the relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as
will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances
such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the
property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling
legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate.



         (b)   In the granting of the variance, the Board of
Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that
existed consistent with the criteria specified in this chapter, any other
zoning regulations in the community, and in the respective enabling
legislation that justified the granting of the variance.



         (c)   No variance shall have the effect of allowing in
any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood
protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular
area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.



         (d)   The following additional variance criteria of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:



            1.   Variances shall not be issued by a community
within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result;



            2.   Variances shall only be issued by a community
upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and



            3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



      (4)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an
appeal from a decision of the City Manager, or an application for a variance,
the Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give
due notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of
Adjustment shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a
copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so
that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.



      (5)   Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a
decision on the appeal or variance within 30 days. In passing upon an appeal,
the Board of Adjustment may, so long as the action is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination of the City Manager or
other public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth
the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a
variance the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards such as those specified in division (D)(6) below, which are in
conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of the conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable under §
151.18. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.



      (6)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of
Adjustment may be made, and as specified in this community’s official
controls and also by state statutes.



      (7)   Flood insurance notice and record keeping.



         (a)   The City Manager shall notify the applicant for a
variance that: the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and the
construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to
life and property.



         (b)   The notification shall be maintained with a record
of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report the variances
issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the
National Flood Insurance Program.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The Planning Commission shall hear and
decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this chapter.
Applications shall be submitted to the City Manager who shall forward the
application to the Planning Commission for consideration.



      (1)   Hearings. Upon filing with the Planning Commission an
application for a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall
submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.



      (2)   Decisions. The Planning Commission shall arrive at a
decision on a conditional use within 30 days. In granting a conditional use
permit, the Planning Commission shall prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those specified in division (D)(6) below, which
are in conformity with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of the
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter punishable under § 151.18. A copy of all decisions granting
conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten days of the action.



      (3)   Procedures to be followed by the Planning Commission in
passing on conditional use permit applications within all Floodplain
Districts.



         (a)   Require the applicant to furnish such of the
following information and additional information as deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission for determining the suitability of the particular site
for the proposed use:



            1.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and
the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and



            2.   Specifications for building construction and
materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.



         (b)   Transmit one copy of the information described in
division (D)(3)(a) above to a designated engineer or other expert person or
agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed
project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood
damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection and other
technical matters.



         (c)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the
designated engineer or expert, the Planning Commission shall determine the
specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the
proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.



      (4)   Factors upon which the decision of the Planning
Commission shall be based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the
Planning Commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:



         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;



         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures;



         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions;



         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual
owner;



         (e)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location;



         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use;



         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;



         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



         (l)   Other factors which are relevant to the purposes
of this chapter.



      (5)   Time for acting on application. The Planning Commission
shall act on an application in the manner described above within 30 days from
receiving the application, except that where additional information is
required pursuant to division (D)(3) above. The Planning Commission shall
render a written decision within 30 days from the receipt of the additional
information.



      (6)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits.



         (a)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and
the purpose of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall attach the
conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary
to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.



         (b)   The conditions may include, but are not limited
to, the following:



            1.   Modification of waste treatment and water
supply facilities;



            2.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy and
operation;



            3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties
and deed restrictions;



            4.   Requirements for construction of channel
modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees and other protective
measures; and



            5.   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with
the State Building Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan
or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the flood proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.17  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in § 151.08, shall
be subject to the provisions of divisions (A) through (E) below.



   (A)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in
a way that increases its nonconformity.



   (B)   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood
damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the
regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation
on fill or flood proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 flood proofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further
restricted in divisions (C) and (F) below.



   (C)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50%
of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section
are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must
include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed
on all manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure,
then the structure must meet the standards of §§ 151.11 or 151.12 for new
structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District, respectively.



   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this
chapter. The Building Official shall notify the City Manager in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of
12 months.



   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially
damaged, as defined in § 151.08, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in §§ 151.11 and 151.12 will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District, respectively.



   (F)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in § 151.08,
from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the
existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration or other
improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building,
then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet
the requirements of §§ 151.11 or 151.12 for new structures, depending upon
whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.18  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional
uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by
law.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city, from taking
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The
actions may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the
City Manager and local government may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including, but not limited to, prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct Ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program;



      (2)   When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or
brought to the attention of the City Manager, the City Manager shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of
the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible,
this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources’ and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along
with the community’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree
possible;



      (3)   The City Manager shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature
and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure
and/or use is under construction or development, the City Manager may order
the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the City Manager may either: issue an order
identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time
period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls; or notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
30 days; and



      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the City Manager within the specified period of time, each additional day
that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and
shall be prosecuted accordingly. The City Manager shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



§ 151.19  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall
not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the
elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he or she determines
that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended
use.



   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the
official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must
meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) technical conditions
and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days’ written notice of
all hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and the notice shall
include a draft of the ordinance amendment or technical study under
consideration.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-5-2012)



CHAPTER 152:  MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS



Section



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Location outside mobile home parks



   152.03   Mobile home park



   152.04   Nonconforming mobile homes and mobile home parks



   152.05   Building permit



   152.06   Site requirements



   152.07   Guidelines for the use and occupancy of “Pre-Code”
manufactured (mobile) homes



   152.08   Administration and enforcement



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE HOME, TRAILER, TRAILER COACH, DOUBLE WIDE TRAILERS AND MODULARS
OR HOUSE TRAILER.  Any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed to
make possible occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons,
or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade, and so
designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on
highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive
power, except a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp,
site, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the
purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any mobile home, or
trailer, and upon which any mobile home is parked. MOBILE HOME PARK shall
also include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment
thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the mobile home park and its
facilities or not. MOBILE HOME PARK shall not include automobile or trailer
sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection
or sales.



   UNIT.  A section of ground in a mobile home park of not less than
3,600 square feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location
for one mobile home, off-street parking space for one automobile, and other
uses considered pertinent to the establishment and use of a mobile home as
permitted by this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 11.01)  (Ord. passed 5-24-1968; Ord. 73-1, passed 6-8-1973)



§ 152.02  LOCATION OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   (A)   Unlawful act.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to park any mobile home on
any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or any tract of land
owned by the person, occupied or unoccupied, or to replace any such existing
mobile home with a new or different mobile home, whether new or used, and
park or use the replacement mobile home at or on any of the above noted
places or premises, except as provided in this chapter.



      (2)   It is also unlawful for any person owning or occupying a
mobile home after the effective date of this section, where the mobile home
is located outside of a duly designated and lawfully licensed mobile home
court or park, to continue to park or use the mobile home outside of such a
mobile home park more than five years after the effective date of this
section unless either:



         (a)   Provided for elsewhere by this chapter; or



         (b)   The mobile home is brought into conformity with
all structural and related standards contained elsewhere in this chapter
before the expiration of five years after the effective date of this section.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the above, the present owner or occupant
may continue to own and/or occupy such a mobile home indefinitely at its
current location, provided it is otherwise maintained in a habitable
condition consistent with all other applicable laws.



      (4)   If the ownership and/or occupancy of the mobile home is
changed anytime after the effective date of this section, the mobile home
shall then be subject to all of the above noted provisions.



   (B)   Emergency stopping. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking
is permitted on any street or alley or highway for not longer than three
hours, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or
limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or other city code
provisions for that street, alley or highway.



   (C)   Temporary parking. It is unlawful for any person to park or
occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied dwelling or any lot which
is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling either of which is
situated outside of any approved mobile home park; except, the parking of
only one trailer unoccupied or occupied in any accessory private garage
building, or in a rear yard in any district, is



permitted providing no permanent living quarters shall be maintained or any
business practiced in the trailer while the trailer is so parked or stored.
Permanent living quarters shall be defined as occupancy exceeding ten days.



   (D)   Public property parking. It is unlawful for any person to park
a trailer on any public property overnight except in those public areas,
specifically designated for overnight stops, en-route stops, camper stops or
transient occupancy. In no case shall parking be permitted in those areas for
a period exceeding ten days or nights continuously or intermittently within
any 30-day period.



   (E)   Special permits. Special permits may be issued by the Council
for the use of a trailer as a dwelling or an office by persons directly
connected with new construction in the city, providing that the person has
obtained a building permit for the construction and is proceeding with the
work. Special permits shall be limited to periods of not more than 90 days.



(2003 Code, § 11.10)  (Ord. 14, passed 2-9-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.03  MOBILE HOME PARK.



   (A)   Applications. Applications for a special permit to establish,
construct and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this
chapter shall be made to the Council.



   (B)   Park Plan. The application for a permit shall be accompanied
by four copies of the park plan, showing the following either existing or
proposed:



      (1)   The extent and area proposed for mobile home park
purposes;



      (2)   Roads and driveways;



      (3)   Location of sites and units for trailers;



      (4)   Location and number of sanitary conveniences;



      (5)   Proposed disposition of surface drainage;



      (6)   Proposed street surfacing and lighting;



      (7)   Location of water and sanitary sewer lines; and



      (8)   Any other information requested by the Council.



   (C)   Certificate of ownership. Each application for a special
permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of ownership on all the property
within 250 feet of any boundary line of the proposed camp site.



   (D)   Fee. Each applicant shall be required to pay a fee of $25 at
the time that the application is filed with the City Clerk. This money shall
be used by the City Clerk to defray expenses of processing the application.



   (E)   Hearing. No special permit for any mobile home park shall be
issued by the Council until after a public hearing has been held on the
matter by the Council. This hearing shall be advertised in the official
newspaper of the city at least ten days before the hearing. At least ten days
prior to the public hearing, the Council shall mail a notice of the hearing
to each of the property owners shown on the certificate of ownership at their
last known address so that they might appear and be heard.



   (F)   Planning Commission. The Council may refer the application to
the Planning Commission for recommendation. If a recommendation is not
received from the Commission within 30 days after the referral, the Council
may proceed without the recommendation.



   (G)   Voting on application. After the public hearing, the Council
may grant or deny the application for permit by a majority vote of its
members.



(2003 Code, § 11.11)  (Ord. passed 5-24-1968)



§ 152.04  NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   The lawful use of any mobile home park or mobile home existing on the
effective date of this section may be continued for a period of 20 years,
even if the use does not conform to the regulations of this chapter, except
as provided below:



   (A)   Nonconforming mobile homes.



      (1)   Alterations. A nonconforming mobile home or ancillary
structure shall not be reconstructed or altered except for normal maintenance
and repairs, to an extent exceeding 25% of its market value for assessment
purposes, or $10,000, whichever is greater, unless the mobile home or
ancillary structure is changed to conform with the regulations of this
chapter.



      (2)   Enlargement. A nonconforming mobile home or ancillary
structure shall not be added to, enlarged in any manner or relocated within
the city unless the additions, enlargements or relocations are made so as to
bring the nonconforming mobile home or ancillary structure into conformity
with the regulations of this chapter.



      (3)   Restoration. A nonconforming mobile home or ancillary
structure which is damaged by fire or other cause to the extent of more than
50% of its market value shall not be restored, except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter.



      (4)   Abandonment. The use of a nonconforming mobile home
which has been discontinued for a period of 120 days shall not be
re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the regulations
of this chapter.



   (B)   Nonconforming use of mobile, home or land.



      (1)   Extension. A nonconforming use of a mobile home may be
extended throughout the mobile home provided no structural alterations are
made therein except as required by other codes or city code provisions or
required for normal maintenance and repairs, but a nonconforming use of land
shall not be expanded or enlarged.



      (2)   Relocation. A nonconforming use of a mobile home shall
not be moved to any other site within the city or to any part of the parcel
of land upon which the same was conducted on the effective date of this
section.



      (3)   Abandonment. A nonconforming use of a mobile home or
land which has been discontinued for a period of 120 days shall not be
re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the regulations
of this chapter.



      (4)   Nonconforming uses in the Flood Fringe District. If any
nonconforming mobile home is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an
extent of 50% of its market value for assessment purposes, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter;
however, the Board of Adjustment may issue a special use permit for
reconstruction if the mobile home is located outside of the Floodway District
and upon reconstruction, is adequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected in conformity with the with the provisions of this chapter.
Furthermore, any addition or alteration to any nonconforming mobile home
which would result in increasing its flood damage potential shall be
protected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 11.12)  (Ord. 107, passed 12-06-2002)



§ 152.05  BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   Application for permit. The applicant for a building permit
for the construction of a mobile home park or any part thereof shall comply
with all of the provisions of the State Building Code as those provisions may
apply.



   (B)   Plans. Each application shall be accompanied by four copies of
detailed plans of the proposed construction and improvement of the site.



   (C)   Approval of Department of Health. Each application for a
building permit to construct a mobile home park or to expand an existing
mobile home park shall be accompanied by plans approved by the State
Department of Health, showing that the applicant is complying with all
recommendations, suggestions and laws under the jurisdiction of that
Department.



   (D)   Referral to Planning Commission. The Council may refer any
application to the Planning Commission for recommendations, but the building
permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector after it has been approved
by a majority of the Council.



(2003 Code, § 11.20)



§ 152.06  SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Well-drained. Every mobile home site shall be located on a
well-drained area and the premises shall be properly graded to prevent the
accumulation of storm and other waters.



   (B)   Gross area. Every unit shall have a gross area of not less
than 3,600 square feet.



   (C)   Minimum width. Each unit shall have a minimum width of 40 feet
measured at right angles to its side lines.



   (D)   Minimum distance. There shall be a minimum distance of ten
feet between the trailer and the front of street line of the unit.



   (E)   Alleys. Where an alley is provided adjacent to the back line
of the unit, there shall be a minimum setback of seven feet from the back
line. Where there is no alley, the setback from the back line of the unit
shall be not less than ten feet.



   (F)   Side lines. There shall be not less than seven feet between
the trailer and any side line of a unit.



   (G)   Space between trailers. There shall be not less than 14 feet
of space between the trailers in all directions.



   (H)   Patio. A concrete slab or patio may be constructed on the
ground beside each trailer parking space, this slab shall be not less than
160 square feet and two inches thick.



   (I)   Shade tree. At least one shade tree shall be placed and
maintained on each unit.



   (J)   Grass. Except for the areas used for the trailer, patio,
sidewalk and off-street parking space, the entire area shall be sodded or
seeded and maintained with grass.



   (K)   Streets. Each unit shall abut on and have access to a street
which shall be at least 40 feet wide between gutters, except that streets may
be 30 feet wide if off-street parking of a minimum of one car space per unit
is provided or if parking is permitted on one side of the street only. The
construction of the street shall conform to the standards established by the
city and specified as a five-ton street. The streets are to be built and
maintained by the owners of the mobile home park. All streets and ways
established by the mobile home park are hereby declared public to the extent
that they shall be under the supervision and control of the police
enforcement powers of the city with respect to traffic laws and other laws as
may be applicable to public ways and places.



   (L)   Curbs. A curb shall be constructed on each side of the street
according to specifications of the city.



   (M)   Sidewalks. A cement sidewalk not less than 30 inches wide
shall be constructed adjacent to the concrete slab and on the unit side
thereof. This sidewalk shall be connected to the unit patio by a cement walk
not less than 24 inches in width.



   (N)   Boulevards. There shall be a boulevard, at least ten feet in
width, on each side of any street established hereunder. The width may be
included with the sidewalk required under division (M) above. The boulevard
shall be sodded and planted.



   (O)   Setback. Every park shall provide for a minimum setback of 30
feet from all exterior property lines. The minimum setback shall be 50 feet
from state or federal highways and from abutting residential areas. In the
latter case, an adequate buffer zone shall be provided through landscaping
and planting of vegetation.



   (P)   Parking. The parking of more than one trailer on any single
unit shall not be permitted.



   (Q)   Inhabitants. No mobile home shall be inhabited by a greater
number of occupants than that for which it was designed.



   (R)   Utilities. Water facilities, sewage disposal and street
lighting shall be installed and maintained by the owner of the mobile home
park, and shall be constructed in accordance with the laws of the state, the
recommendations of the State Health Department and the city code provisions
and policies of the city.



   (S)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be placed throughout the
area in such a way as to satisfy the District Fire Marshal that adequate fire
protection is achieved.



   (T)   Extraneous equipment. All boats, boat trailers, hauling
trailers and all other equipment not stored within the mobile homes or the
utility enclosure that may have been provided, shall be stored in a separate
place provided by the park owners and not upon the plots occupied by mobile
homes nor upon the streets within the mobile home park.



   (U)   Minimum size. Every mobile home park shall be at least two
acres in size.



   (V)   Off-street parking. Every unit shall contain at least one
off-street parking space which space shall be surfaced with a dust-free,
durable material and shall be no less than 160 square feet in area.



   (W)   Site lighting. Site lighting shall be provided and used to
supplement street lighting and shall be effectively related to public areas,
walks, steps, and ramps. Illumination shall be of conservative intensity, but
sufficiently distributed to eliminate dark areas.



(2003 Code, § 11.21)  (Ord. passed 5-24-1968)



§ 152.07  GUIDELINES FOR THE USE AND OCCUPANCY OF “PRE-CODE”
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOMES.



   (A)   Definition.“PRE-CODE” MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOMES are
defined as homes built prior to HUD C.F.R. 3280 Standards, effective June 15,
1976, or built prior to state inspection and certification requirements in
accordance with ANSI Standards A119.1, July 1, 1972.



   (B)   Minimum requirements for pre-code homes.



      (1)   Egress windows and exits.



         (a)   Each home shall have at least one egress window in
each bedroom that meets the minimum specifications of HUD 3280.106 and .404
for manufactured homes. These standards require that the window be at least
22 inches in the horizontal or vertical least dimension and at least five
square feet in area, the bottom of the window opening shall be not more than
36 inches above the floor, and that locks and latches which need to be
operated to permit exiting not be located more than 54 inches above the
finished floor. If the requirements of the State Building Code and/or ANSI
A199.1 1982 are met, the home shall be deemed to be in compliance with this
section.



         (b)   The home shall have two exterior exit doors
located remote from each other as required in HUD 3280.105. These standards
require single section manufactured homes to have the doors not less than 12
feet center to center from each other and multi-section manufactured home
doors to be not less than 20 feet center to center from each other measured
in a straight line direction regardless of the length of path of travel
between doors. One of the required exit doors must be accessible from the
doorway of each bedroom without traveling more than 35 feet. Exterior swing
doors shall have a minimum 28-inch by 74-inch clear opening and sliding glass
doors shall have a 28-inch by 72-inch clear opening. Each exterior door other
than screen/storm doors shall have a key-operated lock that has a deadlocking
latch or a key-operated dead bolt with a passage latch, and locks shall not
require the use of a key or special tool for operation from the inside of the
home.



      (2)   Flame spread.



         (a)   Walls and ceilings adjacent to or enclosing a
furnace or water heater shall have an interior finish with flame spread
rating not exceeding 25. Sealants and other trim materials two inches or less
used to finish adjacent surfaces within these spaces are exempt from this
provision provided all joints are supported by framing members or materials
with a 25 or less flame spread rating. Combustible doors providing interior
or exterior access to furnace and water heater spaces shall be covered with
materials of limited combustion (i.e., 5/16 inch gypsum board and the like)
with the surface allowed to be interrupted for louvers ventilating the space;
however, the louvers shall not be of materials of greater combustibility than
the door itself (i.e., plastic louvers and a wood door). Reference HUD
3280.203.



         (b)   Exposed interior finished surfaces, including
vertical surfaces between range top and overhead cabinets and/or ceiling,
shall have a flame spread rating not exceeding 50 as required by HUD
3280.203. Back splashes not exceeding six inches in height are exempted.
Vertical clearance above cook tops and ranges shall not be less than 24
inches as required by HUD 3280.709.



      (3)   Smoke detectors.



         (a)   A smoke detector shall be installed on any wall in
the hallway or space communicating with each bedroom area between the living
area and the first bedroom as required by HUD 3280.208. Homes with bedroom
areas separated by any one or a combination of common-use areas such as a
kitchen, dining room, living room or family room (but not a bathroom or
utility room) shall be required to have one detector for each bedroom area.



         (b)   Smoke detectors shall not have switches in the
circuit to the detector between the over-current protection device protecting
the branch circuit and the detector. The detector shall be attached to an
electrical outlet box and connected by a permanent wiring method into a
general electrical circuit. The detector shall not be placed on a branch
circuit or any circuit protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter.



      (4)   Solid fuel burning stoves and fireplaces.



         (a)   Solid, fuel-burning factory-built fireplaces and
fireplace stoves may be used in manufactured (mobile) homes provided that
they are listed for use in manufactured homes and installed as per their
listing/ manufacturers’ instructions and the minimum requirements of HUD
3280.710.



         (b)   A solid fuel burning fireplace or fireplace stove
shall be equipped with integral doors designed to close the fire chamber
opening and shall include complete means for venting through the roof, a
combustion air inlet, or hearth extension, and means to securely attach the
unit to the manufactured home structure.



            1.   A listed factory-built chimney designed to be
attached directly to the fireplace/fireplace stove and equipped with, in
accordance with the listing, a termination device and spark arrester shall be
required. The chimney shall extend at least three feet above the part of the
roof through which it passes and at least two feet above the highest
elevation of any part of the manufactured home within ten feet of the chimney.



            2.   An air intake assembly shall be installed in
accordance with the terms of listings/manufacturers’ instructions. A
combustion air inlet shall conduct the air directly into the fire chamber and
shall be designed to prevent material from the hearth dropping onto the area
beneath the manufactured home.



            3.   The hearth extension shall be of
noncombustible material a minimum of three-eighths inch thick, shall extend a
minimum of 16 inches in front and eight inches beyond each side of the
fireplace-stove opening. The hearth shall also extend over the entire surface
beneath a fireplace stove and beneath an elevated or overhanging fireplace.



      (5)   Support systems. Pre-Code homes built prior to June 15,
1976, are required to be installed (set-up) in accordance with the standards
of the State Building Code, Chapter 1350.



      (6)   Aluminum wiring. All electrical systems shall be tested
for continuity to assure that metallic parts are properly bonded, tested for
operation to demonstrate that all equipment is connected and in working
order, and undergo a polarity check to determine that connections are proper.
The electrical system shall be properly protected for the required amperage
load. If the unit is of aluminum conductors, all receptacles and switches
rated 20 amperes or less directly connected to the aluminum conductor shall
be marked CO/ALR. Exterior receptacles other than heat tape receptacles shall
be of the ground fault circuit interrupter (GFI) type. Conductors of
dissimilar metals (copper/aluminum or copper-clad aluminum) must be connected
in accordance with the National Electrical Code.



      (7)   Replacement furnaces and water heaters.



         (a)   If the manufactured (mobile) home has had or is to
receive a replacement furnace or water heater, it shall be listed for use in
a manufactured (mobile) home. Vents, roof jacks and chimneys necessary for
the installation shall be listed for use with the furnace or water heater.



         (b)   The furnace and water heater shall be secured in
place to avoid displacement. Every furnace and water heater shall be
accessible for servicing and/or replacement.



         (c)   Furnaces and water heaters shall be installed to
provide complete separation of the combustion system from the interior
atmosphere of the manufactured home as required by HUD 3280.709.



         (d)   The floor area in the water heater area shall be
free from damage from moisture and the like, to assure that the floor will
support the weight of the water heater and water contained within.



      (8)   Gas line testing. The gas piping for each pre-code home
shall be tested with the appliance valves removed from the piping and capped
at those areas. The piping shall withstand a pressure of at least six inches
mercury or 3-psi gauge for a period of not less than ten minutes without
showing any drop in pressure. Pressure shall be measured with a mercury
manometer or a slope gauge calibrated so as to read in increments of not
greater than 1/10 pound or equivalent device. The source of normal operating
pressure shall be isolated before the pressure test is made. After the
appliance connections are reinstalled, the piping system and connections
shall be tested with line pressure of not less than ten inches nor more than
14 inches water column air pressure. The appliance connections shall be
tested for leakage with soapy water or bubble solution.



(2003 Code, § 11.22)  (Ord. 52, passed 9-29-1995)



§ 152.08  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Building
Inspector, who is hereby designated as enforcing officer. The Building
Inspector may institute in the name of the city any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator as provided by law.



(2003 Code, § 11.30)  (Ord. passed 5-24-1968)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   153.01   Introduction



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Plat presentation procedures/requirements



   153.04   Design standards



   153.05   Required improvements



   153.06   Administration and enforcement



§ 153.01  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   Purpose. To regulate the subdividing of land within the city
so that new additions will be integrated with the Comprehensive Plan and will
contribute to an attractive, stable and wholesome community development.



   (B)   Legal authority. Minnesota Laws 1965, Chapter 670, being M.S.
§§ 462.351 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Geographic jurisdiction. The area within the corporate limits
of the city, and the area extending two miles beyond its corporate limits,
except within a township which has adopted subdivision regulations.



   (D)   Conveyance by metes and bounds.



      (1)   No conveyance of land in which the land conveyed is
described by metes and bounds, or by reference to an unapproved registered
land survey made after the effective date of Laws 1961, Chapter 626, being
M.S. § 462.358, at it may be amended from time to time, shall be made or
recorded unless the parcel described in the conveyance:



         (a)   Was a separate parcel of record on the effective
date of this chapter;



         (b)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey
entered into prior to that date;



         (c)   Was a separate parcel of not less than two and
one-half acres in area and 150 feet in width on the effective date of this
chapter; or



         (d)   Is a single parcel of land not less than five
acres in area and 300 feet in width.



      (2)   Building permits shall be withheld for structures on
tracts which have been subdivided and conveyed by this method, and the city
may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve, repair or
maintain any such tracts.



(2003 Code, § 10.01)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way usually 20 feet or less in width which
normally affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.



   ARTERIAL STREET.  A street which provides for the movement of
relatively heavy traffic to, from, or within the city. It has a secondary
function of providing access to land. An ARTERIAL STREET system is designated
on the City Comprehensive Plan.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  That policy document which serves as a guide for
the future physical development of the city and entitled “Comprehensive
Plan, Granite Falls, Minnesota”.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A short street having but one end open to traffic and the
other end being permanently terminated to a vehicular turn around.



   DEVELOPER.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.



   LOCAL STREET.  A street of little or no continuity designed to provide
access to abutting property and leading into arterial streets.



   LOT.  A piece, parcel or plot of land intended for building
development or as a unit for transfer of ownership.



   PLAT.  A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of
subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission and the Council for
approval.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   Includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.



      (2)   The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots
or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development,
or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; provided
that:



         (a)   A division of land for agricultural purposes into
lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall
not be deemed a subdivision;



         (b)   The parcel is co-extensive with a separate parcel
of record on the effective date of this chapter;



         (c)   An agreement to convey such a parcel has been
entered into prior to such time and the instrument showing the agreement to
convey is recorded in the office of the County Recorder within one year
thereafter; and



         (d)   The parcel is co-extensive with a lot unit or
units described with reference to a plat or auditor’s subdivision duly
filed and of record in the office of the Yellow Medicine or Chippewa County
Recorder prior to the effective date of this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 10.02)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953)



§ 153.03  PLAT PRESENTATION PROCEDURES/REQUIREMENTS.



   No real property within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be
subdivided and offered for sale or a plat recorded until a preliminary plat
and a final plat have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission
as having fulfilled the requirement of this chapter, and until a final plat
has been approved by the Council.



   (A)   Procedures for presenting plats.



      (1)   A preliminary plat of the area to be subdivided shall be
prepared sketch form and presented by the subdivider or his or her agent to
the Planning Commission for review. The Planning Commission may utilize the
services of technical personnel, such as engineer and land planner, to aid
its review.



      (2)   Prior to approval of a preliminary plat, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon at which time all persons
interested in the plat shall be heard.



      (3)   Upon approval or conditioned approval, a final plat
shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer and presented by
the subdivider or his or her agent to the Planning Commission for review. The
final plat may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat, which is
to be recorded and developed at the time.



      (4)   Upon approval of the final plat, the Planning Commission
shall transmit the final plat to the Council for its review and action.



      (5)   If approved by the Council, the subdivider or his or her
agent shall file the final plat with the City Clerk and shall record the
final plat with the Yellow Medicine or Chippewa County Recorder within 30
days of final plat approval; otherwise, the approval shall be considered void.



   (B)   Data required on plats.



      (1)   The preliminary plat and final plat shall each contain
the following information:



         (a)   Identification and description:



            1.   Proposed name of subdivision;



            2.   Location by section, town, range or by other
legal description; and



            3.   Graphic scale (one inch equals 100 feet),
north-point and date of preparation.



         (b)   Subdivision design features:



            1.   Layout and width of proposed streets and
utility easements showing street names, lots, parks and other public areas;
and



            2.   Proposed use of all parcels, and if zoning
change is contemplated, proposed re-zoning.



         (c)   Plan of the entire area. Where a tract of land is
proposed for subdivision that is a part of a larger logical subdivision unit,
the Planning Commission may cause to be prepared a “Plan of the Entire
Area”, the plan to be used by the Commission to aid in judging the proposed
plat; and



         (d)   Location of all floodway and flood fringe areas.
No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the Council for
reason of flooding, inadequate drainage or inadequate water supply or sewage
treatment facilities. All lots contained in the Floodplain District shall
contain a building site and provide for access and water supply and sewage
disposal facilities that comply with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The preliminary plat shall also contain the following:



         (a)   Preliminary plans for water supply, sewage
disposal and drainage; and



         (b)   Existing conditions in tract and in surrounding
area to a distance of 300 feet:



            1.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision,
clearly indicated;



            2.   Total approximate acreage;



            3.   Platted streets, railroad right-of-way and
utility easements;



            4.   Boundary lines and ownership of adjoining
unsubdivided land;



            5.   Sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground facilities;



            6.   Permanent buildings or structures;



            7.   Topography, showing watercourses, marsh areas
and contours at vertical intervals of no more than two feet. All elevation
data shall be maintained at sea level; and



            8.   Other information such as soil tests, if
requested by the Planning Commission to aid in its review.



      (3)   The final plat shall also contain the following:



         (a)   Final plans for water supply, sewage disposal and
drainage;



         (b)   Data required under regulations by the applicable
County Surveyor, i.e., accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines,
angles and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, easements and
other important features;



         (c)   An  identification system for all lots and blocks;



         (d)   The size (in square feet) and dimensions of all
lots;



         (e)   Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying
to accuracy of survey and plat;



         (f)   Notarized certification by owner, and by any
mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
streets and other public areas;



         (g)   If the plat contains areas within the floodplain,
restrictive deed covenants shall be filed to provide that the floodplain area
be left essentially in the state shown on the plat and that no improvements
shall be made in the floodplain areas in violation of the floodplain
provisions of the city code; and



         (h)   Certification by the Planning Commission and by
the Council of their approval of the plats.



(2003 Code, § 10.10)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977)



§ 153.04  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   Generally, design standards shall assure that layout of the subdivision
harmonizes with the existing plans affecting the development and its
surroundings, and shall be in conformity with the city’s development
objectives for the entire area. No plat shall be approved for any subdivision
which covers an area within the floodplain unless the subdivider agrees to
meet all floodplain zoning provisions and other floodplain regulations; makes
improvements which will assure that each lot contains a flood free side for
location of structure; designs roads so that the finished surface is not more
than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation; and locates or
designs public utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
to provide protection to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (A)   Circulation.



      (1)   General street design.



         (a)   The design of all streets shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of
traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water and to the
proposed uses of the area to be served.



         (b)   Where new streets extend existing adjoining
streets, their projections shall be at the same or greater width, but in no
case less than the minimum required width.



         (c)   Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the
proper projection of streets. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided
land susceptible to being subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried
to the boundaries of the unsubdivided land.



      (2)   Street width. Arterial streets shall have rights-of-way
and improved roadway widths of at least 80 and 40 feet, respectively. Similar
widths for local streets shall be at least 66 and 36 feet, respectively.



      (3)   Maximum vertical grades. Maximum vertical grades shall
be 4% for arterial streets and 6% for local streets.



      (4)   Cul-de-sacs. Maximum length of permanent cul-de-sac
(turn around) streets shall be 500 feet measured along the center line from
the intersection of origin to end of right of way. Each cul-de-sac shall be
provided at the closed end with a turn around having a minimum outside
roadway diameter of 100 feet, and a minimum street property line diameter of
120 feet.



      (5)   Street jogs. Street jogs with center line off-sets of
less than 125 feet shall be avoided.



      (6)   Street intersections. Insofar as practical, streets
shall intersect at right angles and no intersection shall be at an angle of
less than 60 degrees. No intersection shall contain more than four
“corners”.



      (7)   Access to arterial streets or highways. Where a proposed
plat is adjacent to an arterial street or highway as designated by the
Comprehensive Plan, spacing between access points to the thoroughfares of
less than 660 feet for arterials and 1,320 feet for highways shall be
avoided, except where impractical or impossible due to existing property
divisions or topography.



      (8)   Alleys. Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas
unless special permission is granted by the Council.



      (9)   Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street
arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining
property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.



   (B)   Easements.



      (1)   Utilities. Easements of at least 12 feet wide centered
on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary. Easements
for storm or sanitary sewers shall be at least 20 feet wide. They shall have
continuity of alignment from block to block. Temporary construction easements
may be required where installation depths are greater than ten feet. Utility
easements shall be kept free of any vegetation which would interfere with the
free movement of utility service vehicles.



      (2)   Watercourses. When a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the
lines of the watercourses, and with such further width or construction as may
be determined to be necessary by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Blocks.



      (1)   Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,000 feet and
shall not be less than 400 feet.



      (2)   Pedestrian walkways. In blocks longer than 600 feet, a
pedestrian crossway with a minimum right-of-way of 20  feet shall be
required near  the center of the block. Additional accessways to schools,
parks and other destinations shall be provided if requested by the Planning
Commission at the time of preliminary plat review.



   (D)   Lots.



      (1)   Layout. Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Lots with
frontage on two parallel local streets shall be prohibited.



      (2)   Size and dimension. Minimum lot areas and lateral
dimensions shall be as set forth in the Zoning Code.



      (3)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least 10%
wider than the minimum lot width required.



      (4)   Natural features. In the subdivision of land, due regard
shall be shown for all natural features which if preserved will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development and which may alter
normal lot platting.



      (5)   Lot remnants. Lot remnants which are below the minimum
lot size must be added to adjacent or surrounding lots rather than be allowed
to remain as an unusable outlot or parcel unless the owner can show plans for
the future use of the remnant.



(2003 Code, § 10.20)



§ 153.05  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   Improvements shall be made in all subdivisions according to the
following requirements.



   (A)   Monuments. Steel monuments shall be placed at all block
corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points
as shown on the final plat. The installation shall be the subdivider’s
expense and responsibility. All U.S., state, county or other official
benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
property shall be preserved in precise position.



   (B)   Warning signs. In areas within the floodplain, warning signs
shall be placed by means of firmly placed markers of a sufficient size to be
easily read from a distance of 20 feet, which signs shall meet the
requirements of the floodplain provisions of the city code. The warning signs
shall be installed prior to the sale of lots and construction of any
buildings or structures.



   (C)   Streets.



      (1)   Grading. Streets shall be graded to the full width of
the right-of-way. All street grading will be in accordance with
specifications on file in the City Clerk’s office. Grading will be complete
prior to installation of applicable underground utilities, either private or
public in nature.



      (2)   Surfacing. Following City Engineer approval of street
grading and after utility installation, streets shall be surfaced and
provided with concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with the latest
recommended plans and specifications prepared by the City Engineer, approved
by the Council and on file in the City Clerk’s office.



   (D)   Utilities. All utilities, whether private or public shall be
installed underground so as to enhance the visual appearance of the area.
Where utilities are to be installed in street or alley rights-of-way, the
installation shall take place prior to street surfacing. Water and sewer
laterals shall be laid to the property line ending at the corporation cock.



      (1)   Sanitary sewer. Sanitary sewer facilities adequate to
serve the subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the latest plans
and specifications of the City Engineer.



      (2)   Water supply. Water distribution facilities adequate to
serve the subdivision including pipe, fittings, hydrants, valves and the
like, shall be installed. All water mains shall be installed in accordance
with the latest plans and specifications of the City Engineer.



   (E)   Drainage facilities. Storm sewer and/or other surface drainage
facilities shall be installed as determined to be necessary by the City
Engineer for the proper drainage of surface waters.



   (F)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks, when provided, shall be of monolithic
concrete, four inches in thickness with pitch and surface as approved by the
City Engineer, with a required width for sidewalks of at least five feet.



   (G)   Specifications/inspections. Unless otherwise stated, all of
the required improvements shall conform to engineering standards and
specifications as required by the Council. The improvements shall be subject
to inspection and approval by, and shall be made in sequence as determined by
the City Engineer.



   (H)   Financing. The above improvements shall be paid for according
to the terms of the city’s special assessment policy, adopted by the
Council by resolution, which is in effect at the time the improvements are
ordered, a copy of the policy to remain on file and available for inspection
during normal business hours in the office of the City Clerk.



   (I)   Review and inspection. The subdivider shall pay for all costs
incurred by the city for subdivision review and inspection. This would
include preparation and review of plans and specifications by technical
assistants and cost incurred by the City Attorney, as well as other costs of
similar nature.



   (J)   When improvements required. The improvements required by this
chapter shall be made as the subdivision is developed upon petition of the
developer for the improvement or upon Council initiation.



(2003 Code, § 10.21)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 80-1, passed 3-14-1980)



§ 153.06  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Responsible official. It shall be the duty of the Council to
see that the provisions of this chapter are properly enforced.



   (B)   Building permit. No building permit shall be issued by any
governing official for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement on any land henceforth subdivided until all requirements of this
chapter have been fully complied with.



   (C)   Variances. The Council shall have the power to vary from the
requirements of this chapter when supporting evidence indicates that:



      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape
or topographic conditions of the land involved, a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict
letter of the regulations were to be carried out;



      (2)   The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is
based are unique to the tract of land for which the variance is sought and
one not applicable, generally to other property with the same zoning
classification;



      (3)   The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively
upon a desire to increase the value of income potential of the parcel of land;



      (4)   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the
provisions of this chapter and has not been created by any persons presently
or formerly having an interest in the parcel of land;



      (5)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the vicinity
in which the tract of land is located; and/or



      (6)   The proposed variance will not substantially increase
congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger
the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within
the vicinity.



   (D)   Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by the provisions of
this chapter may have the chapter, rule, regulation, decision or order,
reviewed by an appropriate remedy in the District Court, subject to the
provisions of M.S. § 462.361, as it may be amended from time to time.



(2003 Code, § 10.30)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953)



CHAPTER 154:  AIRPORT SAFETY ZONING



Section



   154.01   Purpose and authority



   154.02   Short title



   154.03   Definitions



   154.04   Air space obstruction zoning



   154.05   Land use safety zoning



   154.06   Airport maps



   154.07   Nonconforming uses



   154.08   Permits



   154.09   Variances



   154.10   Hazard marking and lighting



   154.11   Airport Zoning Administrator



   154.12   Board of Adjustment



   154.13   Appeals



   154.14   Judicial review



   154.15   Conflicts



   154.16   Zoning map adopted



   154.17   Severability



§ 154.01  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   The City Municipal Airport Joint Airport Zoning Board, created and
established by joint action of the City Council, the Board of Commissioners
of Yellow Medicine County and the Town Board of Minnesota Falls pursuant to
the provisions and authority of M.S. § 360.063, as it may be amended from
time to time, hereby finds and declares that:



   (A)   An airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of
the Granite Falls Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its
vicinity; and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of
the area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to destroy or impair the utility of the airport and the public
investment therein;



   (B)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by the Granite Falls Municipal
Airport;



   (C)   For the protection of the public health, safety, order,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare, and for the promotion of the
most appropriate use of land, it is necessary to prevent the creation or
establishment of airport hazards;



   (D)   The prevention of these airport hazards should be
accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation;



   (E)   The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport
hazards, and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation or marking and
lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political
subdivisions may raise and expend public funds;



   (F)   The Granite Falls Municipal Airport is an essential public
facility that serves an important public transportation role and provides a
public good;



   (G)   The Transportation Section of Chapter 6: Vision Statements,
Goals, Objectives and Strategies of the Yellow Medicine County Comprehensive
Plan, April 2006 states in Objective 3 that “The County needs to work in
partnership with cities, townships, the Upper Sioux Community, regional
counties and cities, the Area Transportation Partnership and Minnesota
Department of Transportation (MNDOT) to provide a transportation system and
road network that moves people and products economically”. The plan
identifies a strategy of “work(ing) to ensure that the transportation
system and road network encourages employment and growth and opportunities
throughout the entire county” (Strategy 3). The airport zoning process is a
cooperative effort in part by the City of Granite Falls and Yellow Medicine
County and Minnesota Falls Township to allow for growth and opportunities
within the region; as such, the goals of the county are advanced; and



   (H)   This chapter amends and replaces the Granite Falls Municipal
Airport Zoning Ordinance dated June 1, 1996.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Airport Safety Zoning Ordinance
for the Granite Falls Municipal Airport”. Those sections of land affected
by this chapter are indicated in Exhibit “A”, which is attached to the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRPORT.  The Granite Falls Municipal Airport located in Section 21,
Township 115, Range 39.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION.  The established elevation of the highest point on
the usable landing area. The elevation is established to be 1,047 feet above
mean sea level while Runway 15-33 is in commission. At a point when Runway
16-34 is constructed and Runway 15-33 is decommissioned, the airport
elevation shall be 1,050 feet above mean sea level.



   AIRPORT HAZARD.  Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs
the air space required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of
aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which
is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.



   COMMISSIONER.  The Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of
Transportation.



   CONFORMING USE.  Any structure, tree or object of natural growth, or
use of land that complies with all the applicable provisions of this chapter
or any amendment to this chapter.



   DWELLING.  Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.



   ESTABLISHED RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN A BUILT UP URBAN AREA
(ERN-BUUA).  An area which, if it existed on or before January 1, 1978 shall
be considered a conforming use that shall not be prohibited.



   HEIGHT.  For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this chapter and shown on the exhibits, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   LANDING AREA.  The area of the airport used for the landing, taking
off or taxiing of aircraft.



   LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL LOT.  A single lot located in an area which is
zoned for single- family or two-family residences and in which the
predominant land use is such type of residences.



   LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE.  A single-family or two-family home.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  Any pre-existing structure, tree, natural growth
or land use which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment hereto.



   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  A runway having an existing or
planned straight-in instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, and for which no precision approach
facilities are planned or indicated on an approved planning document.



   OTHER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY.  A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by jet aircraft or aircraft of more than 12,500 pounds
maximum gross weight; or is 4,900 feet or more in length.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.



   PLANNED.  Refers only to those proposed future airport developments
that are so indicated on a planning document having the approval of the
Federal Aviation Administration, Minnesota Department of Transportation
Office of Aeronautics and the city.



   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS), a Microwave
Landing System (MLS), or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR), a Transponder
Landing System (TLS), or a satellite-based system capable of operating to the
same level of precision guidance provided by the other included systems.
Also, a runway for which a precision instrument approach system is planned
and is so indicated on an approved planning document.



   RUNWAY.  Any existing or planned paved surface or turf covered area of
the airport which is specifically designated and used or planned to be used
for the landing and/or taking off of aircraft.



   SLOPE.  An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic
ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.



   Slope = 3:1 =3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical



   STRUCTURE.  An object constructed or installed by humans, including,
but without limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations and
overhead transmission lines.



   TRAVERSE WAYS.  For the purpose of determining height limits as set
forth in this chapter, shall be increased in height by 17 feet for interstate
highways; 15 feet for all other public roadways; ten feet or the height of
the highest mobile object that would normally traverse the road, whichever is
greater, for private roads; 23 feet for railroads; and for waterways and all
other TRAVERSE WAYS not previously mentioned, an amount equal to the height
of the highest mobile object that would normally traverse it.



   TREE.  Any object of natural growth.



   UTILITY RUNWAY.  A runway that is constructed for, and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and
less; and is less than 4,900 feet in length.



   VISUAL RUNWAY.  A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach
procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an approved planning
document.



   WATER SURFACES.  Has the same meaning as land for the establishment of
protected zones.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.04  AIR SPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONING.



   (A)   Air space zones. In order to carry out the purpose of this
chapter, as set forth above, the following air space zones are hereby
established: Primary Zone, Horizontal Zone, Conical Zone, Approach Zone,
Precision Instrument Approach Zone and Transitional Zone. The locations and
dimensions of these air space zones are as follows and as displayed in
Exhibits B1, B2 and B3, except as provided for in § 154.17(C), at which time
Exhibits C1, C2 and C3 shall illustrate the locations and dimensions of air
space.



      (1)   Primary zone.



         (a)   All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and: extending
200 feet beyond each end of Runway 15-33 until the runway is decommissioned.
At that point, there shall be no primary zone for Runway 15-33; extending 200
feet beyond each end of Runway 16-34; and coinciding with each end of Runway
8-26.



         (b)   The elevation of any point on the primary surface
is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.



         (c)   The width of the primary surface is: 1,000 feet
for Runway 16-34; 500 feet for Runway 15-33 until the runway is
decommissioned. At that point, there shall be no primary zone for Runway
15-33; and 250 feet for Runway 8-26.



      (2)   Horizontal zone. All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary horizontal surface 150 feet above the established airport
elevation or a height of 1,197 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of
the Horizontal Zone is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet from the
center of each end of the primary surface of Runway 16-34 and Runway 15-33
and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. At a point
when Runway 15-33 is decommissioned, there shall be no 10,000 foot arc
associated with Runway 15-33 and the height of the horizontal zone associated
with Runway 16-34 shall be 1,200 feet above mean sea level.



      (3)   Conical zone. All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of
the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000
feet as measured outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface.



      (4)   Approach zone. All that land which lies directly under
an imaginary approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended
centerline at each end of a runway. The inner edge of the approach surface is
at the same width and elevation as, and coincides with, the end of the
primary surface. The approach surface inclines upward and outward at a slope
of: 34:1 for Runway 15-33 until the runway is decommissioned. At that point,
there shall be no approach zone for Runway 15-33; and 20:1 for Runway 8-26.
The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of: 3,500 feet for Runway
15-33 at a distance of 10,000 feet, then continues at the same rate of
divergence to the periphery of the conical surface until the runway is
decommissioned. At that point, there shall be no approach surface for Runway
15-33; and 1,250 feet for Runway 8-26 at a distance of 5,000 feet, then
continues at the same rate of divergence to the periphery of the conical
surface.



      (5)   Precision instrument approach zone. All that land which
lies directly under an imaginary precision instrument approach surface
longitudinally centered on the extended centerline at each end of Runway
16-34, a precision instrument runway. The inner edge of the precision
instrument approach surface is at the same width and elevation as, and
coincides with, the end of the primary surface. The precision instrument
approach surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of 50:1 for a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet expanding uniformly to a width of 4,000
feet, then continues upward and outward for an additional horizontal distance
of 40,000 feet at a slope of 40:1, expanding uniformly to an ultimate width
of 16,000 feet.



      (6)   Transitional zone.



         (a)   All that land which lies directly under an
imaginary surface extending upward and outward at right angles to the runway
centerline and centerline extended at a slope of 7:1 from the sides of the
primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces until they
intersect the horizontal surface or the conical surface.



         (b)   Transitional surfaces for those portions of the
precision instrument approach surface which project through and beyond the
limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured
horizontally from the edge of the precision instrument approach surface and
at right angles to the extended precision instrument runway centerline.



   (B)   Height restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no
structure or tree shall be constructed, altered, maintained or allowed to
grow in any air space zone created in division (A) above so as to project
above any of the imaginary air space surfaces described in division (A)
above. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more
restrictive limitation shall prevail.



   (C)   Boundary limitations. The air space obstruction height zoning
restrictions set forth in this section shall apply for a distance not to
exceed one and one-half miles beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary
and in that portion of an airport hazard area under the approach zone for a
distance not exceeding two miles from the airport boundary.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.05  LAND USE SAFETY ZONING.



   (A)   Safety zone boundaries. In order to carry out the purpose of
this chapter, as set forth above, to restrict those uses which may be
hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the
Granite Falls Municipal Airport, and, furthermore, to limit population and
building density in the runway approach areas, thereby creating sufficient
open space to protect life and property in case of an accident, as
illustrated in Exhibit D1, except as provided for in § 154.17(C), at which
time Exhibit D2 shall illustrate the land use safety zones, there are hereby
created and established the following land use safety zones:



      (1)   Safety Zone A. All land in that portion of the approach
zones of a runway, as defined in § 154.04(A), which extends outward from the
end of the primary surface a distance equal to two-thirds of the planned
length of the runway, which distance shall be: 2,900 feet for Runway 15-33
until the runway is decommissioned. At that point, there shall be no Safety
Zone A for Runway 15-33. 3,667 feet for Runway 16-34; and 1,667 feet for
Runway 8-26;



      (2)   Safety Zone B. All land in that portion of the approach
zones of a runway, as defined in § 154.04(A), which extends outward from
Safety Zone A a distance equal to one-third of the planned length of the
runway, which distance shall be: 1,450 feet for Runway 15-33 until the runway
is decommissioned. At that point there shall be no Safety Zone B for Runway
15-33; 1,833 feet for Runway 16-34; 833 feet for Runway 8-26; and



      (3)   Safety Zone C. All land which is enclosed within the
perimeter of the horizontal zone, as defined in § 154.04(A), and which is
not included in Safety Zone A or Safety Zone B.



      (4)   Exceptions; established residential neighborhoods. There
are no areas designated as established residential neighborhoods in built up
urban areas based upon the status of development existing on January 1, 1978.



   (B)   Use restrictions.



      (1)   General. Subject at all times to the height restrictions
set forth in § 154.04(B), no use shall be made of any land in any of the
safety zones defined in division (A) above which creates or causes
interference with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the
airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the
landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.



      (2)   Zone A. Subject at all times to the height restrictions
set forth in § 154.04(B) and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings,
temporary structures, exposed transmission lines or other similar
above-ground land use structural hazards, and shall be restricted to those
uses which will not create, attract or bring together an



assembly of persons thereon. Permitted uses may include, but are not limited
to, the uses as agriculture (seasonal crops), horticulture, animal husbandry,
raising of livestock, light outdoor recreation (non-spectator), cemeteries
and automobile parking.



      (3)   Zone B. Subject at all times to the height restrictions
set forth in § 154.04(B), and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above, areas designated as Zone B shall be restricted in use
as follows.



         (a)   Each use shall be on a site whose area shall not
be less than three acres.



         (b)   Each use shall not create, attract or bring
together a site population that would exceed 15 times that of the site
acreage.



         (c)   Each site shall have no more than one building
plot upon which any number of structures may be erected.



         (d)   A building plot shall be a single, uniform, and
non-contrived area, whose shape is uncomplicated and whose area shall not
exceed the following minimum ratios with respect to the total site area:



 


Site Area

 

Ratio of Building Site Area to Building Plot Area

 

Max. Site Plot Area (sq. ft.)

 

Population (15 persons/acre)




At least (acres)

 

But Less Than (acres)




3

 

4

 

12:1

 

10,900

 

45




4

 

6

 

10:1

 

17,400

 

60




6

 

10

 

8:1

 

32,600

 

90




10

 

20

 

6:1

 

72,500

 

150




20

 

and up

 

4:1

 

218,000

 

300




 



         (e)   The following uses are specifically prohibited in
Zone B: Churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels, motels,
trailer courts, campgrounds and other places of frequent public or
semi-public assembly.



      (4)   Zone C. Zone C is subject only to height restrictions
set forth in § 154.04(B), and to the general restrictions contained in
division (B)(1) above.



      (5)   Exemptions - established residential neighborhoods.
There are no areas designated as Established Residential Neighborhoods in
built up urban areas based upon the status of development existing on January
1, 1978.



   (C)   Boundary limitations. The land use zoning restrictions set
forth in this section shall apply for a distance not to exceed one mile
beyond the perimeter of the airport boundary and in that portion of an
airport hazard area under the approach zone for a distance not exceeding two
miles from the airport boundary.



   (D)   Boundary assurances. A certified survey prepared by a licensed
land surveyor shall be required to be submitted with a building permit
application for properties that are entirely or partially contained within
Land Use Safety Zones A and B, unless the Zoning Administrator determines the
proposed building site is clearly outside the Safety Zones. For any location
within the air space jurisdiction of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator
may require a survey that City Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance shows the
elevation of a proposed structure will conform to the air space requirements
of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.06  AIRPORT MAPS.



   The several zones herein established are shown in Exhibits B1 Airspace
(Runways 15-33, 16-34 and 8-26), 320 B2 Airspace (Runways 15-33, 16-34 &
8-26) South Approach, B3 - Airspace (Runways 15-33, 16-34 and 321 8-26) North
Approach, CI Airspace (Runways 16-34 & 8-26), C2 Airspace (Runways 16-34 and
8-26) - 322 South Approach, C3 (Runways 16-34 & 8-26) North Approach, D1 Land
Use Safety Zones (Runways 15-323 33, 16-34 & 8-26), and D2 Land Use Safety
Zones (Runways 16-34 and 8-26) consisting of eight sheets, and have been
prepared by Bolton and Menk, Inc., and dated 4/26/11, attached hereto and
made a part hereof, which together with the amendments thereto as may from
time to time be made, and all notations, references, elevations, data, zone
boundaries and other information thereon, shall be and the same is hereby
adopted as part of this chapter. Refer to the local land use authority for
underlying land use and zoning designations, as well as § 154.15 for
guidance on conflicts between regulations.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.07  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Regulations are not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by
this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other
changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere
with the continuance of any nonconforming use.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction
or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two years thereof.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.08  PERMITS.



   (A)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in divisions
(A)(1) and (A)(2) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land
and no structure shall be erected, altered or otherwise established in any
zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted by the Zoning Administrator, hereinafter, provided for. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If the determination is in the affirmative,
the permit shall be granted.



      (1)   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than
75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the
horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond
a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, except when
the tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend the height or land use limit prescribed for the
respective zone.



      (2)    Nothing contained in this foregoing exception shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration
or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limitations
established by this chapter as set forth in § 154.04 and the land use
limitations set forth in § 154.05.



   (B)   Existing uses. Before any existing use or structure may be
replaced, substantially altered or repaired, or rebuilt within any zone
established herein, a permit must be secured authorizing the replacement,
change or repair. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed.



      (1)   Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80% torn
down, deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow
the structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise
deviate from the zoning regulations.



      (2)   Whether application is made for a permit under this
division (C) or not, the Zoning Administrator may order the owner of the
abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure, at his or her own
expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct or equip the same in the manner
necessary to conform to the provisions of this chapter. In the event the
owner of the nonconforming structure shall neglect or refuse to comply with
the order for ten days after receipt of written notice of the order, the
Zoning Administrator may, by appropriate legal action, proceed to have the
abandoned or partially destroyed nonconforming structure lowered, removed,
reconstructed or equipped and assess the cost and expense thereof against the
land on which the structure is or was located.



      (3)   Unless such an assessment is paid within 90 days from
the service of notice thereof on the owner of the land, the sum shall bear
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date the cost and expense is
incurred until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as are general
taxes.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.09  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, permit the growth of any tree or use his or her property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter may apply to the
Board of Adjustment, hereinafter provided for, for a variance from the
regulations.



   (B)   If the Board of Adjustment fails to grant or deny the variance
within the time frame established within M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended
from time to time, the variance shall be deemed to be granted by the Board.



   (C)   When the variance is granted by reason of the failure of the
Board to act on the variance, the person receiving the variance shall notify
the Board and the Commissioner, by certified mail, that the variance has been
granted.



   (D)   The applicant shall include a copy of the original application
for the variance with this notice to the Commissioner.



   (E)   The variance shall be effective 60 days after this notice is
received by the Commissioner subject to any action taken by the Commissioner
pursuant to M.S. § 360.063(6)(a), as it may be amended from time to time.



   (F)   The variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a
literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, and relief granted would not be
contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in
accordance with the spirit of this chapter provided any variance so allowed
may be subject to any reasonable conditions that the Board or Commissioner
may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.



   (G)   The Zoning Administrator shall forward the request to the
Minnesota Department of Transportation Office of Aeronautics for review and
comment prior to consideration of the request by the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.10  HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.



   (A)   Nonconforming uses. The owner of any nonconforming structure
or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon of the markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by
the Zoning Administrator, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the
vicinity of the airport the presence of the airport hazards. The markers and
lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city.



   (B)   Permits and variances. Any permit or variance deemed advisable
to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the
circumstances, and granted by the Zoning Administrator or Board, shall
require the owner of the structure or tree in question, at his or her own
expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights as
may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.11  AIRPORT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Zoning Administrator to
administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.



   (B)   Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the
City Zoning Administrator upon a form furnished by them.



   (C)   Permit applications shall be promptly considered and granted
or denied by them in accordance with the regulations prescribed herein or as
provided for within M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Variance applications shall be forthwith transmitted by the
City Zoning Administrator to the Board of Adjustment for action as
hereinafter provided for.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.12  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Establishment. The City Board of Adjustment, which is also the
City Planning Commission, shall serve as the Board of Adjustment for the City
Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   Powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the
following powers:



      (1)   Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the administrator in the enforcement of
this chapter;



      (2)   Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Board of Adjustment under the regulations may be
required to pass; and



      (3)   Hear and decide specific variances.



   (C)   Procedures.



      (1)   A request for a variance or an appeal to the Zoning
Administrator’s ruling shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall forward the request to the Minnesota Department of
Transportation Office of Aeronautics for review and comment prior to
consideration of the request by the Board of Adjustment.



      (2)   Rules governing the Board of Adjustment shall be
consistent with those established by the body serving as the Board of
Adjustment and the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Zoning Administrator or
Chairperson and at other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The
Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and County Recorder’s
Office and shall be a public record.



      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of
facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its
legal conclusions from the facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any
order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.13  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision
of the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of this chapter
may appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The appeals may also be made by any
governing body of a municipality, county or airport zoning board, which is of
the opinion that a decision of the Zoning Administrator is an improper
application of this chapter as it concerns the governing body or board.



   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be commenced within 30 days of the
Zoning Administrator’s decision, by filing with the Zoning Administrator a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator
shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. In
addition, any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decisions of
the Zoning Administrator made in his or her administration of this chapter
who desires to appeal the decision shall submit an application for a
variance, by certified mail, to the Zoning Administrator in the manner set
forth in M.S. § 360.068(2), as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board
of Adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings
shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to
the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make the order,
requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the
circumstances, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Zoning
Administrator.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.14  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment, or any governing body of a municipality, county
or airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that a decision of the Board
of Adjustment is illegal may present to the District Court of Yellow Medicine
or Chippewa County a verified petition setting forth that the decision or
action is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality.



   (B)   The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days
after the decision is filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment. The
petitioner must exhaust the remedies provided in this chapter before availing
himself or herself of the right to petition a court as provided by this
section.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.15  CONFLICTS.



   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable
to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of
structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent
limitation or regulation govern and prevail.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.16  ZONING MAP ADOPTED.



   The zoning maps of this chapter are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



§ 154.17  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   In any case in which the provision of this chapter, although
generally reasonable, is held by a court to interfere with the use or
enjoyment of a particular structure or parcel of land to such an extent, or
to be so onerous in their application to such a structure or parcel of land,
as to constitute a taking or deprivation of that property in violation of the
constitution of this state or the constitution of the United States, the
holding shall not affect the application of this chapter as to other
structures and parcels of land, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be severable.



   (B)   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by
the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall not affect
the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the
parts so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



   (C)   At a point when Runway 16-34 is commissioned and Runway 15-33
is decommissioned, the city, as the airport sponsor, shall pass a resolution
officially recognizing that Runway 15-33 has been decommissioned. The
resolution shall articulate that the regulations associated with the runway
shall no longer be in effect. A copy of the approved resolution shall be
filed with the Commissioner through the Office of Aeronautics, State of
Minnesota and the County Recorder’s Office, Yellow Medicine and Chippewa
Counties, Minnesota.



(Ord. passed 1-4-2012)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   155.01   General provisions



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   District use regulations



   155.04   A Agriculture



   155.05   R-1 Low Density Residence



   155.06   R-2 Medium Density Residence



   155.07   R-M Multiple Dwelling Residence District



   155.08   C-1 Highway/Auto Commerce



   155.09   C-2 Downtown Commerce



   155.10   I-1 Limited Industry



   155.11   I-2 General Industry



   155.12   Minnesota River Overlay District (Scenic River Overlay)



   155.13   District lot regulations



   155.14   Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses



   155.15   Nonconforming uses and structures



   155.16   Television, radio and communication antennas



   155.17   Bed and breakfast inns



   155.18   Opt-out of M.S.§ 462.3593




Special Regulations




   155.30   Residual features



   155.31   Glare



   155.32   Refuse



   155.33   Landscaping



   155.34   Drainage



   155.35   Farm operations



   155.36   Dwelling below ground level



   155.37   Signs



   155.38   Planned residential development



   155.39   Setback from highways



   155.40   Conservation of natural features and amenities



   155.41   Off-street parking requirements



   155.42   Off-street loading and unloading requirements




Administration and Enforcement




   155.55   Zoning Officer



   155.56   Building permit



   155.57   Variances



   155.58   Special use permits



   155.59   Amendments




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 155.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The basic purpose of this chapter is to ensure public
health, safety and general welfare in accordance with the adopted development
goals, plans and policies as stated in the Proposed Comprehensive Plan.
Toward this end, this chapter shall divide the geographic area within its
jurisdiction into use districts and shall establish regulations pertaining to
the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
structures and land within the area.



   (B)   Geographic jurisdiction. The geographic jurisdiction of this
chapter shall be the entire area within the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and
general welfare.



   (D)   Application. Except as herein provided, no building or land
within the city shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part
thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with
applicable regulations herein specified.



   (E)   Essential services exemption. Essential services and
structures such as fire hydrants, utility poles, and substations shall be
exempted from the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   Zoning districts. The city is hereby divided into the
following use districts:



      (1)   A Agriculture;



      (2)   R-1 Low Density Residence;



      (3)   R-2   Medium Density Residence;



      (4)   C-1   Highway/Auto Commerce;



      (5)   C-2   Downtown Commerce;



      (6)   I-1 Limited Industry;



      (7)   I-2 General Industry;



      (8)   R-M Multiple Dwelling Residence;



      (9)   FM Floodway; and



      (10)   FF Flood Fringe.



   (G)   Zoning map. The location and boundaries of the above use
districts are as shown on the zoning districts map, which is incorporated as
a part of this chapter.



   (H)   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. The
boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances
on the official zoning districts map. Where interpretation is needed as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the official
zoning districts map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict
between map boundary and actual field conditions, the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall make the necessary interpretation. Where interpretation is
required within the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall make the necessary interpretation based on
elevations on the applicable water surface profile. The person contesting the
location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present his or her case to the Board and to submit technical evidence if he
or she so desires.



   (I)   Annexed territory. Any land which may be annexed to the city
shall be placed in the A Agriculture District until special action of the
Council shall definitely assign the land to another district.



(2003 Code, § 9.01)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.  A use or building subordinate to the
principal use of the land or a building on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the principal use or structure. The accessory uses
or structures are permitted only when auxiliary to a principal use or
structure as permitted in this chapter. An accessory use or structure may not
exist as principal use or structure in their own stead. Any permitted
accessory structure shall have an architectural design, roof, pitch or lack
of it, roof overhang, or lack of it, and exterior material and color similar
to and consistent with the principal structure, whether attached to or
detached from the principal structure. The structure shall not be primarily
made of metal. A detached residential garage shall not be of a pole barn type
construction. No ACCESSORY BUILDING shall be constructed on any lot prior to
the time of construction of the principal building to which it is its
accessory. With the exception of agricultural buildings, no ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS shall exceed the height of the principal building, be nearer the
front lot line than is the principal building of the lot, or fail to
otherwise comply with any other setback or side yard restrictions applicable
to any other structures on the premises. Detached ACCESSORY BUILDINGS shall
not exceed 20 feet in height or the height of the principal structure,
whichever is greater. When constructed in a residential area, accessory
buildings shall be constructed in a manner and arranged so as to conform with
and maintain the residential character of the neighborhood. For single-family
homes, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS include garages and utility buildings, provided
they shall not exceed 25% of the rear or side yard wheresoever located.
Residential accessory buildings may not be used to carry on commercial
activities, other than lawfully permitted home occupations, or store
commercial vehicles which exceed a gross weight of 9,000 pounds. There shall
be no more than two accessory buildings in addition to one garage, whether
attached or detached, per residence or lot which shall be considered the area
upon which the residence is located, regardless of number of lots indicated
by plat or tax parcel. Notwithstanding that the language hereinabove
authorizes ACCESSORY BUILDINGS having an area greater than 1,000 square feet,
the accessory buildings authorized in addition to the garage shall not exceed
the following areas: 1,000 square feet for the first accessory building, and
1,400 square feet for the second accessory building. Variances shall not be
granted so as to allow ACCESSORY BUILDINGS to occupy more than 25% of the
rear or side yard wheresoever located.



   AGRICULTURE.  The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry,
horticulture and gardening, including the keeping or raising of domestic
animals or fowl.



   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING.  A building so constructed or so located on a
lot that it does not comply with the building requirements or with the
minimum lot requirements of the district within which it is located.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A non-accessory building in which the primary
use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.



   COMMERCE, RETAIL SERVICE.  An enterprise that involves the offering of
a service or entertainment to the general public for compensation.



   COMMERCE, RETAIL TRADE.  An enterprise that involves the offering of a
product to the general public for compensation.



   DWELLING.  A building, or portion thereof, designed or used
predominantly for residential occupancy, including one-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels,
motels, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes or mobile homes.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED.  One which is joined to another dwelling or
building at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.



   DWELLING, DETACHED.  One which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT BUILDING).  A building or portion
thereof containing three or more dwelling units but not including a motel,
hotel or rooming house.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY.  A residential structure containing one dwelling
unit only.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX).  A residential structure containing two
dwelling units only.



   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms containing complete kitchen
facilities, permanently installed, which are arranged, designed, used or
intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family and for not
more than an aggregate of two roomers or boarders.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT.  A dwelling unit with one primary room which doubles
as a living room, dining room and bedroom.



   BILLBOARD.  An advertising sign located off the premises where the
advertised product is sold or offered. It is usually, but not necessarily,
owned by an advertising company.



   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT.  A method of determining the location of
encroachment lines so that the hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each
side of a stream are reduced by an equal amount calculating the increases in
flood stages due to floodplain encroachments.



   FAMILY.  One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or
a group of not more than five persons not so related, maintaining a common
household in a dwelling unit.



   FLOOD.  A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in
inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  The average frequency, statistically determined, for
which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled
or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.



   FLOODPLAIN.  The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or
hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.



   FLOOD PROOFING.  A combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the regional flood.



   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two
buildings. In particular, FLOOR AREA shall include:



      (1)   Basement space if at least one-half of the basement
story is above established curb level, or where the curb level has not been
established, above the average level of the finished grade;



      (2)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;



      (3)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the
structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half feet, except equipment open or
enclosed, located on the roof, i.e., bulk needs, water tanks and cooling
towers;



      (4)   Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds
seven and one-half feet;



      (5)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;



      (6)   Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways; and



      (7)   Accessory uses, other than floor space devoted
exclusively to accessory off-street parking or loading.



   GARAGE.  When used with respect to a private residence, means a garage
used only for the storage of power-driven vehicles and which is erected as an
accessory building as herein defined.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  An occupation carried on by the occupant of a
dwelling in a residential district as a secondary use including, but not
limited to, such occupations as dressmaking and alterations and artist’s
studio.



   INDUSTRY.  An enterprise which involves the production, processing or
storage of materials, goods or products.



   LOT.  A piece, parcel or plot of land intended for building
development or as a unit for transfer of ownership.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of the intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side
and rear lot lines, measured within the lot boundaries.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a
lot measured at the building setback line.



   MATERIAL, DURABLE.  As pertaining to ground surfacing: a hard surfaced
material such as concrete or asphalt, but not including gravel or crushed
rock.



   MOBILE HOME.  As defined in the Chapter 152.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across
or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area,
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either
in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the water, or that
is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the
damage of life or property.



   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE.  A suitable surfaced and permanently
maintained area off the public street right-of-way, either within or outside
of a building, of sufficient size to store one standard automobile, but in no
event less than 200 square feet, exclusive of passageways, driveways or other
means of circulation or access.



   PARTICULATE MATTER.  Dust, smoke or any other form of air-borne
pollution in the form of minute separate particles.



   PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.  A tract of land containing not less
than two acres and which contains or will contain two or more principal
buildings, developed or to be developed under unified ownership or control,
the development of which is unique and of a substantially different character
than that of the surrounding areas.



   REACH.  A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or human-made
obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two
consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.



   REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  A point not less than one foot
above the water surface profile associated with the regional flood, plus any
increases in flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain.
It is elevation to which uses regulated by the flood provisions of this
chapter are required to be elevated or flood proofed.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between a building and the
street or lot line, (unless specifically related to the street centerline),
disregarding steps.



   SIGN.  Any device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but
not including any flag, badge or insignia of any government or governmental
agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or
similar organization. The device may be either stationary or movable.



   SIGN, FLASHING.  Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times
when the sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving,
illuminated sign shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.



   STREET, ARTERIAL.  A street which provides for the movement of
relatively heavy traffic, to, from or within the city. It has a secondary
function of providing access to abutting land. An ARTERIAL STREET system is
designated on the City Comprehensive Plan.



   STREET, LOCAL.  A street of little or no continuity, designed to
provide access to abutting property and ideally leading into collector
streets.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
mobile homes and other similar items.



   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation uses.



   TWIN HOME.  As defined in the R-1 Low Density Residence District.



   USE.  The purpose of activity for which the land or building thereon
is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.



   USE, ACCESSORY.  A use subordinate to the principal use or building on
the same lot and customarily incidental thereto. See ACCESSORY BUILDING OR
USE for greater detail as to definition).



   USE, INCOMPATIBLE.  A use which is incapable of direct association
with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruent or
discordant.



   USE, NONCONFORMING.  Any lawfully established use of a building or
premise which on the effective date of this chapter does not comply with the
use regulations of the zoning district in which the building or premises is
located.



   USE, PERMITTED.  A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and performance standards, if any, of the district.



   USE, PRINCIPAL.  The main use of land and buildings as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.



   USE, SPECIAL.  A use, either public or private, which, because of the
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district. After due consideration in each case, of the impact of
the use upon neighboring land, and of the public need for the particular use
at the particular location, the SPECIAL USE may or may not be granted.



   YARD.  An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the lowest
level to the sky, except as hereinafter permitted. A YARD extends along a lot
line and at right angles to the lot lines to a depth or width specified in
the yard regulations for the district in which the lot is located.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines.



   YARD, REAR.  The portion of the yard on the same lot with the
buildings between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot
for the full width of the lot.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
and rear yards.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  An area or areas for which the regulations and
requirements governing use, lot and bulk or buildings and premises are
uniform.



   ZONING MAP.  A map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning
districts of the city which map is a part of this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 9.02)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977;
Ord. 80-5, passed 5-9-1980; Ord. 59, passed 4-19-1996; Ord. 118, passed
9-15-2003; Ord. 191, passed 10-1-2018)



§ 155.03  DISTRICT USE REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful to use or permit the use of any buildings or premises
within the city for any purpose other than as listed in the following
sections.



(2003 Code, § 9.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.04  A AGRICULTURE.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The intent of this section in establishing an
Agricultural District is to allow maximum freedom of operation for
agricultural uses, and to protect the uses from untimely encroachment by
potential conflicting uses.



      (2)   It is also the intent to protect the natural amenities
of the city area from harmful exploitation.



   (B)   Uses permitted.



      (1)   Farmsteads and agricultural operations including
residences of the farm owners, or tenants and their immediate families,
subject to any specific reference herein;



      (2)   One family non-farm dwellings including the keeping of
animals such as horses, provided the dwellings are located on soils that are
suitable for the use of septic tanks;



      (3)   Public parks and other recreational uses of a
non-commercial nature;



      (4)   Cemeteries;



      (5)   The renting of no more than one apartment or two rooms
for lodging purposes in a one-family residence;



      (6)   Customary home occupations, provided that:



         (a)   Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
residence is used for this purpose; and



         (b)   Only articles made or originating on the premises
shall be sold on the premises.



      (7)   Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing
principal uses, such as private garages, screen houses, signs and play
equipment.



   (C)   Uses by special permit.



      (1)   Recreation facilities of a commercial or semi-public
nature such as golf courses, pistol and rifle ranges, sportsmen’s clubs and
camping areas;



      (2)   Nurseries and greenhouses;



      (3)   Structures for the storage of farm crop products such as
grain and corn;



      (4)   Kennels and veterinary establishments;



      (5)   Roadside stands for the sale of farm products; and



      (6)   Other uses similar in nature to the above uses and
which, in the opinion of the Council, will not be detrimental to the
integrity of the Agriculture District.



(2003 Code, § 9.11)



§ 155.05  R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENCE.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section in establishing a Low
Density Residence District is to provide for the normal outward residential
expansion of the city according to current standards of development, and to
protect the desired quiet living environment from encroachment from potential
conflicting uses.



   (B)   Uses permitted.



      (1)   One- and two-family dwellings;



      (2)   Farmsteads and agricultural operations including
residences of the farm owners or tenants and their immediate families,
subject to any specific reference herein;



      (3)   Public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and other
recreational uses of a non-commercial nature;



      (4)   Churches and public and parochial schools;



      (5)   The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging
purposes only, and for not more than two roomers in a one-family dwelling;



      (6)   Customary home occupations, provided that:



         (a)   Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
residence is used for this purpose;



         (b)   Only articles made or originating on the premises
shall be sold on the premises, unless the articles are incidental to a
permitted commercial service;



         (c)   No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to
be visible from any street;



         (d)   No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
used if the operation of the equipment interferes with the desired quiet
residential environment of the neighborhood; and



         (e)   Evidence of the home occupation shall not be
visible from the street except by way of a sign not larger than two feet by
two feet in area and there shall be no outside storage or sales of supplies,
equipment or maintenance items associated with or used in conjunction with
the home extended business/home occupation.



      (7)   Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing
principal uses such as private garages, screen houses, signs and play
equipment; and



      (8)   Twin homes, which shall be defined for purposes of this
chapter as two-family dwellings wherein each separate dwelling unit may be
owned by different parties than the owners of the other dwelling unit;
provided, the use of twin homes shall comply with all other requirements of
this chapter for two-family dwellings, together with the following minimum
standards which shall control in the event of inconsistency with the other
requirements under this chapter, to-wit:



         (a)   The dwelling shall have separate utility service
lines;



         (b)   The owners shall execute and comply with the terms
of a common maintenance agreement which shall provide for, among other
things, uniformity of exterior appearance of the dwelling;



         (c)   Proper separation or partition of units exist as
provided by the State Building Code;



         (d)   The dwellings comply with all yard regulations for
single- and two-family dwellings contained elsewhere in this chapter, except
that no side yard shall be required between the two-dwelling units which
constitute a twin home;



         (e)   The two-dwelling units constituting a twin home
shall not exceed a height of two stories; and



         (f)   No unit shall be eligible under this chapter as a
twin home unless the division between the two dwelling units constituting the
twin home occurs along the vertical plane between the two units.



   (C)   Uses by special permit.



      (1)   Fire station, library, hospital, nursing home, old age
home, rest home, cemetery and similar uses of a public service nature;



      (2)   Nurseries and greenhouses;



      (3)   Neighborhood grocery stores; and



      (4)   Non-owner occupied daycare facilities, subject to any
and all other state statute, rule, regulation or applicable city code, rule
or regulation.



(2003 Code, § 9.12)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 80-5, passed 5-9-1980;
Ord. 68, passed 9-20-1996; Ord. 116, passed 7-7-2003; Ord. 148, passed
11-3-2008)



§ 155.06  R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section in establishing a Medium
Density Residence District is to protect those residential areas within the
city that were developed in most part prior to World War II, from
encroachment from potential conflicting uses, and to provide for future
residential and related development consistent with proper existing
development and with minimum standards for the provision of health, light,
air and visual appeal.



   (B)   Uses permitted. Same as permitted in the R-1 Low Density
Residence District.



   (C)   Uses by special permit.



      (1)   Multiple-family dwellings;



      (2)   Mobile home courts, subject to any specific reference
herein;



      (3)   Fire station, library, hospital, nursing home, old age
home, rest home, cemetery and similar uses of a public service nature;



      (4)   Nurseries and greenhouses;



      (5)   Neighborhood grocery stores;



      (6)   Townhouses/condominiums;



      (7)   Non-owner occupied daycare facilities, subject to any
and all other state statute, rule, regulation or applicable city code rule or
regulation; and



      (8)   Fitness center, provided that the maximum occupancy of
the same at any one time shall not exceed 49, nor shall the same occupy more
than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence. For purposes of this
division (C)(8), fitness centers shall be defined as a business that provides
strength machine and cardiovascular exercise stations within a circuit
training program, usually for the benefit of its membership, excluding any
and all group classes, hot tubs, saunas and competitive sports facilities.



   (D)   Interim use permits.



      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 462.3597, as the
same may be amended and supplemented from time to time, interim or special
use permits may be issued as determined by the Council consistent with the
provisions of the statute(s) and other applicable provisions of the city code
as provided herein and elsewhere.



      (2)   Criteria for consideration in granting or denying
requests for conditional use permit and interim use permits: the City Council
shall by separate resolution, as the same be amended from time to time,
establish criteria to be considered in the issuance or denial of issuance of
conditional use permits and interim use permits. A copy of the resolution
shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours of the city.



(2003 Code, § 9.13)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 68, passed 9-20-1996;
Ord. 89, passed 2-11-2000; Ord. 141, passed 8-22-2007)



§ 155.07  R-M MULTIPLE DWELLING RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section in establishing a Multiple
Dwelling Residence District is to provide for future residential and related
development consistent with proper minimum standards for the provision of
health, air, light and visual appeal.



   (B)   Uses permitted. In the R-M Residence District, no building
structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall hereafter
be erected, structurally altered or converted, or enlarged unless otherwise
provided for herein, except or one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   All uses permitted in the R-1 District, provided that
those uses comply with all use heights, lot areas and yard regulations of the
R-M Residence District;



      (2)   Multiple dwellings;



      (3)   Group and/or row-houses;



      (4)   Boarding and lodging houses, not including the conduct
of any business other than the convenience of the guests;



      (5)   One- and two-family dwellings;



      (6)   Farmsteads and agricultural operations including
residences of the farm owners or tenants and their immediate families,
subject to § 155.35;



      (7)   Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary
or philanthropic nature;



      (8)   Fraternities, sororities, private clubs and lodges
excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried
on as a business;



      (9)   The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging
purposes only and not more than two roomers in a one-family dwelling;



      (10)   Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing
principal uses such as private garages, screen houses, signs and play
equipment; and/or



      (11)   Customary home occupations as permitted in the R-1 Low
Density Residence District. (Commission and/or Council may wish to prohibit
this use.)



   (C)   Uses by special permit.



      (1)   Mobile home court, subject to Chapter 152; and



      (2)   Fire stations, library, hospital, nursing home, old age
home, rest home, cemetery and other uses of a public nature.



(2003 Code, § 9.14)  (Ord. 74-3, passed 6-7-1974)



§ 155.08  C-1 HIGHWAY/AUTO COMMERCE.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section in establishing a
Highway/Auto Commerce District is to provide appropriate areas for commercial
establishments which are oriented to the motoring public or which require
large sites for off-street parking or display of merchandise.



   (B)   Uses permitted.



      (1)   Commercial establishments which are oriented to the
motorist such as eating places, automobile service stations, auto repair
shops, car washes, motels and in addition thereto, TV repair shops, paint
stores, grocery stores, barber shops, laundromats, service-related offices
such as real estate offices, on and off sale liquor establishments, elevator
services, bait shops, nurseries, plumbing shops, antique shops, drug stores,
photo finishing establishments, sporting goods stores and discount stores; and



      (2)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal
uses such as off-street parking and signs.



   (C)   Uses by special permit.



      (1)   Commercial establishments requiring large sites for
off-street parking or for outdoor display and sale, such as farm implement
sales, mobile home sales and building material sales; and



      (2)   Churches.



(2003 Code, § 9.20)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 86-11, passed 12-4-1986;
Ord. 128, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 162, passed 5-21-2012)



§ 155.09  C-2 DOWNTOWN COMMERCE.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section in establishing a Downtown
Commerce District is in recognition of the existing downtown commercial
development and the need for its future expansion, rehabilitation and
redevelopment.



   (B)   Uses permitted.



      (1)   Commercial establishments including, but not limited to,
the following:



         (a)   Retail establishments such as grocery, hardware,
drug, clothing and furniture stores; eating and drinking places; auto
dealers; and automobile service stations;



         (b)   Personal services such as laundry, barber, shoe
repair and photography studio;



         (c)   Professional services such as medical and dental
clinic and attorney’s offices;



         (d)   Repair services such as automobile, jewelry and
radio and television repair shops;



         (e)   Entertainment and amusement services such as
motion picture theater and bowling alley;



         (f)   Lodging services such as hotel and motel;



         (g)   Finance, insurance and real estate services;



         (h)   Manufacturing of clothing apparel and other
fabrics, manufacturing of wood furniture and fixtures, and machining of small
parts for operation of general machine shop; and



         (i)   Brew or tap rooms, known as “brew pubs”
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.301(b), and small brewer establishments, also known
as “craft brew”, and also known as brew on premises stores, pursuant to
M.S. § 340A.301(6)(d).



      (2)   Public and semi-public buildings such as post office,
fire station and City Hall;



      (3)   Private clubs;



      (4)   Apartments provided they are located above the first
floor level;



      (5)   Automobile parking lots; and



      (6)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal
uses such as off-street parking and loading and unloading areas, signs,
storage of merchandise and wholesaling and manufacturing when incidental to a
permitted use.



   (C)   Uses by special permit. None.



(2003 Code, § 9.21)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 86-9, passed 11-14-1986;
Ord. 168, passed 6-5-2014)



§ 155.10  I-1 LIMITED INDUSTRY.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section in establishing a Limited
Industry District is in recognition of existing “clean and quiet”
industrial development within the community and of the desirability of
reserving additional land for possible new, expanded or relocated industries
of a similar nature. It is intended that land zoned for limited industry
would be minimized. Additionally, this district features greater building
setbacks and side yards than required in the I-2 District.



   (B)   Uses permitted.



      (1)   All fabricating, manufacturing, production or processing
of materials, goods and products provided the activity shall be undertaken
within completely enclosed buildings, and provided further that any outdoor
storage of raw materials or finished products shall be effectively screened
by natural or human-made means from adjacent properties and public streets
and highways;



      (2)   Wholesaling, all commodities except live animals; and



      (3)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal
uses.



   (C)   Uses by special permit. Storage of flammable and explosive
material consistent with the provisions of Chapter 94 of this city code.



(2003 Code, § 9.30)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 21, passed 12-28-1990)



§ 155.11  I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRY.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The intent of this section in establishing a General
Industry District is in recognition of existing “heavy” industrial
development within the community and of the desirability of reserving
additional land for possible new, expanded or relocated industries of a
similar nature.



      (2)   It is intended that land zoned for general industry
would be located such that conflict with incompatible uses would be minimized.



   (B)   Uses permitted.



      (1)   All fabricating, manufacturing, processing, production,
excavation or storage of materials, goods and products;



      (2)   Wholesaling; and



      (3)   Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal
uses.



   (C)   Uses by special permit. Storage of flammable and explosive
material consistent with the provisions of Chapter 94.



(2003 Code, § 9.31)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 21, passed 12-28-1990)



§ 155.12  MINNESOTA RIVER OVERLAY DISTRICT (SCENIC RIVER OVERLAY).



   (A)   Policy. The city hereby establishes a district to provide for
the preservation and protection of the Minnesota River within the city, as
required by M.S.§ 103A.208, as it may be amended from time to time, and
Minn. Rules 1983 Parts 6105.0010 - .0250, Parts 6120.2500 - .3900 and Parts
6105.1200 - .1290.



   (B)   District application. The district applies to the shoreland
area within the designated Minnesota River Land Use District as identified in
Minn. Rules 1983 Part 6105.1290. The district is shown on the zoning map.
Where the district’s boundaries are 300 feet from the normal high water
mark, they will be measured from the top of the natural bank or retaining
walls constructed along the river.



   (C)   Interpretation. The Minnesota River Overlay District applies
to any underlying zoning district. Where provisions of any statute, city code
provision or regulation impose greater restrictions than those required in
this district, the statute, city code provision or regulation is controlling.
Where definitions of any of the terms of this district are in dispute, the
definitions of Minn. Rules 1983 Part 6120.2500 and Part 6105.0040 are
controlling.



   (D)   Uses. All permitted uses, conditional uses and prohibited uses
of the underlying district shall apply within the Minnesota River Overlay
District.



   (E)   District provisions. The following provisions apply within the
Minnesota River Overlay District where they are more restrictive than those
of the underlying district:



      (1)   Dimensional requirements.



 

 

Sewered Areas




Riparian Lots

 

Non-Riparian Lots





1) Lot size (in square feet)
 

20,000

 

15,000



2) Lot width at building line
 

75 feet

 

N/A



3) Building setback from ordinary high water mark*
 

75 feet

 

75 feet



4) Maximum total area of all impervious surfaces on each lot (includes all
structures, surfaced roads, parking lots and other surfaced areas)
 

30%

 

30%



5) Impervious surface setback from ordinary high water mark (Applies to all
surfaced roads or parking lots)
 

50 feet

 

50 feet



*Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site,
structural setbacks may be altered to take setbacks of existing structures
into account, and provide uniformity.




 



      (2)   Substandard lots. Lots of record on the effective date
of this section which do not meet the applicable size or width requirements
can be allowed as building sites provided that all the sanitary and
dimensional standards are complied with, as much as is reasonably
practicable, and the lot was in separate ownership on the effective date of
this section. Contiguous lots under single ownership must be combined to meet
lot width requirements before they can be sold or developed.



      (3)   Vegetative alteration. Between the ordinary high water
mark and the applicable building setback line, cutting of trees over four
inches in diameter at breast height (four and one-half feet) is restricted as
follows.



         (a)   Selective cutting. Selective cutting of trees in
excess of four inches in diameter at breast height is permitted provided that
cutting is spaced in several cutting operations, a continuous tree cover is
maintained and uninterrupted by large openings. In cases where the existing
tree cover has been interrupted by large openings in the past, selective
cutting must maintain a continuous tree cover in the remaining wooded areas.
The above cutting provisions are not meant to prevent:



            1.   The removal of dead, diseased or
insect-infested trees, or of rotten or damaged trees that present safety
hazards; or



            2.   Pruning understory vegetation, shrubs,
plants, bushes, grasses or from harvesting crops, or cutting suppressed trees
or trees less than four inches in diameter at breast height.



         (b)   Clearcutting. Clearcutting of trees larger than
four inches in diameter is prohibited.



      (4)   Grading and filling. Grading and filling in of the
natural topography within the district requires a grading and filling permit
from the Zoning Administrator prior to initiation of any such work, subject
to the following conditions:



         (a)   Grading and filling in of the natural topography
which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall be performed in a
manner which minimizes earthmoving, erosion, tree clearing and the
destruction of natural amenities, and shall be controlled by provisions of
the city code; and



         (b)   Grading and filling in of the natural topography
shall meet the following standards:



            1.   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed
for as short a time as feasible;



            2.   Temporary ground cover, such as sod, is
planted; and



            3.   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment
are employed.



      (5)   Utility crossings. All utility transmission crossings of
lands under the jurisdiction of the city within the district require a
conditional use permit from the city, subject to the standards and criteria
of Minn. Rules 1983 Part 6105.0170.



      (6)   Road crossings. In addition to the permits as may be
required by M.S. § 393.301, as it may be amended from time to time, for the
crossing of public waters, a conditional use permit from the city is required
for any construction or reconstruction of new public roads or existing roads
within the district subject to the standards and criteria of Minn. Rules 1983
Part 6105.0200.



      (7)   Subdivision provisions.



         (a)   Land suitability. No land shall be subdivided
which is determined by the city to be unsuitable by reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate
water supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other features likely to
be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the
proposed subdivision or the community.



         (b)   Inconsistent plats. All plats which are
inconsistent with this section shall be reviewed by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources before approval by the city may be granted. The review
shall require that the proposed plats be received by the Commissioner at
least ten days before a hearing is called by the city for consideration of
approval of a final plat.



      (8)   Planned unit developments. Altered zoning standards for
planned unit developments may be allowed in the district if preliminary plans
are first approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources.



   (F)   Notification and certification requirements.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall send copies of all
notices of hearings, or meetings, and final decisions relating to plats,
variances. City code amendments and conditional use permits affecting any
land within the district, to the appropriate DNR office at least ten days
prior to the hearings and within ten days after the final action. Final
decisions on variances, inconsistent plats and city code amendments are not
effective until certified by the DNR in accordance with Minn. Rules 1983 Part
6105.0230.



      (2)   The following summarizes the permit and certification
process within the Minnesota River Overlay District designated by this
section:



 


Item

 

Action Necessary





Building permits
 
LP


Water supply permits
 
LP


Conditional use permits
 
PH-FD


Amendments to ordinance
 
PH-FD-CC


Amendments to district boundary
 
PH-FD-CC


Inconsistent plats
 
PH-FD-CC


Planned unit developments
 
PH-WA


Variances
 
PH-CC


Plats
 
PH-FD


LP
 
Permit issued by the city in accordance with this section and all other city
code provisions


CC
 
Certification by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to final local
approval


PH
 
Public hearing necessary by the city giving ten days’ notice of the hearing
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources


FD
 
City forwards any decisions to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within
ten days after taking final action


WA
 
The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall submit, after notice of public
hearing and before the city gives preliminary approval, a written review and
approval of the project




 



(2003 Code, § 9.45)  (Ord. 86-3, passed 6-6-1986)



§ 155.13  DISTRICT LOT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Unlawful act. It is unlawful to erect or alter any building
within the city, unless the following minimum lot and yard areas are provided
and maintained in connection with those buildings.



 


District

 

Area (sf)

 

Width (ft)

 

Front (b)

 

Rear

 

Side (c) Interior (total)

 

Side (c) Interior (smallest)

 

St. or Av. Side Corner (k)(1)





A
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




One-family dwellings
 

1 acre (a)

 

150

 

25

 

35

 

30

 

15

 

25



R-1
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




One-family dwellings
 

8,400 (d) over

 

70 (d)

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

12 (f)

 

5 (f)

 

15



Two-family dwellings
 

Varies (g)

 

90

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

20 (f)

 

10 (f)

 

15



Multiple-family dwelling
 

Varies (g)

 

100

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

24

 

12

 

15



Other uses
 

10,000

 

90

 

25

 

15 (h)

 

30

 

15

 

20



R-2
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




One-family dwelling
 

7,000

 

50

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

10 (f)

 

3 (f)

 

7



Two-family dwelling
 

Varies (i)

 

60

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

10 (f)

 

3 (f)

 

7



Multiple-family dwelling
 

Varies (i)

 

75

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

20

 

10

 

12



Other uses
 

8,500

 

75

 

25

 

15 (h)

 

24

 

12

 

15



*One-family dwellings (by variance from Commission or Council)
 

Varies (i)

 

less than 50

 

25

 

35 (e)

 

6(f)

 

3 (f)

 

7



C-1
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




All uses (j)
 

15,000

 

100

 

30

 

20

 

30

 

15

 

20



C-2
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




All uses
 

2,000

 

20

 

None

 

10

 

None

 

None

 

None



I-1
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




All uses (j)
 

15,000

 

100

 

30

 

20

 

24

 

12

 

20



I-2
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




All uses (j)
 

5,000

 

50

 

20

 

10

 

14

 

7

 

10



Footnotes:
 


 


 


 


 


 


 




(a)  A lot area of less than one acre may be permitted if the owner or
developer can show by means of soil percolation tests that a lesser area
would be sufficient for the proper functioning of septic tanks, but in no
case shall a one-family dwelling be built in the A District on a lot less
than one-half acre in size.


(b)  Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different from those
required, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average setback of the
structures, but in no case shall the front yard setback be less than 20 feet.


(c)  Buildings over one and one-half stories in height shall require five
feet for each additional story in addition to the required minimum side yard.


(d)  A one-family dwelling may be erected on a lot in the R-1 District
having less than the minimum required area and width provided the lot existed
by virtue of a recorded plat or deed on the effective date of this chapter;
however, in no event shall a one-family dwelling be erected on a lot less
than 7,000 square feet in area or less than 60 feet in width.


(e)  Detached residential garages shall have a minimum rear yard of five
feet.


(f)  Interior side yards in the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall conform to
normal side yard regulations. Detached residential garages may be located
within three feet of a side lot line and three feet from other buildings on
same lot, provided the garages are located within the required minimum rear
yard.


(g)  8,400 square feet for one dwelling unit plus 2,500 square feet for each
additional efficiency or one bedroom unit, and/or 3,600 square feet for each
additional unit containing two or more bedrooms.


(h)  Rear yard setback is to be set at the time of public hearing subject to
§ 155.57.


(i)  7,000 square feet for one dwelling unit plus 2,500 square feet for each
additional efficiency or one bedroom unit, and/or 2,700 square feet for each
additional unit containing two or more bedrooms.


(j)  In the event the C-1, I-1 or I-2 Districts are located adjacent to a
residential district, a 25-foot “buffer strip” shall be provided between
structures in these districts and the adjacent residence district boundary
line. The “buffer strips” shall be landscaped in an appropriate manner,
and shall contain additional human-made or natural screening if so directed
by the Council.


(k)  Corner lots, except reverse corner lot. The total side yard
requirements for corner lots shall be the sum of the side interior (smallest)
and side corner.


(l)  Reverse corner lots. The front yard requirements for a reverse corner
lot shall be at least 50% of the front yards depth required on the lots in
the rear of the lot or full side corner requirements; whichever is greater,
and no accessory building on the reverse corner lot shall project beyond the
front yard line of the lots back of it; provided, that the regulations shall
not have the effect of reducing the buildable width for a main building to
less than 26 feet or for an accessory building to less than 20 feet for any
lot on record on the effective date of this chapter.




 



   (B)   Minimum lot requirements for R-M District.



 


R-M District

 

Area (sf)

 

Width (ft)

 

Front (ft)

 

Rear (ft)

 

Side Interior (total)

 

Side Interior (smallest)

 

St. or Av. Side CORNER

 

Height (stories)



One-family dwelling
 

7,500 (F-1)

 

70

 

25 (B-1)

 

35 (D-1)

 

12 (C-1)

 

5

 

25 (B-2)

 

2



(small lots/record)
 

(F-4)

 

60

 

25 (“ ”)

 

35 (“ ”)

 

-

 

3

 

25 (“ ”)

 

2



Two-family dwellings
 

12,000 (F-2)

 

90

 

25 (“ ”)

 

35 (“ ”)

 

12 (C-1)

 

5

 

25(“ ”)

 

2



Multiple dwellings
 

varies (F-3)

 

100

 

25 (“ ”)

 

35 (“ ”)

 

12 (A-2)

 

5

 

25 (“ ”)

 

varies (A1, 2)



Other uses
 

10,000 (SBC)

 

90

 

25 (SBC F-4)

 

35 (“ ”)

 

12 (“ ”) (SBC)

 

5 (SBC)

 

25 (SBC)

 

varies




 



   (C)   General information to be used where applicable.



      (1)   “Through lots” shall be prohibited in R-M Districts
(a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets).



      (2)   No “reverse corner lots”, as hereinafter defined,
shall be allowed in the R-M Districts. A reverse corner lot is a corner lot
which does not front on or on which a proposed structure does not front on
the same street with the interior lots on the same side of the block, as
distinguished from the same end of the block.



      (3)   In areas that are not sewered. A lot area of less than
one acre may be permitted if the owner or developer can show by means of
“soil percolation tests” that a lesser area would be sufficient for the
proper functioning of septic tanks, but in no case shall a one-family
dwelling be built in any district on a lot less than one-half acres in size.



      (4)   In the event that C-1, I-1 or I-2 Districts are located
adjacent to a residential district, a 25-foot buffer-strip shall be provided
between these districts and the adjacent residence district boundary lines.
The buffer strip shall be landscaped in an appropriate manner, and shall
contain additional human-made or natural screening if so directed by the
Council.



      (5)   All other regulations of this chapter which are
applicable shall apply to the R-M District.



   (D)   Footnotes.



 



A. Height regulations.


  1. Multiple dwellings shall not exceed six stories or 75 feet in height,
provided further that any building exceeding three stories in height shall
set back from all yard lines required in this section a distance of one foot
for every one foot that the building exceeds the height of 30 feet.


  2. Three-story building shall have a side yard of 15 feet wide on each
side of the building.


  3. Buildings not exceeding two and one-half stories in height shall have
the same side yard requirement as R-1 Low Density Residence District.


B. Front yard regulations.


  1. Front yard regulations shall be the same as R-1 Low Density Residence
District.


  2. There shall be a 25-foot front yard on each street side of a corner
lot. No building or structure shall project beyond the front yard line on
either street.


C. Side yard regulations.


  1. See A-3 above.


  2. See A-2 above.


D. Rear yard regulations. Rear yard regulations shall be the same as R-1 Low
Density Residence District.


E. Special yard regulations.


  1. Any storage garage or accessory building that is not a part of the main
building shall be located not closer than 60 feet to the front lot line and
not closer than five feet to any side or rear lot lines, and not closer than
three to any other structure on the same property.


  2. All minimum required yard areas shall be perpetually maintained.


F. Lot area requirements. Except as hereinafter provided, every dwelling
hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, altered or reconstructed shall be
located on lots containing the following areas:


  1. A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain
an area of not less than 7,500 square feet, and shall be not less than 60
feet wide.


  2. A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an
area of not less than 6,000 square feet per family.


  3. A lot on which there is erected a multiple dwelling shall contain an
area of not less than 10,000 square feet for the first three-family units,
plus 2,000 square feet for each additional family unit in excess of three.


  4. Where a lot has less area or width than is required, and was of record
on the effective date of this section, that lot may be used only for single
family dwelling purposes or any of the other non-dwelling uses permitted in
the district. In no event shall a single-family dwelling be erected on a lot
of less than 7,000 square feet in area or less than 60 feet in width.




 



(2003 Code, § 9.50)  (Ord. 74-3, passed 6-7-1974; Ord. 117, passed
8-4-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.14  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND ADULT USES.



   (A)   Definitions. Subject to the provisions of this section, the
uses defined and authorized herein are specifically limited to the C-1
Highway/Auto Commerce and C-2 Downtown Commerce District. For the purpose of
this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      ADULT USES.  Any of the activities and businesses described
below constitute sexually oriented businesses which are subject to the
regulations of the city code and more specifically to division (B) below.



         ADULT USE - BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent to the body of a patron when the body
is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - BOOKSTORE.  A building or portion of a
building used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture
film if the building or portion of a building is not open to the public
generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor
by reason of age and if a substantial or significant portion of the items are
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - CABARET.  A building or portion of a building
used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if the building or
portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age and if the dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
employee of the establishment and a customer, if the service is distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A parlor which
excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of engaging
in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if the service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A club which excludes
minors by reason of age, and if the club is distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - HOTEL OR MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and where material is
presented which is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB. A parlor or club
which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
massage, if the service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or
portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for
presenting material if the building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, and if the material is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.



         ADULT USE - MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment whose major
business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided
with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to
the customers, and who engage in specified sexual activities or display
specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by the
customers.



         ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or portion
of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
material if the building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age, and if the material is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.



         ADULT USE - NOVELTY BUSINESS.  A business which has as a
principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or
devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.



         ADULT USE - SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by
reason of age, and which provides a steam bath or heating bathing room used
for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



         ADULT USE - STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or
portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or
hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the building or portion
of a building restricts minors by reason of age, and if the service provided
by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ESCORT BUREAU.  Any person who offers to furnish an escort for
financial consideration.



      ESCORT.  Any person who receives financial consideration for
consorting with or escorting another person in any public or private place
within the city.



      CHURCH.  A building or structure, or a group of buildings or
structures which, by design and construction, are primarily intended for the
conducting of organized religious services and associated accessory uses.



      SCHOOL.  A public school as defined by M.S. § 120A.20, as it
may be amended from time to time, or a non-public school, or a non-sectarian,
non-public school as defined in M.S. § 123.932, as it may be amended from
time to time.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



         (a)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the
context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented
acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;
or



         (b)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of
sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;



         (c)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus or masturbation;



         (d)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast;



         (e)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of
whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and
who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of any such persons;



         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal
or anal irrigation.



      YOUTH FACILITY.  A public playground, playground, public
swimming pool, public library or licensed daycare facility.



   (B)   Regulation of sexually oriented businesses and adult uses.



      (1)   Purpose and intent.



         (a)   The regulations of this section have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.



         (b)   It is not the intent nor effect of this section to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.



         (c)   It is the purpose of this section to regulate
sexually oriented businesses and adult uses to promote the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to:



            1.   Prevent additional criminal activity within
the city;



            2.   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and
its consequent adverse effects on real estate values of properties within the
neighborhood;



            3.   Locate sexually oriented businesses away from
residential areas, schools, churches and parks and playgrounds;



            4.   Prevent concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within certain areas of the city; and



            5.   Prevent the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.



      (2)   General provisions. Sexually-oriented businesses or
adult uses as defined herein shall be subject to the following general
provisions.



         (a)   Activities defined as obscene by M.S. § 617.241,
as it may be amended from time to time, are not permitted and are prohibited.



         (b)   Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses,
either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any
building which is also utilized for residential purposes.



         (c)   Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses,
either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any place
which is also used to dispense, consume or sell alcoholic beverages.



         (d)   A sexually oriented business or adult use which
does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an adult
use-principal.



         (e)   Sexually oriented businesses or adult uses
classified as an adult use-principal may not locate or operate within the
city without first obtaining a sexually oriented businesses adult use
principal license as required by Chapter 114 of this code.



      (3)   Adult uses - principal.



         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses classified as adult
use-principal shall be located at least 500 radial feet, as measured in a
straight line from the closest point of the property line of the building
upon which the adult use-principal is located to the property line of:



            1.   Residentially zoned property or residential
uses;



            2.   A licensed daycare center;



            3.   Public or private educational facilities,
including preschools, elementary, junior high or senior high schools;



            4.   A public library;



            5.   A public park;



            6.   Another adult use, principal;



            7.   An on-sale liquor, wine or beer establishment;



            8.   Churches;



            9.   Commercial recreational facilities if the
majority of its customers consist of minors; and



            10.   Specialty schools if the majority of its
students consist of minors.



         (b)   Adult use-principal activities, as defined herein,
shall be classified as one use. Two or more sexually oriented businesses or
adult uses-principal shall not be located in the same building or upon the
same property.



         (c)   Sexually oriented businesses shall adhere to the
following signage regulations:



            1.   Sign messages shall be generic in nature and
shall only identify the type of business or use which is being conducted;



            2.   Shall not contain material classified as
advertising; and



            3.   Shall comply with the requirements of size
and number for the district in which they are located.



         (d)   Adult use-principal activities shall be prohibited
at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other
performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are
permitted.



      (4)   Adult uses - accessory.



         (a)   Adult use-accessory shall:



            1.   Comprise no more than 10% of the floor area
of the establishment in which it is located;



            2.   Comprise no more than 20% of the gross
receipts of the entire business operation; and



            3.   Not involve or include any activity except
the sale or rental of merchandise.



         (b)   Adult use-accessory shall be restricted from and
prohibit access to minors by the physical separation of those items from
areas of general public access. The business owner shall make every
reasonable precaution to limit access to minors.



            1.   Movie rentals. Display areas shall be
restricted from general view and shall be situated in such fashion as to
prohibit access of which is in clear view and under the control of the
persons responsible for the operation.



            2.   Magazines. Publications classified or
qualifying as adult uses shall not be accessible to minors and shall be
covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material
other than the publication title.



            3.   Other use. Adult uses-accessory not
specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this section subject to
the approval of the Council.



      (5)   Nonconforming sexually oriented businesses, adult
use-principal or accessory.



         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses and adult uses which
are classified as legal nonconforming uses may continue in accordance with
the provisions of this section except that any such nonconforming use shall
be terminated and become illegal on and after January 1, 1998. To the extent
possible, the city shall attempt to identify all the uses which become
classified as nonconforming under the provisions of this division (B)(5) and
shall notify the property owners and operators of the uses in writing of the
change in status and the terms and conditions which apply.



         (b)   The owner of any property on which an adult use is
located may apply to the Council for an extension of the termination date.
Any such application shall be in writing and be received by the city no later
than January 1, 1998. Failure to submit a timely extension application shall
constitute a waiver of the right to request an extension.



         (c)   The extension may be granted if the applicant
demonstrates that the amortization period is an unreasonable burden upon the
business and does not allow adequate time to recover a reasonable return upon
the business investment.



         (d)   The applicant shall have the burden of proof to
demonstrate hardship with the established termination date and also the time
required for an extension.



         (e)   In making its decision, the Council may consider
any factor relevant to the issue, including, but not limited to:



            1.   The degree or magnitude of threat to the
public health, safety and general welfare posed by the secondary impacts of
the operation;



            2.   The length of time that the adult use has
been operating;



            3.   The ease by which the property could be
converted to a conforming use;



            4.   The nature and character of the surrounding
neighborhood;



            5.   The value and condition of the improvements
on the property;



            6.   The amount of the applicant’s investment in
the business;



            7.   The amount of investment already realized; and



            8.   The cost of relocating the adult use.



(2003 Code, § 9.52)  (Ord. 76, passed 12-12-1997)



§ 155.15  NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.



   The lawful use of any land or buildings existing on the effective date
of this section, unless extended by approval of a special use permit, may be
continued through repair and maintenance, even if the use does not conform to
the regulations of this chapter, except as provided below.



   (A)   Nonconforming buildings.



      (1)   Alterations. A nonconforming building or structure shall
not be reconstructed or altered to an extent exceeding 25% of its market
value for assessment purposes, or $5,000, whichever is greater, unless the
building or structure is changed to conform with the regulations of this
chapter.



      (2)   Enlargement. A nonconforming building or structure shall
not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless the additions or
enlargements are made so as to bring the building or structure into
conformity with the regulations of this chapter.



      (3)   Restoration. A nonconforming building or structure which
is damaged by fire or other cause to the extent of more than 50% of its
market value shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations
of this chapter.



   (B)   Nonconforming use of building or land.



      (1)   Extension. A nonconforming use of a building may be
extended throughout the building provided no structural alterations are made
therein except as required by other codes or city code provisions, but a
nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or enlarged.



      (2)   Relocation. A nonconforming use shall not be moved to
any part of the parcel of land upon which the same was conducted on the
effective date of this section.



      (3)   Abandonment. A nonconforming use of a building or land
which has been discontinued for a period of one year shall not be
re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the regulations
of this chapter.



      (4)   Nonconforming uses in the Flood Fringe District. If any
nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an
extent of 50% of its market value for assessment purposes, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter;
however, the Board of Adjustment may issue a special use permit for
reconstruction if the structure is located outside of the Floodway District
and, upon reconstruction, is adequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Furthermore, any
addition or alteration to any nonconforming structure which would result in
increasing its flood damage potential shall be protected in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.



(2003 Code, § 9.60)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977;
Ord. 31, passed 5-17-1991; Ord. 106, passed 12-6-2002)



§ 155.16  TELEVISION, RADIO AND COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Purpose, intent and definitions.



      (1)   In order to accommodate the communication needs of the
residents, business and industry while protecting the health, safety and
general welfare of the city, the following regulations are imposed in order
to:



         (a)   Facilitate the managed deployment of wireless
communications facilities (WCFs), television, and radio antenna, for
residents, business and industry of the city;



         (b)   Minimize adverse effects of towers through careful
design and siting standards;



         (c)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower or antenna failure through structural standards and setback
requirements;



         (d)   Encourage the deployment of smaller, less
intrusive WCFs to supplement existing larger WCFs;



         (e)   Encourage the use of wall-mounted panel antennas;



         (f)   Encourage roof-mounted antennas when wall-mounted
antennas will not provide adequate service or are not otherwise feasible;



         (g)   Encourage the location of towers in
non-residential areas in a manner that minimizes the total number of towers
needed throughout the community;



         (h)   Encourage, strongly, the collocation of WCFs on
new and existing sites;



         (i)   Encourage owners and users of antennas and towers
locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact to the
community is minimized;



         (j)   Enhance the ability of wireless communications
service providers to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively, and efficiently;



         (k)   Effectively manage WCFs in the public
right-of-way; and



         (l)   Manage amateur radio facilities, television, and
radio antennas in the city.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles, traffic signals, buildings, and similar
alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with the natural
setting and surrounding structures, and camouflage or conceals the presence
of antennas or towers so as to make them architecturally compatible with the
surrounding area pursuant to this section. This term also includes any
antenna or antenna array attached to an ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. A
stand-alone pole in the public right-of-way that accommodates small cell
wireless facilities is considered an ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE to the
extent it meets the camouflage and concealment standards of this section.



         AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA FACILITY. A facility designed and
used in accordance with an amateur radio station license issued by the U.S.
Federal Communications Commission.



         ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of
collecting or radiating electromagnetic signals including but not limited to
directional antennas such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes and
omni directional antennas, such as whip antennas or any exterior apparatus
designed for telephone, radio, or television communications through the
sending and/or receiving of wireless communications signals.



         BASE STATION.



            1.   A structure or equipment at a fixed location
that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network. BASE STATION does not include or
encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower.
BASE STATION does include, without limitation:



               A.   Equipment associated with wireless
communications services such as private broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services
such as microwave backhaul that, at the time the relevant application is
filed with the city under this section and has been reviewed and approved
under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or
local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the
sole or primary purpose of providing such support; and



               B.   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial
or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplied, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed
antenna systems (“DAS”) and small-cell networks) that, at the time the
relevant application is filed with the city under this section, has been
reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under
another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was
not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.



            2.   BASE STATION does not include any structure
that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this
section does not support or house equipment described in divisions 1.A. and
B. of this definition.



         CAMOUFLAGE, CONCEALMENT, or CAMOUFLAGE DESIGN TECHNIQUES.



            1.   A wireless communication facility (WCF) is
camouflaged or utilizes CAMOUFLAGE DESIGN TECHNIQUES when any measures are
used in the design and siting of a WCF with the intent to minimize or
eliminate the visual impact of such facilities to surrounding uses.



            2.   A WCF site utilizes CAMOUFLAGE DESIGN
TECHNIQUES when it (i) is integrated as an architectural feature of an
existing structure such as a cupola, or (ii) is integrated in an outdoor
fixture such as a flagpole, or (iii) uses a design which mimics and is
consistent with the nearby natural, or architectural features (such as an
artificial tree) or is incorporated into (including without limitation, being
attached to the exterior of such facilities and painted to match it) or
replaces existing permitted facilities (including without limitation, stop
signs or other traffic signs or freestanding light standards) so that the
presence of the WCF is not readily apparent.



         COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain,
modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or
adjacent to an existing wireless support structure.



         ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. Any request for modification
of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of such tower or base station involving:  (i)
collocation of new transmission equipment, (ii) removal of transmission
equipment, or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment.



         ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any tower or base station as
defined in this section, provided that it is existing at the time the
relevant application is filed with the city under this section.



         EXISTING (as applied to a constructed tower or base station
existing). A tower or base station that was reviewed, approved, and lawfully
constructed in accordance with all requirements of applicable law as of the
time it was built. For example, a tower that exists as a legal,
non-conforming use and was lawfully constructed is existing for purposes of
this definition.



         MANAGER.  The Granite Falls City Manager, or his or her
designee.



         MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY or MICRO CELLS.  A small wireless
facility that is no larger than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches
high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches.



         MONOPOLE. A wireless communication facility which consists
of a single unit without supporting members structure, erected on the ground
to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances.



         OTARD ANTENNA.



            1.   An antenna that is designed to receive direct
broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite services,
that is one meter or less in diameter; or



            2.   An antenna that is designed to receive video
programming services via multipoint distribution services, including
multichannel multipoint distribution services, instruction television fixed
services, and local multipoint distribution services, and that is one meter
or less in diameter or diagonal measurement; or



            3.   An antenna that is designed to receive
television broadcast signals.



         OTARD ANTENNA STRUCTURE. Any pole, tower, or other
structure designed and intended to support and OTARD antenna.



         PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  Any public street,
way, alley, sidewalk, median, parkway, or boulevard that is dedicated to
public use.



         PUBLIC UTILITY. Persons, corporations or governments
supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer or land line telephone
services to the general public. For the purpose of this section, commercial
wireless telecommunications service facilities shall not be considered PUBLIC
UTILITY uses, and are defined separately.



         SITE FOR TOWERS (other than towers in the right-of-way and
eligible support structures). The current boundaries of the leased or owned
property surrounding the tower or eligible support structure and any access
or utility easements currently related to the site.  A site, for other
alternative tower structures, base stations and small cell facilities in the
right-of-way, is further restricted to that area comprising the base of the
structure and to other related accessory equipment already deployed on the
ground.



         SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY or SMALL CELLS. A wireless facility
that meets both of the following qualifications:



            1.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit
within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and



            2.   All other wireless equipment associated with
the small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or



            3.   A micro wireless facility.



         SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE FOR ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURES.



            1.   A modification that substantially changes the
physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if after the
modification, the structure meets any of the following criteria:



               A.   (i)   For towers other than
alternative tower structures or towers in the right-of-way, it increases the
height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height of one additional
antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed
20 feet, whichever is greater;



                  (ii)   For other eligible support
structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more
than ten feet, whichever is greater; 



               B.   (i)   For towers other than towers
in the right-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the
tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or
more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater;



                  (ii)   For eligible support
structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure
that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;



               C.   (i)   For any eligible support
structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets; or



                  (ii)   For towers in the right-of-way
and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on
the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the
structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more
than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with the structure;



               D.   For any eligible support structure, it
entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;



               E.   For any eligible support structure, it
would undermine the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or



               F.   For any eligible support structure, it
does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the
construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base
station equipment, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height,
increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not
exceed the thresholds identified in divisions 1.A., 1.B., and 1.C. of this
definition.



            2.   For purposes of determining whether a
substantial change exists, changes in height are measured from the original
support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated
horizontally, such as non buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances,
changes in height are measured from the dimensions of the tower or base
station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications
that were approved prior to February 22, 2012.



         TOWER.  Any structure that is designed and constructed
primarily built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting one or more any
FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities,
including structures that are constructed for wireless communications
services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services
such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.  The term includes self
supporting lattice towers, guy towers, monopole towers, radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like.



         TOWER HEIGHT. The height as determined by measuring the
vertical distance from the point of contact with the ground to the highest
point of the tower, including all antennae or other attachments.



         TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT.  Equipment that facilities
transmission for any FCC licensed or authorized wireless communication
service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial
or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes
equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not
limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul.



         WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or WCF.  A facility used
to provide personal wireless services as defined at 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(C);
or wireless information services provided to the public or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public via licensed or
unlicensed frequencies; or wireless utility monitoring and control
services.  A WCF does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a
permitted building where the installation does not require a modification of
the exterior of the building; nor does it include a device attached to a
building, used for serving that building only and that is otherwise permitted
under other provisions of the code. A WCF includes an antenna or antennas,
including without limitation, direction, omni-directional and parabolic
antennas, base stations, support equipment, alternative tower structures, and
towers. It does not include the support structure to which the WCF or its
components are attached if the use of such structures for WCFs is not the
primary use. The term does not include mobile transmitting devices used by
wireless service subscribers, such as vehicle or hand held radios/telephones
and their associated transmitting antennas, nor does it include other
facilities specifically excluded from the coverage of this section.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The requirements set forth in this section shall apply
to all WCF applications for base stations, alternative tower structures,
towers, micro cells, and small cells as defined in division (A) above and
further addressed herein.



      (2)   The requirements set forth in this section shall not
apply to:



         (a)   Amateur radio antenna, OTARD, and residential
television reception/antenna towers except as provided in division (C) below.



         (b)   Pre-existing WCFs. Any WCF for which a permit has
been properly issued prior to ______________, 2017, shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of
division (D) below. Changes and additions to pre-existing WCFs (including
trading out of antennas for an equal number of antennas) shall meet
applicable requirements of division (E) below.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any modifications qualifying as an eligible facilities requests
shall be evaluated under divisions (F)(1)(e) and (h) below.



   (C)   Amateur radio antenna, OTARD, satellite dishes, and
residential television reception/antenna towers. The construction/erection of
facilities supporting amateur radio antennas, OTARD, satellite dishes, and
residential television reception equipment/antennas shall be a permitted use
in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The facilities require a building permit;



      (2)   The facilities shall be allowed only in the rear yard of
residentially zoned properties. If there is sufficient space within the rear
yard to erect the tower and any related guy wires, then the property owner
may apply for a conditional use permit to erect a tower in another yard
(front or side);



      (3)   The facilities shall not exceed 75 feet in height,
except by conditional use permit;



      (4)   The facilities shall conform to the accessory structure
setback for the district in which it is located;



      (5)   Amateur radio antenna, OTARD, satellite dishes, and
residential television reception/antenna facilities shall be installed in
accordance with the instructions furnished by the manufacturer of the tower
model.  Antennas mounted on a facility may be modified and changed at any
time so long as the published allowable load on the facility is not exceeded
and the structure of the facility remains in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications;



      (6)   Satellite dishes greater than one meter in diameter
shall be allowed only by a conditional use permit in all districts. Design
plans shall include provisions for screening and shall be submitted with the
conditional use permit application; and



      (7)   The facility shall be exempt from all other 
requirements of this section except for division (D) below.



   (D)   Operational standards.



      (1)   Federal requirements.  All WCFs shall meet the current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the
federal government with the authority to regulate WCFs. If such standards and
regulations are changed, then the owners of the WCF governed by this section
shall bring such facility into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling federal
agency. Failure to meet such revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner’s expense.



      (2)   Legal access.  In all applications for WCFs an
applicant must warrant and represent that it has the written agreement of the
owner of the property which is the subject of the application for legal
access to and from the WCF and the applicant must also warrant and represent
that it will have legal access to the utilities to operate and maintain the
WCF.



      (3)   Operation and maintenance.  To ensure the structural
integrity of WCFs, the owner of a WCF shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable local building and safety
codes. If upon inspection, the city concludes that a WCF fails to comply with
such codes and constitutes a danger to persons, property or the environment,
then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of the WCF, the owner
shall have 30 days from the date of notice to bring such WCF into compliance.
Upon good cause shown by the owner, the city’s Chief Building Official may
extend such compliance period not to exceed 90 days from the date of said
notice. If the owner fails to bring such WCF into compliance within said time
period, the city may remove such WCF at the owner’s expense. If the WCF
poses an immediate danger to persons, property, or the environment the city
may cause for the WCF to be immediately deactivated or removed. The city will
provide notice of such immediate deactivation or removal to the applicant as
soon as practicable.



      (4)   Abandonment and removal. If a WCF has not been in use
for a period of three months, the owner of the WCF shall notify the city of
the non-use and shall indicate whether re-use is expected within the ensuing
three months. Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of six
months shall be considered abandoned. The city, in its sole discretion, may
require an abandoned WCF to be removed. The owner of such WCF shall remove
the same within 30 days of receipt of written notice form the city. If such
WCF is not removed within said 30 days, the city may remove it at the
owner’s expense and any approved permits for the WCF shall be deemed to
have expired.



   (E)   Design standards.



      (1)   The requirements set forth in this division (E) shall
apply to the location and design of all WCFs governed by this section as
specified below; provided, however, that the city may waive these
requirements if it determines that the goals of this section are better
served thereby. To that end, WCFs shall be designed and located to minimize
the impact on the surrounding neighborhood and to maintain the character and
appearance of the city, consistent with other provisions of this code.



         (a)   Camouflage/concealment.  All WCFs and any
transmission equipment shall, to the extent possible, use camouflage design
techniques including, but not limited to the use of materials, colors,
textures, screening, undergrounding, landscaping, or other design options
that will blend the WCF into the surrounding natural setting and built
environment. Design, materials and colors of WCFs shall be compatible with
the surrounding environment. Designs shall be compatible with structures and
vegetation on the same parcel and adjacent parcels.



            1.   Camouflage design may be of heightened
importance where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g. proximity
to historic or aesthetically significant structures, views, and/or community
features). In such instances where WCFs are located in areas of high
visibility, they shall (where possible) be designed (e.g., placed
underground, depressed, or located behind earth berms) to minimize their
profile.



            2.   The camouflage design may include the use of
alternative tower structures should the Manager or his or her designee
determine that such design meets the intent of this code and the community is
better served thereby.



            3.   All WCFs, such as antennas, vaults, equipment
rooms, equipment enclosures, and tower structures shall be constructed out of
non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only).



         (b)   Hazardous materials. No hazardous materials shall
be permitted in association with WCFs, except those necessary for the
operations of the WCF and only in accordance with all applicable laws
governing such materials.



         (c)   Siting.



            1.   No portion of any WCF may extend beyond the
property line.



            2.   Collocation.  WCFs may be required to be
designed and constructed to permit the facility to accommodate WCFs from at
least two wireless service providers on the same WCF unless the city approves
an alternative design. No WCF owner or operator shall unfairly exclude a
competitor from using the same facility or location.



            3.   WCFs shall be sited in a location that does
not reduce the parking for the other principal uses on the parcel below code
standards.



         (d)   Lighting. WCFs shall not be artificially lighted,
unless required by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority, or the
WCF is mounted on a light pole or other similar structure primarily used for
lighting purposes. If lighting is required, the city may review the available
lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views. Lighting shall be shielded or directed
to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize the amount of glare and
light falling onto nearby properties, particularly residences.



         (e)   Landscaping and fencing requirements.



            1.   WCFs shall be sited in a manner that does not
reduce the landscaped areas for the other principal uses on the parcel, below
code standards.



            2.   WCFs shall be landscaped with a buffer of
plant materials that effectively screen the view of the WCF from adjacent
residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of the front, side,
and rear landscaped setback on the perimeter of the site. Where the city has
requested additional landscaping, the city may require irrigation
requirements for the landscaping.



            3.   Where fencing is required by the Manager or
assigned designee the fencing material shall not be wire.



            4.   In location where the visual impact of the
WCF would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived
altogether by the Manager or assigned designee.



            5.   Existing mature tree growth and natural
landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as WCFs sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around
the site perimeter may be sufficient to buffer.



            6.   No trees larger than four inches in diameter
measured at four and one-half feet high on the tree may be removed, unless
authorized by the Manager. To obtain such authorization the applicant shall
show that tree removal is necessary, the applicant’s plan minimizes the
number of trees to be removed and any trees removed are replaced at a ratio
of two to one. The city may designate a tree caliper requirement for all
replacement trees.



         (f)   Noise.  Noise generated on the site must not
exceed the levels permitted in the city code, except that a WCF owner or
operator shall be permitted to exceed city code noise standards for a
reasonable period of time during repairs, not to exceed two hours without
prior authorization from the city.



         (g)   Additional design requirements shall be applicable
to the various types of WCFs as specified below:



            1.   Base stations. If an antenna is installed on
a structure other than a tower or alternative tower structure, such as a base
station or micro cell (including, but not limited to the antennas and
accessory equipment) it shall be of a neutral, non-reflective color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure, or uses other design characteristics so as to make the antenna and
related facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible, including for
example, without limitation, painting the antennas and accessory equipment to
match the structure. Additionally, any ground mounted equipment shall be
located in a manner necessary to address both public safety and aesthetic
concerns in the reasonable discretion of the Manager, and may, where
appropriate, require a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault.



            2.   Alternative tower structures and small cell
facilities. Alternative tower structures shall be designed and constructed to
look like a building, facility, or structure typically found in the area and
shall:



               A.   With respect to its pole-mounted
components, be located on or within an existing utility pole serving another
utility; or



               B.   Shall include design characteristics
consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the
right-of-way near the location where the alternative tower structure will be
located so as to reduce or eliminate visual obtrusiveness; or



               C.   With respect to its pole components, be
located on or within a new utility pole where other utility distribution
lines are aerial, if there are no reasonable alternatives, and the applicant
is authorized to construct the new utility poles; or



               D.   To the extent reasonably feasible, be
consistent with the size and shape of the pole-mounted equipment installed by
communications companies on utility poles near the alternative tower
structure;



               E.   Be sized to minimize the negative
aesthetic impacts to the public right-of-way;



               F.   Be designed such that antenna
installations on traffic signal standards are placed in a manner so that the
size, appearance, and function of the signal will not be considerably altered;



               G.   Require that any ground mounted
equipment shall be located in a manner necessary to address both public
safety and aesthetic concerns in the reasonable discretion of the Manager,
and may, where appropriate, require a flush-to-grade underground equipment
vault; and



               H.   Not alter vehicular circulation or
parking within the right-of-way or impede vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
access or visibility along the right-of-way. The alternative tower structure
must comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act and every other local,
state, and federal law and regulations. No alternative tower structure may be
located or maintained in a manner that causes unreasonable interference.
Unreasonable interference means any use of the right-of-way that disrupts or
interferes with its use by the city, the general public, or other person
authorized to use or be present upon the right-of-way, when there exists an
alternative that would result in less disruption or interference.
Unreasonable interference includes any use of the right-of-way that disrupts
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, any interference with public utilities, and
any other activity that will present a hazard to public health, safety, or
welfare.



            3.   Towers.



               A.   Towers shall either maintain a
galvanized steel finish, or, subject to any applicable FAA standards, be
painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness as determined by
the city;



               B.   Tower structures should use existing
land forms, vegetation, and structures to aid in screening the facility from
view or blending in with the surrounding built and natural environment;



               C.   Monopole support structures shall taper
from the base to the tip;



               D.   All towers, excluding alternative tower
structures in the right-of-way, shall be enclosed by security fencing or wall
at least six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anti-climbing device.



            4.   Related accessory equipment.  Accessory
equipment for all WCFs shall meet the following requirements:



               A.   All buildings, shelter, cabinets, and
other accessory components shall be grouped as closely as technically
possible;



               B.   The total footprint coverage area of
the WCF's accessory equipment shall not exceed 350 square feet;



               C.   No related accessory equipment or
accessory structure shall exceed 12 feet in height;



               D.    Accessory equipment, including but not
limited to remote radio units, shall be located out of sight whenever
possible by locating behind parapet walls or within equipment enclosures.
Where such alternate locations are not available, the accessory equipment
shall be screened so as to reduce or eliminate visual obtrusiveness.



   (F)   Review procedures and requirements.



      (1)   No new WCF shall be constructed and no collocation or
modification to any WCF may occur except after a written request from an
applicant, reviewed and approved by the city in accordance with this section.
All WCFS except eligible facilities requests which are reviewed under
divisions (F)(1)(e) and (F)(1)(h) below, shall be reviewed pursuant to the
following procedures.



         (a)   Submittal requirements.  In addition to an
application form and submittal fees, each applicant shall submit a scaled
site plan, photo simulations, scaled elevation view and other supporting
drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by
appropriate qualified professionals, showing the location and dimension of
all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio
frequency coverage, tower height, setbacks drives, parking, fencing,
landscaping, adjacent uses, drainage, and other information deemed by the
Manager to be necessary to assess compliance with this section.



         (b)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a
WCF shall provide to the Manager a narrative and map description of the
applicant’s existing or then currently proposed WCFs within the city, and
outside of the city within one mile of its boundaries. In addition, the
applicant shall inform the city generally of the areas in which it believes
WCFs may need to be located within the next three years. The inventory list
should identify the site name, site address, and a general description of the
facility (i.e., rooftop antennas and ground mounted equipment). This
provision is not indented to be a requirement that the applicant submit its
business plan, proprietary information, or make commitments regarding
locations of WCFs within the city and all applicants for WCFs to share
general information, assist in the city’s comprehensive planning process,
and promote collocation by identifying areas in which WCFs might be
appropriately constructed for multiple users.



         (c)   In all zoning districts, applications for base
stations, alternative tower structures, and alternative tower structures
within a right-of-way, shall be reviewed by the Manager for conformance to
this section and code using the site plan review procedures set forth in this
section. Except for WCFs in the rights-of-way that otherwise meet all
requirements of this section, should the Manager consider the proposed WCF to
have a significant visual impact (i.e., proximity to historical sites) or
otherwise be incompatible with the structure or surrounding area, or not meet
the intent of these provisions, the Manager may refer the application to City
Council for approval, after a recommendation by Planning Commission.



         (d)   In all zoning districts, all other towers may be
permitted only as a conditional use. WCFs shall be reviewed for conformance
to this section and code using the conditional use review procedures set
forth in this code. All applications for towers shall demonstrate that other
alternative design options such as base stations or alternative tower
structures are not viable options as determined by the city. Notwithstanding
anything in this section to the contrary, no towers located in the
right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height.



         (e)   Review procedures for eligible facilities requests.



            1.   Application.



               A.   In all zoning districts, eligible
facilities requests shall be subject to administrative review. The city shall
prepare, and from time to time revise and make publicly available, an
application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the
city to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request.
Such information may include, without limitation, whether the project:



                  (i)   Would result in a substantial
change;



                  (ii)   Violates a generally applicable
law, regulations, or other rule codifying objective standards reasonably
related to public health and safety.



               B.   The application may not require the
applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed
modification or collocation.



            2.   Type of review. Upon receipt of an
application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this section, the
Manager shall review such application to determine whether the application so
qualifies.



            3.   Timeframe for review. Subject to the tolling
provisions of division (F)(2)(e)4. below, within 60 days of the date on which
an applicant submits an application seeking approval under this section, the
city shall approve the application, approve with conditions if issues are
present with an otherwise eligible facilities request that may not comply
with generally applicable law, regulations, or other rule related to public
health and safety, unless it determines that the application is not covered
by this division (F)(2)(e)3.



            4.   Tolling of the timeframe for review. The
60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be
tolled only by mutual agreement of the city and the applicant, or in cases
where the Manager determines that the application is incomplete:



               A.   To toll the timeframe for
incompleteness, the city must provide written notice to the applicant within
30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing
documents or information required in the application;



               B.   The timeframe for review begins running
again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in response
to the city’s notice of incompleteness; and



               C.   Following a supplemental submission,
the city will notify the applicant within ten days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice
delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of
second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in
division (F)(1)(e)1. In the case of a second or subsequent notice of
incompleteness, the city may not specify missing information or documents
that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.



            5.   Failure to act.  In the event the city fails
to act on a request seeking approval for an eligible facilities request under
this section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling),
the request shall be deemed granted.  The deemed grant becomes effective
when the applicant notifies the city in writing after the review period has
expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed
granted.



            6.   Interaction with Telecommunications Act
Section 332(c)(7).  If the city determines that the applicant’s request is
not an eligible facilities request as delineated in this section, the
presumptively reasonable timeframe under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by
the FCC’s shot clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the
city’s decision that the application is not a covered request. To the
extent such information is necessary, the city may request additional
information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section
332(c)(7) reviews.



         (f)   Abandonment and removal. Prior to approval,
affidavits shall be required from the owner of the property and from the
applicant acknowledging that each is responsible for the removal of a WCF
that is abandoned or is unused for a period of six months.



         (g)   With respect to all wireless communications
facilities, including eligible facilities requests, the applicant shall
include as part of its application:



            1.   A statement made under penalty of perjury by
the applicant or the owner that the applicant is representing, representing
that all WCFs that are the subject of the application shall comply with
federal standards for radio frequency emissions. 



            2.   A signal interference letter signed under
penalty of perjury by the applicant or the owner that the applicant is
representing, representing that all WCFs that are the subject of the
application shall be designed, sited and operated in accordance with
applicable federal regulations addressing radio frequency interference.



         (h)   Decision.  Any decisions to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny an application for a WCF, shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence in a written record. The applicant shall
receive a copy of the decision.



         (i)   Compliance with applicable law.  Notwithstanding
the approval of an application for new WCFs or collocation as described
herein, all work done pursuant to WCF applications must be completed in
accordance with all applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety
requirements as set forth in the city code and any other applicable laws or
regulations. In addition, all WCF applications shall comply with the
following:



            1.   Comply with any permit or license issued by a
local, state, or federal agency with jurisdiction of the WCF;



            2.   Comply with easements, covenants, conditions
and/or restrictions on or applicable to the underlying real property;



            3.   Be maintained in good working condition and
to the standards established at the time of application approval; and



            4.   Remain free from trash, debris, litter,
graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon
as practicable, and in no instance more than ten calendar days from the time
of notification by the city or after discovery by the owner or operator of
the site. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any graffiti on WCFs located in the
rights-of-way or on other city-owned property may be removed by the city at
its discretion, and the owner and/or operator of the WCF shall pay all costs
of such removal within 30 days after receipt of an invoice from the city.



         (j)   Compliance report. Upon request by the city, the
applicant shall provide a compliance report within 45 days after installation
of a WCF, demonstrating that as installed and in operation, the WCF complies
with all conditions of approval, applicable code requirements and standard
regulations.



   (G)   Standards for approval.



      (1)   (a)   It is the intent of the city to provide for
approval of WCFs administratively in cases where visual impacts are
minimized, view corridors are protected, WCFs utilize appropriate design as
set forth in division (E)(1)(a) of this section to avoid adverse impacts on
the surrounding area, and WCFs are designed, maintained, and operated at all
times to comply with the provisions of this section and all applicable law. 
Notwithstanding the approval of an application for collocation as described
herein, all work done pursuant to WCF applications must be completed in
accordance with all applicable building and safety requirements as set forth
in the city code and any other applicable regulations.



         (b)   WCFs, which are not eligible facilities requests,
shall be evaluated for approval subject to compliance with the design
standards of division (E) and the following criteria:



            1.   Base station.



               A.   Such facilities shall be
architecturally compatible with respect to attachments, and colored to match
the building or structure to which they are attached;



               B.   The maximum protrusion of such
facilities from the building or structure face to which they are attached
shall be six feet;



               C.   Wall-mounted WCFs shall not extend
above the roofline; and



               D.   (i)   Roof-mounted WCFs shall be
approved only where an applicant demonstrates a wall-mounted WCF is
inadequate to provide service and evaluated for approval based upon the
following criteria:



                     (I)   Roof-mounted antennas
shall extend no more than ten feet above the parapet of any flat roof or
ridge of a sloped roof to which they are attached; and



                     (II)   Other roof-mounted
transmission equipment shall extend no more than ten feet above any parapet
of a flat roof upon which they may be placed, and shall not be permitted on a
sloped roof.



                  (ii)   By filing an application for a
roof-mounted WCF an applicant is certifying that the height extensions
described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1.D.(i)(I) and (II) above are the maximum
heights that will assure compliance with division (E)(1)(a), and that any
additional increase in height will undermine the camouflage nature of the
site.



            2.   Alternative tower structures.



               A.   Such structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the surrounding area;



               B.   Height and size of the proposed
alternative tower structure should be minimized as much as possible;



               C.   WCFs shall be sited in a manner that
evaluates the proximity of the facility to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;



               D.   WCFs should take into consideration the
uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the facility
to these uses;



               E.   Compatibility with the surrounding
topography;



               F.   Compatibility with the surrounding tree
coverage and foliage;



               G.   Compatibility of the design of the
site, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the
effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and



               H.   Impact on the surrounding area of the
proposed ingress and egress, if any.



            3.   WCFs within right-of-way. An alternative
tower structure or small cell facility may be deployed in the right-of-way,
including the utilization of a traffic signal, street light pole, or similar
structure within a public right-of-way or freestanding structure.  Such
facilities shall remain subject to the alternative tower structures standards
of approval noted above and subject to the following criteria below:



               A.   The pole or structure is not more than
ten feet higher (as measured from the ground to the top of the pole) than any
existing utility or traffic signal within 500 feet of the pole or structure.



               B.   Any such pole shall in no case be
higher than 50 feet.



               C.   Any new pole for WCFs shall be
separated from any other similar pole, accessory equipment or wireless
communication facility in the right-of-way by a distance of at least 600 feet.



               D.   When placed near a residential
property, the WCF shall be placed adjacent to the common side yard property
line between adjoining residential properties, such that the WCF minimizes
visual impacts equitably among adjacent properties. In the case of a corner
lot, the WCF may be placed adjacent to the common side yard property line
between adjoin residential properties, or on the corner formed by two
intersecting streets.



               E.   Collocations are strongly encouraged
and the number of poles within the right-of-way should be limited as much as
possible.



               F.   Equipment enclosures shall be located
out of view as much as possible.



               G.   All WCFs in the right-of-way shall have
utilities separately metered. No WCFs in the right-of-way shall share an
unmetered power source.



            4.   All other towers.



               A.   Height or size of the proposed tower;



               B.   Proximity of the tower to residential
structures and residential district boundaries;



               C.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby
properties;



               D.   Compatibility with the surrounding
topography;



               E.   Compatibility with the surrounding tree
coverage and foliage;



               F.   Design of the Tower, with particular
reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;



               G.   Proposed ingress and egress;



               H.   No new towers shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no
existing WCFs can accommodate the needs that the applicant proposes to
address with its tower application.  Evidence submitted to demonstrate that
no existing WCF can accommodate these needs may consist of the following:



                  (i)   No existing WCFs with a suitable
height are located within the geographic area required to meet the
applicant’s engineering requirements;



                  (ii)   Existing WCFs do not have
sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed WCF;



                  (iii)   The applicant’s proposed
WCFs would cause electromagnetic interference with the WCFs on the existing
WCFs or the existing WCF would cause interference with the applicant’s
proposed WCF; and



                  (iv)   The applicant demonstrates that
there are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable for
collocation.



               I.   Setbacks and separation.  The
following minimum setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all
WCFs for which a conditional use approval is required; provided, however,
that the city may reduce standard setbacks and separation requirements if the
applicant demonstrates that the goals of this section can be better met by
reduced setback and separation requirements that protect the public health
and safety, view corridors, or minimize adverse impact. A tower shall meet
the greater of the following minimum setbacks from all property lines:



                  (i)   The setback for a principal
building within the applicable zoning district;



                  (ii)   Twenty-five percent of the
facility height, including WCFs and related accessory equipment;



                  (iii)   The tower height, including
antennas, if the tower is in or adjacent to a residential district; and



                  (iv)   Towers over 90 feet in height
shall not be located within one-quarter mile from any existing tower that is
over 90 feet in height, unless the applicant has shown to the satisfaction of
the city that there are no reasonably suitable alternative sites in the
required geographic area which can meet the applicant’s needs.



(2003 Code, § 9.62)  (Ord. 100, passed 3-8-2002; Ord. 186, passed
11-20-2017)



§ 155.17  BED AND BREAKFAST INNS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BED AND BREAKFAST.  An owner-managed and owner-occupied single
family residential structure used as a lodging establishment where a room or
rooms are rented on a nightly basis, and in which only breakfast is included
as part of the basic compensation.



   (B)   Zoning requirements. A bed and breakfast inn is permitted only
in the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts of the city; provided, however that a
special use permit shall be obtained prior to the establishment of the bed
and breakfast inn. Bed and breakfast inns are prohibited in all other
districts.



   (C)   Accessory use. A bed and breakfast inn must be accessory to
the use of a property as a single- family residential home. This means that
the individual or family who operates the facility must also occupy the house
as their primary residence.



   (D)   Maximum size. Bed and breakfast inns are limited to a maximum
of four bedrooms available for rent to guests. All guest rooms shall be
contained within the principal structure.



   (E)   Employees. There shall be no more than one person employed by
the bed and breakfast inn who is not a resident of the dwelling.



   (F)   Other licenses and code compliance. Prior to opening to the
public of the bed and breakfast inn, the applicant must furnish evidence that
all licenses required by the state either have been issued or will be issued
before commencing operation and that the structure is in compliance with all
applicable building and other state and local codes. Additionally, prior to
the commencement of operation, the owner/operator of the facility shall file
with the City Clerk a certificate of public liability insurance providing
coverage in an amount as may be specified by the City Council in granting the
special use permit authorizing operation of the inn.



   (G)   Dining facilities. Dining facilities, except for the purposes
of special events described herein, must not be open to the public and must
be used exclusively for registered guests. No cooking facilities shall be
permitted in any guest room.



   (H)   Length of stay. No guest shall stay in the facility for more
than 14 days within any 30-day period of time.



   (I)   Commercial activities. With the exception of recognized home
occupations otherwise allowed or provided for under the city code, and with
the exception of special events authorized as hereinafter noted, no other
commercial enterprises shall be operated in the facility during the period of
time that the same is authorized to operate and/or operates as a bed and
breakfast. No liquor or alcoholic beverages are to be sold or served to any
guests, either at special events or occupying a guest room, on the premises
unless the operator has first obtained a prior license for the same from the
city.



   (J)   Lodging tax. A lodging tax as otherwise provided pursuant to
city code shall be charged to guests staying at the bed and breakfast inn.



   (K)   Special events.



      (1)   A bed and breakfast inn may host an unlimited number of
special events with fewer than 25 non-registered guests, provided however
that a guest registered at the time of the event also is a participant in the
special event as host or otherwise.



      (2)   Special events include weddings, business meetings,
retreats and other functions at which non-registered guests are present in
addition to registered guests who are participating in the special event.



      (3)   Special events are also subject to the following
requirements.



         (a)   The maximum number of guests allowed at special
events shall be limited to the maximum occupancy of the bed and breakfast inn
as determined by City Building and Fire Code Inspectors, the occupancy limits
to be determined prior to the holding of any such special event with the
information provided to the city and the owner of the bed and breakfast by
inspectors duly designated and authorized to act by the city.



         (b)   The events must comply with any noise restrictions
or disorderly conduct provisions of the city.



         (c)   The owner/operator or designated employee must be
present during special events and provide adequate supervision of the event.



         (d)   Food and/or alcoholic beverages may be furnished
by and to special event guests, provided all necessary local, state and/or
federal permits, license or authorizations have been obtained in advance and
verification provided to the city upon request.



         (e)   Adequate off-street parking or other suitable
arrangements have been provided satisfactory to the city so as to not unduly
disrupt neighboring properties.



   (L)   Signage, lighting, off-street parking and miscellaneous.



      (1)   Identifying signs shall be no more than four square feet
in total, located on the building, or if free standing, located at least ten
feet off any property line and consistent with the character and
architectural features of the building. There shall be only one sign per
facility and any lighting of the same shall be either screened or indirect so
as to not shine onto neighboring properties.



      (2)   All exterior lighting shall be concealed or screened.



      (3)   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
bed and breakfast room for rent, not less than two additional off-street
parking spaces shall be provided for the owner and an additional off-street
parking space shall be provided for any non-owner employee.



   (M)   Waiver or modification of special use permit conditions and
termination of special use permit.



      (1)   Waiver or modification. The City Council may grant a
special use permit for a bed and breakfast inn that waives or modifies one or
more of the requirements herein above set forth; provided, however that the
waiver or modification shall be requested by the applicant at the time of
application for the special use and may be granted only after a public
hearing and upon specific written findings as to the reasons for the waiver
or modification. In granting a waiver or modification, the City Council must
consider the impact of the same upon the neighborhood in which the inn is to
be located.



      (2)   Termination of special use permit. A special use permit
under this section shall terminate upon occurrence of any of the following:



         (a)   Noncompliance with the provisions of this section,
including any conditions or restrictions imposed by the Council when the
special use permit is initially granted;



         (b)   Transfer of ownership of the property from the
owner/operator; or



         (c)   The creation of a condition that adversely affects
the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city or its residents.



(Ord. 153, passed 1-19-2010)



§ 155.18  OPT-OUT OF M.S. § 462.3593.



   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subd. 9, the city
opts out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
temporary family health care dwellings.



(Ord. 177, passed 8-15-2016)




SPECIAL REGULATIONS




§ 155.30  RESIDUAL FEATURES.



   No activity or operation shall be established or maintained which by
reason of its nature or manner of operation will cause the emission of noise,
odor, toxic or noxious fumes, smoke, dust and particulate matter in
concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
welfare, comfort and safety or cause injury to property or business.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-1)



§ 155.31  GLARE.



   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area or sign
shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential
property or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether
from flood lights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or
welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-2)



§ 155.32  REFUSE.



   All waste material, debris, refuse or garbage not disposed of through
the public sanitary sewage system will be kept in an enclosed building or
properly contained in a closed container designed for those purposes. The
owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping the land free of refuse.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-3)



§ 155.33  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   In all but the I-2 and C-2 districts, all developed uses shall
provide a landscaped yard along all streets. The yard adjacent to streets
shall be kept clear of all structures and storage, except off-street parking.
The yard adjacent to streets shall be at least eight feet in depth along all
streets measured from the street right-of-way. Except for driveways, the yard
shall extend the entire frontage of the lot and along both streets in the
case of a corner lot.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, to the extent not otherwise
occupied by structures legally placed or erected thereon pursuant to code, or
not otherwise defined and allowed pursuant to § 155.40, the remainder of all
yards in all but the I-2 and C-2 districts shall have grass or other ground
cover landscaping properly installed. No land shall remain distressed and
exposed without established grass or other ground cover or landscaping for a
period exceeding six months.



   (C)   In the event that new construction occurs on the premises
resulting in the ground being disturbed or exposed, and in the event that the
construction is completed after the end of the growing season, the
landscaping shall then be installed within 60 days of the start of the next
growing season.



   (D)   If land filling or land reclamation or excavation is done in a
residential area, the foregoing requirements for landscaping shall be
followed so as to require that the property shall not remain disturbed or
exposed for a period longer than six months.



   (E)   Silt fences and other methods to prevent soil erosion shall be
installed and maintained on any portions of a lot that is not covered with
growing grass or other proper ground cover or landscaping until a stable
ground cover is established or landscaping completed.



   (F)   All areas disturbed by grading which surround the principal
building and accessory buildings on a property which are not driveway,
sidewalks or patios shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees or other
suitable landscaping materials, except as may be otherwise specifically
authorized by § 155.40.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-4)  (Ord. 154, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 155.34  DRAINAGE.



   No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results
in water run-off, flooding or erosion on adjacent properties. The run-off
shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding area or
other public facilities.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-5)



§ 155.35  FARM OPERATIONS.



   Farm operations in existence on the effective date of this chapter
shall be permitted to continue; however, new buildings in which farm animals
are to be kept or other similar use of property which may be objectionable to
adjacent property owners may be permitted only in the A, R-1 and I-2
Districts and only after written consent of 75% of all property owners within
500 feet of the proposed use. Following this, Council approval shall be
required.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-6)



§ 155.36  DWELLING BELOW GROUND LEVEL.



   No interior space below ground level shall be occupied for dwelling
purposes, unless the space is part of a structure having at least one full
story above ground level and having its exterior portion in a structurally
finished state.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-8)  (Ord passed 2-16-1953)



§ 155.37  SIGNS.



   (A)   Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect and promote
the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city
through the establishment of a comprehensive and impartial set of regulations
governing the erection, display and use of signs serving as a visual media to
persons on public or private properties within the city. These regulations
are intended to:



      (1)   Preserve and protect property values and civic duty, and
not allow signs which detract from this objective due to excessive size,
height, number, visual impact, undesirable location, maintenance or lack
thereof, spacing or elimination;



      (2)   Provide for signs which are compatible with their
surroundings and appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain;



      (3)   Control signs which invade privacy, constitute a public
nuisance or increase the likelihood of accidents by distracting attention or
obstructing vision;



      (4)   Establish standards which will permit businesses a
reasonable and equitable opportunity for effective communication, but will
avoid excessive and unreasonable visual competition among sign displays;



      (5)   Allow a reasonable freedom of choice, while promoting a
concern for the visual amenities of those persons assigning, displaying,
erecting or utilizing signs in the city; and



      (6)   Assuring that the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city is preserved.



   (B)   Prohibited signs. The following signs shall be prohibited:



      (1)   Signs, that by reason of position, shape or color, would
interfere with the proper functioning of a traffic sign or signal;



      (2)   Signs, that resemble any official marker erected by a
governmental agency, or that display the words “Stop” or “Danger”;



      (3)   Flashing signs;



      (4)   Signs or sign structures that obstruct any window, door,
fire escape, stairway or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or
egress from any building or structure. Signs painted on windows and doors are
excepted;



      (5)   Billboards. Except as otherwise provided herein, outdoor
advertising structures and billboards which advertise products or businesses
not connected with the site or building on which they are located shall not
be permitted; and



      (6)   Roof signs.



   (C)   Permitted signs. The following signs shall be permitted:



      (1)   Residential or business name plate signs;



      (2)   The temporary signs as authorized by resolution of the
Council from time to time;



      (3)   Except as may be prohibited above, signs specifically
advertising the business on the site upon which the sign is located;



      (4)   Within the C-1 Highway/Auto Commerce, I-1 Limited
Industry and I-2 General Industry, only on property located adjacent to U.S.
Trunk Highway 212, Minnesota Trunk Highways 23 and 67, and Chippewa County
State Highways #38 and #5 within the defined districts, the following types
of signs:



         (a)   Specific service signs used to direct travelers to
lodging, campground, resort, restaurant, rural agricultural or other tourism
oriented business(es) or place(s) of worship. The signs shall be constructed
as slat or stacked groupings of signs;



         (b)   Directional signs located off the right-of-way
which provide directional information about public places owned or operated
by governmental entities or public or privately-owned natural phenomena,
historic, cultural, scientific, educational and religious sites or areas of
natural beauty or outdoor recreation; and



         (c)   The specific service signs (stacked signs) and
directional signs provided for herein shall be non-advertising in nature. The
signs shall not exceed four by eight feet in size. The same shall be not
closer than 300 feet apart on the same side of the road. The signs shall not
be closer than 300 feet from any intersection with cross highways. The
minimum setback from the highway right-of-way shall be ten feet. The bottom
of any sign shall have a maximum elevation of seven feet above the level of
the existing grade of the adjacent highway. The height of the signs shall not
exceed 12 feet.



      (5)   The exposed uprights, super structure and/or backside of
all signs shall be painted or of a neutral color such as light blue, gray,
brown or white, unless it can be illustrated that the part of the sign
designed or painted in another manner is integral to the overall design of
the sign. Signs not properly maintained, or which become structurally unsafe,
may be removed by the city at the expense of the individual or firm owning
the property on which the structure is located. Landscaping adjacent to the
sign shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner, and in a functional
yet decorative manner, lending itself to minimum maintenance and the
withstanding of vandalism.



   (D)   Nonconforming signs; sign removal.



      (1)   Nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs which lawfully
existed on the effective date of this division (D)(1), and which do not meet
the requirements of this division (D)(1), shall be allowed to continue in use
for a period of not more than five years thereafter.



      (2)   Sign removal. All conforming signs, and sign structures
not used by a tenant or owner shall be removed by the owner of the premises
after one year of non-use. The Building Inspector may also, in conjunction
with the Council, call for the immediate removal of any sign which is deemed
structurally unsafe, or in disrepair. Signs not so removed by the owner as
required hereunder shall be removed by the city at the owner’s expense.



   (E)   Permit. Signs authorized under this division (E) shall be
maintained only upon the securing of a permit from the Planning Commission
upon payment of a fee as may be designated by resolution from time to time,
and the following of the application process as required by the city and
applicable MNDOT signing regulations.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-9)  (Ord. 35, passed 6-29-1992)



§ 155.38  PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.



   The Council, following review by the Planning Commission, shall have
the power to vary from the lot requirements of the R-1 and R-2 Districts in
the event a planned residential development as defined herein is proposed
which generally would create a more desirable living environment than would
be possible through the strict application of lot and yard requirements, and
which meets the following development standards.



   (A)   Maximum density:



      (1)   Detached dwellings: six dwelling units per net
residential acre; and



      (2)   Attached dwellings: ten dwelling units per net
residential acre.



   (B)   Minimum setback from residential street center line: 60 feet.



   (C)   Minimum setback from interior lot line: ten feet for walls
with windows, six feet for windowless walls.



   (D)   Minimum spacing between buildings: one-half the sum of the
heights of the two buildings.



   (E)   Minimum area devoted to developed open space for the common
use of residents of the development: 10% of total area.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-10)



§ 155.39  SETBACK FROM HIGHWAYS.



   In addition to requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter, all
buildings and structures, however used, shall be set back at least 100 feet
from the center line of U.S. Highway 212, and at least 75 feet from the
center line of all state highways and of that portion of C.S.A.H. 5 located
north of the Milwaukee Railroad main line.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-11)



§ 155.40  CONSERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.



   (A)   In the development of land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability
to the proposed developments.



   (B)   In the development of hilly areas for residential purposes,
minimum lot areas shall be one dwelling per three acres for slopes between
12% and 25%, and structures shall be prohibited on slopes exceeding 25%.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-12)



§ 155.41  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   All off-street parking shall meet the following requirements:



   (A)   Number. Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required:



      (1)   None required in C-2 District;



      (2)   Dwellings: one per dwelling unit;



      (3)   Churches, auditoriums, mortuaries and other similar
places of assembly: one per every four seats;



      (4)   Sanatoriums, convalescent homes, rest homes, nursing
homes: one per every six beds; and



      (5)   Retail trade commerce other than in C-2 District:



         (a)   Restaurants: one per every three seats; and



         (b)   Other retail: one per every 100 square feet of
retail floor space, but in no case less than one and one-half (gross parking
area) to one (gross building floor area).



      (6)   Retail service commerce other than in C-2 District:



         (a)   Motels: one per unit;



         (b)   Personal and professional offices: one per every
150 square feet of office floor space; and



         (c)   Other service commerce: one per every 200 square
feet of gross floor space.



      (7)   Industrial including wholesale: one per every two
persons of maximum employment during any work period.



   (B)   Minimum size of parking space: 250 square feet of standing and
maneuvering space. Fractional spaces over one-half count as one space.



   (C)   Location. Parking spaces shall be located in the following
ways:



      (1)   Spaces for dwellings: on the same lot as the dwelling
unit;



      (2)   Spaces for commercial uses not in the C-2 District or
for public or semi-public uses: within 300 feet of the main entrance of the
building served;



      (3)   Spaces for industrial uses: within 300 feet of the main
entrance of the building being served; and



      (4)   No off-street parking spaces to be located within five
feet of any street right-of-way.



   (D)   Surfacing and drainage. Off-street parking areas and
accessways other than those for one and two family dwellings shall be
surfaced with a durable material to control dust, and shall be graded so as
to dispose of all surface water.



   (E)   Screening. All open off-street parking areas having more than
six parking spaces shall be effectively screened by a compact hedge or a
similar landscaped element along all sides which adjoin or are directly
across a street or alley from a property in a residence district.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-13)



§ 155.42  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   An adequate number of off-street loading spaces shall be provided for
all structures which require the receipt and distribution of materials or
merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles so as to assure unrestricted
movement of both pedestrian and motor vehicles throughout the active areas of
the city.



   (A)   Size. Minimum size of off-street loading berths:



      (1)   Width: ten feet;



      (2)   Length: 25 feet; and



      (3)   Vertical Clearance: 14 feet.



   (B)   Location. Off-street loading berths shall be located no closer
than 25 feet from the intersection of two street rights-of-way.



   (C)   Surfacing and drainage. Off-street loading berths and
accessways shall be hard surfaced to control dust and shall be graded to
dispose of all surface water.



(2003 Code, § 9.51-14)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 155.55  ZONING OFFICER.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector acting as the
Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The specific duties of the Zoning Officer shall include:



      (1)   Providing zoning information upon request;



      (2)   Receiving applications for building permits, reviewing
the applications to determine if they comply with city code provisions,
recommending acceptance or denial to the Council, and issuing or denying
permits;



      (3)   Receiving applications for special use permits,
variances, amendments and appeals, referring the applications to the
appropriate agency, notifying affected property owners of required public
hearings, and publishing notice of the hearing;



      (4)   Conducting inspections;



      (5)   Investigating violations; and



      (6)   Keeping the zoning map and text up to date.



(2003 Code, § 9.61-1)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953)



§ 155.56  BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   Hereafter, no person shall erect, alter, remodel, wreck or
move any kind of structure, building or part thereof, no use or change of use
of a building, structure or land shall be permitted, nor shall a person be
permitted to occupy the premises, no change or extension of a nonconforming
use shall be permitted, no placement of fill or excavation of materials shall
be permitted within the Floodplain Districts, without first securing a
building permit therefor; provided, however, no such permit shall be required
for the following, except as the activities may be prohibited or otherwise
restricted within the Floodplain Districts as provided elsewhere within this
chapter: construction, reconstruction or alteration of a building where the
estimated cost of the work does not exceed $500.



   (B)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any land henceforth subdivided until
all requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.



   (C)   Each application for a building permit and for an occupancy
permit for the use of land shall be accompanied by the following exhibits
unless waived by the Zoning Officer.



      (1)   Boundary survey of an area including the property in
question and 100 feet beyond its outer boundaries showing existing utilities,
lot boundaries, and dimensions, building and easements. Foliage, topography,
waterways and soil borings to be included if pertinent.



      (2)   Plot plan indicating location, size and placement of
proposed structure and yards, parking and loading facilities, vehicular
access and egress, and utility plan including surface drainage.



      (3)   In the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, the
applicant will provide the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale,
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the lot; existing
or proposed structures, fill or storage of materials; and the location of the
foregoing in relation to the river channel.



   (D)   Prior to the granting of a building permit (use permit), or
processing a special use permit, the Building Inspector shall determine that
the applicant has obtained all applicable state and federal permits.



   (E)   Certificate of zoning compliance for new, altered or
nonconforming uses: it is unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged
in its use or structure within either the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by
the Building Inspector, stating that the use of the building or land conforms
to the requirements of this chapter.



      (1)   Where a nonconforming use or structure is extended or is
substantially altered, the certificate of zoning compliance shall
specifically state the manner in which the nonconforming structure or use
differs from the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, or
certificate of zoning compliance, the applicant for such a permit for a
building structure or premises situated within the Floodway or Flood Fringe
Districts shall be required to submit certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect, as appropriate, that the finished fill
and building floor elevations, flood proofing or other flood protection
measures, were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   A registered land surveyor may certify fill and building
elevations.



   (F)   Record of first floor elevations: the Building Inspector shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the first floor (including basement) of
all new structures or additions to existing structures within the Floodway or
Flood Fringe Districts. He or she shall also maintain a record of the
elevations to which structures or additions to existing structures are flood
proofed.



(2003 Code, § 9.61-2)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed
4-8-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.57  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Board of Appeals and Adjustments. The Planning Commission
shall be the Board of Appeals and Adjustments for this city, and, as provided
by M.S. § 462.354, Subd. 2, shall have the powers granted under M.S. §
462.357, Subd. 6, as may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Variances. Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6, as may be
amended from time to time, the Planning Commission, acting as a Board of
Appeals and Adjustments, may issue variances from the provisions of this
zoning code. A VARIANCE is a modification or variation of the provisions of
this zoning code as applied to a specific piece of property.



      (1)   Variances shall only be permitted when they are:



         (a)   In harmony with the general purposes and intent of
the zoning ordinance; and



         (b)   Consistent with the comprehensive plan.



      (2)   Variances may be granted when the applicant for the
variance establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with
the zoning ordinance.



   (C)   As used in connection with the granting of a variance,
PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES mean that:



      (1)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance;



      (2)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances
unique to the property not created by the landowner; and



      (3)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.



      (4)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute
PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES. PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES include, but are not limited
to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.



   (D)   Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction,
as defined in M.S. § 216C.06, Subd. 14, when in harmony with the zoning
ordinance. The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may not permit as a variance
any use that is not allowed under the zoning ordinance for property in the
zone where the affected person’s land is located. The Board may permit as a
variance the temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling.
The Board may impose conditions in the granting of variances. A condition
must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the
impact created by the variance.



   (E)   In a Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, no variance shall
permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for that particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by state law.



(2003 Code, § 9.61-3)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977;
Ord. 192, passed 11-19-2018)



Editor’s Note:



   If a mobile home park is converted to another use requiring a variance
or zoning change, the Planning Commission must give notice of hearing to each
occupant. See M.S. § 327C.095.



§ 155.58  SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Granting. Before a building or premises is devoted to any use
classified under “Uses by Special Permit” in this chapter, a special use
permit must be granted by the Council following a public hearing and
recommendation by the Planning Commission.



      (1)   The Council shall submit to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources a copy of the application for the proposed special use permit
sufficiently in advance of the hearing so that the Commissioner will receive
at least ten days’ notice of the hearing.



      (2)   A copy of all decisions of the Council granting special
use permit shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within
ten days’ of the action.



   (B)   Exhibits. The following exhibits shall be required unless
waived by the Planning Commission:



      (1)   The boundary survey and plot plan as required for
building permit applications;



      (2)   Certification of notification of 100% of owners of
property located within 350 feet of property in question demonstrating that
the owners have been advised of the time, date and place of the public
hearing to be held before the Planning Commission to determine the
appropriateness of the issuance of the special use permit sought; and



      (3)   Upon receiving an application for a special use permit
within the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts involving the use of fill,
construction of structures or storage of materials, the Council shall, prior
to rendering the decision thereon:



         (a)   Require the applicant to furnish such of the
following and additional information as deemed necessary by the Council for
determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:



            1.   Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or
proposed structures, fill/ storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and
the relationship of the above to the location of the river channel;



            2.   A typical valley cross section showing the
channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and
high water information;



            3.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations, or
contouring of the ground; pertinent structure fill, or storage elevation;
size, location and special arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water supply,
sanitary facilities; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation
upstream and downstream; and soil types;



            4.   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of
the channel or flow line of the stream; and



            5.   Specifications for building construction and
materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.



         (b)   Transmit one copy of the information described in
division (B)(3)(a) above, to a designated engineer or other expert person or
agency for technical assistance, where necessary in evaluating the proposed
project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of the
flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for the protection and
other technical matters.



         (c)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the
designated engineer or expert, the Council shall determine the specific flood
hazard at the site, and elevate the suitability of the proposed use in
relationship to the flood hazard.



   (C)   Standards for granting special use permits.



      (1)   A special use permit may be granted by the Council after
demonstration by evidence that:



         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare;



         (b)   The special use will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values
within the neighborhood;



         (c)   The establishment of the special use will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district;



         (d)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and
necessary facilities have been or will be provided;



         (e)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in
the public streets;



         (f)   The special use will, in all other respects,
conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located;
and



         (g)   In passing on special use permits in the Floodway
and Flood Fringe Districts, the Board shall consider all relevant factors
specified elsewhere in this chapter, and in addition thereto, the following
factors:



            1.   The danger to life and property due to
increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;



            2.   The danger that materials may be swept onto
other lands or downstream to the injury of others;



            3.   The proposed water supply and sanitary
systems and the abilities of these systems to prevent disease, contamination,
and unsanitary conditions;



            4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility
and its contents to flood damage and the effect of the damage on the
individual owner;



            5.   The importance of the services provided by
the proposed facility to the community;



            6.   The requirements of a facility for a
waterfront location;



            7.   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use;



            8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



            9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and the floodplain management program for the city;



            10.   The safety of access to the property in
times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



            11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration,
rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site;
and



            12.   Other factors which are relevant to the
purposes of this chapter.



      (2)   The Planning Commission may recommend, and the Council
may stipulate the conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the requirements specified in this chapter.



      (3)   Within the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, the
Council shall also stipulate, as an additional condition or restriction,
flood proofing measures which are in accordance with the State Building Code.
Furthermore, the applicant shall be required to submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood
proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



   (D)   Revocation of special use permits.



      (1)   Where a special use permit has been issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the permit shall become null and void without
further action by the Planning Commission or the Council unless work thereon
commences within one year of the date of granting the special use.



      (2)   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only
one particular use and shall expire if that use shall cease for more than 12
consecutive months.



(2003 Code, § 9.61-4)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977;
Ord. 83-5, passed 8-5-1983)



Editor’s Note:



   If a mobile home park is converted to another use requiring a variance
or zoning change, the Planning Commission must give notice of hearing to each
occupant. See M.S. § 327C.095.



§ 155.59  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Adoption. This chapter may be amended, changed or altered only
by a favorable majority vote of the Council and only after a public hearing
has been duly advertised and held by the Planning Commission as provided for
by M.S. § 394.26, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Kinds of amendments. An amendment to this chapter may be one
of the following:



      (1)   A change in a district’s boundary (re-zoning);



      (2)   A change in a district’s regulations; or



      (3)   A change in any other provision of this chapter.



   (C)   Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings for amending this
chapter shall be initiated by at least one of the following three methods:



      (1)   By petition of an owner or owners of property which is
proposed to be re-zoned, or for which district regulation changes are
proposed;



      (2)   By recommendation of the Planning Commission; or



      (3)   By action of the Council.



   (D)   Required exhibits for re-zoning or district regulations
changes initiated by property owners.



      (1)   The boundary survey and plot plan as required for
building permit applications.



      (2)   Certification of notification of 100% of owners of
property located within 350 feet of the property for which re-zoning or
district regulation changes is sought demonstrating the owners have been
advised of the issue for consideration, and the time, date and place of the
public hearing to be held before the Planning Commission and/or the Council
as appropriate, to determine the appropriateness of the re-zoning or other
changes sought.



   (E)   Floodplain designation. The Floodplain Designation on zoning
maps shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that
the designation is in error or that the areas are filled to an elevation at
or above the flood protection elevation, and are contiguous to other lands
lying outside the floodplain districts. Special exceptions to this rule may
be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources, if he or she
determines that, through other measures, lands are protected adequately for
the intended uses. All amendments to this chapter (relating to the Floodway
or Flood Fringe Districts), including amendments to the official zoning map,
must be submitted to, and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources
prior to adoption.



(2003 Code, § 9.61-5)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1953; Ord. 77-4, passed 4-8-1977;
Ord. 83-5, passed 8-5-1983)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES; AGREEMENTS



      II.   LAND USAGE



      III.   VACATIONS



      IV.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



      V.   ANNEXATIONS



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES; AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




- 
 
3-4-1968
 
Grants franchise to Great Northern Railway Company to construct, maintain and
operate a railroad spur track in the city for a period of 20 years


74-1
 
1-7-1974
 
Authorizes entering into agreement for membership with Missouri Basin
Municipal Power Agency


82-2
 
4-5-1982
 
Grants gas franchise to Great Plains Natural Gas Company for a period of 20
years


85-6
 
11-18-1985
 
Grants cable communications franchise to North American Communications
Corporation for a period of 15 years


5
 
5-2-1988
 
Grants franchise to Burlington Northern Railroad to construct, maintain and
operate a railroad spur track in the city for a period of 20 years


88
 
- -1999
 
Grants franchise to Triax Midwest Associates, L.P., to construct, operate and
maintain a cable communications system in the city


88
 
10-26-1999
 
Grants cable television franchise to Triax Midwest Associates, L.P., for a
period of 15 years


- 
 
10-27-1999
 
Grants a cable television franchise to Triax Midwest Associates, L.P.


103
 
3-18-2002
 
Grants gas franchise to Great Plains Natural Gas Company for a period of 20
years


119
 
9-15-2003
 
Amends Ord. passed 2-18-2002, granting gas franchise to Great Plains Natural
Gas Company


124
 
12-6-2004
 
Amends Ord. 103, granting gas franchise fee to Great Plains Natural Gas
Company


126
 
3-2-2005
 
Grants to Centerpoint Energy Resources Corporation a nonexclusive franchise
to construct, operate, repair and maintain facilities and equipment for the
transportation, distribution, manufacture and sale of gas energy


127
 
3-21-2005
 
Amends Ord. 126, passed 2-22-2005, granting gas franchise to Centerpoint
Energy Resources Corporation


179
 
1-3-2017
 
Grants cable franchise to Mediacom Minnesota LLC to construct, operate, and
maintain a cable system in the city


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  LAND USAGE



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




78-1
 
3-6-1978
 
Waives certain provisions relating to platting


-
 
12-21-1982
 
Assigned new names to certain streets in the city


74-6
 
11-4-1984
 
Opened a street to be named Holiday Road


39
 
10-18-1993
 
Named a street running part along Baldwin’s Second Addition as John Other
Day Road


60
 
5-20-1996
 
Renamed Airport Drive as Winter Drive, and Bunch Drive as Volstead Drive


66
 
6-17-1996
 
Renamed Old County Road 38 as Winter Drive


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
1-4-1937
 
Vacates portions of Sixth Street, Granite Street and Eighth Avenue,
Pillsbury’s Second Addition


Res. -
 
10-24-1941
 
Vacates a portion of Hoit Street


-
 
11-3-1948
 
Vacates portions of Water Street, original plat


-
 
2-1-1950
 
Vacates portions of 12th Avenue, 8th Street and 10th Street, Pillsbury’s
Second Addition


-
 
7-5-1950
 
Vacates portions of Twelfth Avenue, Pillsbury’s Second Addition


-
 
4-21-1952
 
Vacates portions of Tenth Street, Lathrop Addition and portion of Twelfth
Street lying between Blocks 15 and 16, Lathrop’s Second Addition


-
 
4-21-1952
 
Vacates portions of 12th Street lying between Blocks 17 and 18, Lathrop’s
Second Addition


-
 
7-7-1952
 
Vacates portion of Third Street, lying south of Prentice Street and 12th
Avenue


-
 
9-17-1952
 
Vacates portion of Grandview Street,  Peterson’s Addition


-
 
12-3-1952
 
Vacates portion of North Street, original plat


-
 
5-18-1953
 
Vacates portions of Sixth Street, Pillsbury’s Second Addition


-
 
7-6-1955
 
Vacates south 16.7 feet of Twelfth Avenue


-
 
10-3-1955
 
Vacates portion of Lincoln Street


-
 
8-20-1956
 
Vacates portion of Prentice Street and Third Street, original plat


-
 
8-20-1956
 
Vacates portion of East Street, Baldwin’s Second Addition


-
 
11-5-1956
 
Vacates portion of Tenth Street and Eighth Street, Pillsbury’s Second
Addition


-
 
3-18-1957
 
Vacates portion of Twelfth Avenue,  Pillsbury’s Second Addition


-
 
1-5-1959
 
Vacates Fifteenth Avenue and portion of Fourteenth Avenue abutting
Pillsbury’s Second Addition


-
 
1-4-1960
 
Vacates portion of 13th Avenue, west of 9th Street


-
 
3-21-1960
 
Vacates portion of Twelfth Avenue, abutting Block 20 of Lathrop’s Second
Addition


-
 
6-6-1960
 
Vacates portion of Eighth Avenue, abutting Block 14, Pillsbury’s Second
Addition


-
 
11-19-1962
 
Vacates portion of alley in Block 15, original plat


-
 
11-19-1962
 
Vacates portion of 13th Avenue, north of Blocks 47 and 48, Pillsbury’s
Second Addition


-
 
6-17-1963
 
Vacates portion of alley in Block 15, original plat


-
 
6-19-1967
 
Vacates Eighth Avenue between 13th and 14th Streets, Lathrop’s Second
Addition


75-5
 
9-9-1975
 
Vacates portion of Eighth Avenue between Block 1 of Phillippe’s Second
Addition and Block 8 of Lathrop’s Second Addition


77-12
 
11-7-1977
 
Vacates east 150 feet of Fairview Avenue (now part of Regal Heights Addition)
and west 50 feet of Fairview Avenue entering Chippewa County Highway No. 5


77-13
 
11-21-1977
 
Vacates portion of 8th Avenue between Block 1 and Block 8 of Lathrop’s
Second Addition


80-7
 
10-20-1980
 
Vacates Granite Street from south line of Seventh Avenue to south line of
Eighth Avenue and westerly 150 feet of Eighth Avenue between Fourth Street
and Granite Street


81-5
 
5-18-1981
 
Vacates part of Skyline Drive and Miller’s Circle in plat of Highland Park
Third Addition


81-6
 
5-18-1981
 
Vacates parks in Highland Park, Third Addition


81-10
 
10-26-1981
 
Vacates alley in Block 37, original plat


82-5
 
11-1-1982
 
Vacates portion of Third Street, original plat


83-2
 
6-6-1983
 
Vacates portion of unnamed street adjacent to Baldwin’s Addition


84-1
 
5-21-1984
 
Vacates portion of eighth Street between Blocks 23 and 24, Lathrop’s
Addition


39
 
10-18-1993
 
Vacates parts of Water Street and Sixth Avenue along Block 3


54
 
11-9-1995
 
Vacates part of Elm Street adjacent to Baldwin’s Addition


55
 
11-23-1995
 
Vacates part of Warren Avenue, Pillsbury’s Fourth Addition


71
 
6-16-1997
 
Vacates portions of 13th Street


73
 
10-6-1997
 
Vacates a portion of 10th Avenue


78
 
9-8-1998
 
Vacates portion of an unnamed street


79
 
10-19-1998
 
Vacates portion of an unnamed street


86
 
7-19-1999
 
Vacates a portion of an alley lying in Block 6, Baldwin’s Addition


87
 
7-19-1999
 
Vacates a portion of 4th Street


93
 
4-2-2001
 
Vacates portion of 8th Avenue


108
 
12-16-2002
 
Vacates portion of Pillsbury Drive in Industrial Park, First Addition


120
 
11-17-2003
 
Vacates a portion of an alleyway


133
 
7-17-2006
 
Vacates a street platted as Cliffside Drive


134
 
9-5-2006
 
Vacates a portion of 14th Avenue


135
 
- -
 
Vacates 14th Avenue between 6th and 7th Street


137
 
6-20-2007
 
Vacates portion of 12th Street


140
 
7-16-2007
 
Vacates portion of 12th Street


146
 
8-18-2008
 
Vacates a portion of 4th Street


152
 
1-4-2010
 
Vacates portion of Miller Street


185
 
6-5-2017
 
Vacates portion of Oak Street between Center Street and vacated North Street


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




75-4
 
7-7-1975
 
Zoning map amendment


76-5
 
6-7-1976
 
Zoning map amendment


77-15
 
12-19-1977
 
Zoning map amendment


78-2
 
3-6-1978
 
Zoning map amendment


78-4
 
7-5-1978
 
Zoning map amendment


79-2
 
10-18-1979
 
Zoning map amendment


81-3
 
4-6-1981
 
Zoning map amendment


83-1
 
5-16-1983
 
Zoning map amendment


83-3
 
7-18-1983
 
Zoning map amendment


85-1
 
4-1-1985
 
Zoning map amendment


85-8
 
12-2-1985
 
Zoning map amendment


86-6
 
8-4-1986
 
Zoning map amendment


86-10
 
12-2-1986
 
Zoning map amendment


3
 
8-3-1987
 
Zoning map amendment


4
 
10-5-1987
 
Zoning map amendment (Highland Court and Highland Park)


9
 
12-5-1988
 
Zoning map amendment (Pillsbury and Pinney)


17
 
6-18-1990
 
Zoning map amendment (Sandberg, Chippewa County)


33
 
1-6-1992
 
Zoning map amendment (Highland Park and Industrial Park)


36
 
6-1-1992
 
Zoning map amendment (Chippewa County)


37
 
7-6-1992
 
Zoning map amendment (original plat)


38
 
7-6-1992
 
Zoning map amendment (Phillipies Addition and Thull’s Apartment)


41
 
8-15-1994
 
Zoning map amendment (Pillsbury)


49
 
7-3-1995
 
Zoning map amendment (Industrial Park)


50
 
8-21-1995
 
Zoning map amendment (Chippewa County)


53
 
10-16-1995
 
Zoning map amendment (Chippewa County)


70
 
12-2-1996
 
Changes lots from R-1 to I-2 District


84
 
6-7-1999
 
Changes land from C-1 to R-2 District


90
 
11-20-2000
 
Changes lots from I-2 to A District


96
 
10-10-2001
 
Zoning map amendment (Brad Hall)


98
 
11-19-2001
 
Zoning map amendment (Sawmill)


102
 
3-18-2002
 
Zoning map amendment (Park Street)


109
 
1-6-2003
 
Zoning map amendment (Hubent)


130
 
6-5-2006
 
Changes lots from R-1 to R-M


139
 
7-11-2007
 
Changes land from R-1 to I-2


143
 
6-2-2008
 
Changes land from C-1 to R-2


145
 
7-21-2008
 
Changes land from I-2 to R-1


151
 
7-20-2009
 
Changes land from R-1 to I-2


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V: ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
12-15-1969
 
Annexation of parcel abutting 33-116-39 West of 5th P.M.


73-4
 
9-17-1973
 
Annexation of property


73-4a
 
11-5-1973
 
Annexation of property


73-7
 
12-3-1973
 
Annexation of property


74-4
 
10-21-1974
 
Annexation of property


74-5
 
10-21-1974
 
Annexation of property


76-2
 
3-1-1976
 
Annexation of property


77-1
 
3-31-1977
 
Annexation of property


77-5
 
5-2-1977
 
Annexation of property


77-9
 
9-6-1977
 
Annexation of property


Res. 96-142
 
9-3-1996
 
Annexation of property (Skyview East Addition)


Res. 96-206
 
12-16-1996
 
Annexation of property (Properties west of 17th Street)


Res. 02-98
 
6-3-2002
 
Annexation of property (Stony Run Addition)


Res. 03-109
 
6-30-2003
 
Annexation of property (ethanol plant site)


164
 
11-18-2013
 
Annexation of property (Granite Falls Municipal Hospital and Manor)


176
 
7-18-2016
 
Annexation of property (Minnesota Falls Township, Yellow Medicine County)


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 2003 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Reference
 
Code Section




10A.14
 
115.38


Chapter 13
 
30.17; 110.13


14.001—14.69
 
115.02


15.99
 
154.09; 154.11


16B.69
 
150.01


18.77(8)
 
95.037


18.83(2)
 
95.037


18G.07
 
95.002


35.71
 
91.07


65A.50
 
30.15


65B.48(5)
 
71.02


84.81—84.90
 
71.01


84.92—84.929   
 
71.02


84.9257
 
71.02


88.16—88.22
 
95.070


89.001
 
95.002


89.01
 
95.002


89.51—89.64
 
95.002


103A.208
 
155.12


Chapter 103F
 
151.01


Chapter 103G
 
151.11; 151.16


103G.298
 
51.14


120A.20
 
114.02; 155.14


144.391
 
112.01


Chapter 145A
 
134.07; 134.08; 134.09


145A.02(17)
 
134.07


145A.04
 
134.08


145A.04(8)(b)
 
134.08


145A.04(8)(c)
 
134.08


145A.08
 
134.08


145A.09—145A.12
 
134.07


145A.10
 
134.01


Chapter 152
 
130.04


152.01
 
130.04


152.02, Schedules I—V
 
134.07


160.22
 
95.002


Chapter 168
 
95.085


168B.011(3)
 
95.020


Chapter 169
 
70.01; 70.07; 71.02; 90.06; 95.085


169.121
 
71.01


169.522
 
71.02


169.69
 
70.12


169.693
 
70.12


169.70
 
71.02


169.999
 
10.98


Chapter 171
 
71.02


216C.06, Subd. 14
 
155.57


Chapter 216D
 
96.05; 96.15; 111.09


216D.01—216D.09
 
96.05


222.37
 
111.09


237.162
 
96.02; 96.10


237.163
 
96.10


Chapter 238
 
111.09


273.73(8)
 
31.14


299F.50
 
150.31


299F.362(1)
 
150.31


300.06
 
96.04


Chapter 306
 
92.04


306.29
 
92.04


325J.09
 
116.06


326B.101—326B.19 4
 
150.01


326B.121(d)
 
150.01; 150.07


326B.133(1)
 
150.01


326B.148
 
150.01


326B.153
 
150.02


327C.095
 
155.57; 155.58


Chapter 329
 
113.03


340A.301(b)
 
155.09


340A.301(6)(d)
 
115.49; 115.50; 155.09


340A.301(7)
 
115.49


340A.301(7)(b)
 
115.49; 115.50


340A.404(B)
 
115.40


340A.404(4)(b)
 
115.47


340A.404(5)
 
115.40


340A.503(1)(a)(1)
 
133.05


340A.504, Subd. 3
 
115.39


340A.90
 
133.01


343.21
 
150.10


343.22
 
91.09


343.29
 
91.09


344.04(a)
 
116.05


344.04(h)
 
116.05


360.063
 
154.01


360.063(6)(a)
 
154.09


360.068(2)
 
154.13


Chapter 364
 
116.04


364.06
 
30.17; 110.13


364.09
 
30.17; 110.13


366.011
 
31.16; 32.01


366.012
 
31.16; 32.01


393.301
 
155.12


394.26
 
155.59


412.02
 
30.03


412.022
 
30.03


415.01
 
32.01


415.01(2)
 
31.16


437.02
 
113.03


Chapter 429
 
96.15; 150.10


429.061
 
95.001; 95.002; 95.024


429.101
 
95.001; 95.024; 95.043


Chapter 462
 
96.15; 151.01


462.351 et seq.
 
153.01


462.354, Subd. 2
 
155.57


462.357, Subd. 6
 
155.57


462.358
 
153.01


462.3597
 
155.06


462.361
 
153.06


462.3593
 
155.18


462.3593, Subd. 9
 
155.18


463.15—463.26
 
95.001


463.17
 
95.023


466.02
 
134.05


469.003
 
31.14


469.048—469.068
 
31.14


469.190
 
33.02; 33.15


471.476
 
31.16


514.67
 
95.001


Chapter 609
 
93.07; 95.025


609.377
 
150.10


609.378
 
150.10


609.523
 
116.05


609.531
 
130.04


609.72
 
111.04


617.80—617.87
 
114.09


617.241
 
155.14


626.862
 
10.20


631.48
 
10.99


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 2003 CODE



 

2003 Code Section
 
2014 Code Section




1.02
 
10.05


2-42-1
 
92.01


2-42-2
 
92.02


2-42-3
 
92.03


2-42-4
 
92.04


2-42-5
 
92.05


2-42-6
 
92.06


2-42-7
 
92.07


2-42-8
 
92.08


2.01
 
30.01


2.02
 
30.02


2.025
 
30.03


2.026
 
30.04


2.03
 
30.05


2.04
 
30.06


2.05
 
30.07


2.06
 
30.08


2.20
 
30.09


2.21
 
30.10


2.22
 
30.11


2.30
 
31.01


2.31
 
31.03


2.32
 
31.04


2.33
 
31.05


2.34
 
31.06


2.35
 
31.07


2.36
 
31.08


2.37
 
31.09


2.38
 
31.10


2.50
 
31.02


2.51
 
31.11


2.52
 
31.12


2.53
 
31.13


2.54
 
31.14


2.55
 
31.15


2.56
 
31.16


2.57
 
31.17


2.58
 
31.18


2.59
 
31.19


2.70
 
95.085—95.088


2.72
 
30.16


2.73
 
30.12


2.74
 
30.13


2.75
 
30.14


2.76
 
30.15


3.01
 
50.01


3.02
 
50.02


3.03
 
50.03


3.04
 
50.04


3.05
 
50.05


3.06
 
50.06


3.07
 
50.07


3.20-1
 
51.01


3.20-2
 
51.02


3.20-3
 
51.03


3.20-4
 
51.04


3.20-5
 
51.05


3.20-6
 
51.06


3.20-7
 
51.07


3.20-8
 
51.08


3.20-9
 
51.09


3.20-10
 
51.10


3.20-11
 
51.11


3.20-12
 
51.12


3.20-13
 
51.13


3.30-1
 
52.01


3.30-2
 
52.02


3.30-3
 
52.03


3.30-4
 
52.04


3.30-5
 
52.05


3.30-6
 
52.06


3.30-7
 
52.07


3.30-8
 
52.08


3.40-1
 
53.01


3.40-2
 
53.02


3.40-3
 
53.03


3.40-4
 
53.04


3.40-5
 
53.05


3.40-6
 
53.06


3.40-7
 
53.07


3.40-8
 
53.08


3.40-9
 
53.09


3.40-10
 
53.10


3.40-11
 
53.11


3.40-12
 
53.12


3.40-13
 
53.13


4.04
 
150.03


4.20
 
150.04


4.21
 
150.05


4.22
 
150.06


4.23
 
150.07


5.01
 
115.01


5.02
 
115.02


5.03
 
115.03


5.04
 
115.04


5.05
 
115.05


5.06
 
115.06


5.07
 
115.07


5.08
 
115.08


5.09
 
115.09


5.10
 
115.10


5.11
 
115.11


5.12
 
115.12


5.13
 
115.13


5.14
 
115.14


5.15
 
115.25


5.16
 
115.26


5.17
 
115.27


5.18
 
115.28


5.19
 
115.29


5.20
 
115.30


5.21
 
115.31


5.30
 
115.32


5.31
 
115.33


5.32
 
115.34


5.33
 
115.35


5.50
 
115.36


5.51
 
115.37


5.52
 
115.38


5.53
 
115.39


5.60
 
115.40


5.70
 
115.42


5.75
 
115.43


5.80
 
115.44


5.90
 
115.45


5.91
 
115.46


5.92
 
115.47


5.95
 
115.48


6.01
 
110.01


6.02
 
110.02


6.03
 
110.03


6.04
 
110.04


6.05
 
110.05


6.06
 
110.06


6.07
 
110.07


6.08
 
110.08


6.09
 
110.09


6.10
 
110.10


6.11
 
110.11


6.30
 
111.01


6.31
 
111.02


6.32
 
111.03


6.33
 
111.04


6.34
 
111.05


6.35-1
 
112.01


6.35-2
 
112.02


6.35-3
 
112.03


6.35-4
 
112.04


6.35-5
 
112.05


6.35-6
 
112.06


6.35-7
 
112.07


6.35-8
 
112.08


6.35-9
 
112.09


6.35-10
 
112.10


6.35-11
 
112.11


6.35-13
 
112.13


6.36
 
111.06


6.37
 
111.07


6.38
 
111.08


6.40-1
 
114.01


6.40-2
 
114.02


6.40-3
 
114.03


6.40-4
 
114.04


6.40-5
 
114.05


6.40-6
 
114.06


6.40-7
 
114.07


6.40-8
 
114.08


6.40-9
 
114.09


6.40-10
 
114.10


6.40-11
 
114.11


6.40-12
 
114.12


6.40-13
 
114.13


6.41
 
111.09


7.01
 
70.01


7.02
 
70.02


7.03
 
70.03


7.04
 
70.04


7.05
 
70.25


7.06
 
70.26


7.08
 
70.27


7.09
 
70.05


7.10
 
70.06


7.11
 
70.28


7.12
 
70.29


7.13
 
70.30


7.30
 
70.07


7.31
 
70.08


7.32
 
70.09


7.33
 
70.10


7.34
 
70.11


7.35
 
71.01


7.36
 
71.02


7.50
 
72.01


7.51
 
72.02


7.52
 
72.03


7.53
 
72.04


7.54
 
72.05


7.55
 
72.06


7.56
 
72.07


7.57
 
72.08


7.58
 
72.09


7.59
 
72.10


7.60
 
72.11


7.61
 
72.12


7.62
 
72.13


7.63
 
72.14


7.64
 
72.15


7.65
 
72.16


7.66
 
72.17


7.67
 
70.12


8.01
 
130.01


8.03
 
112.14


8.04-1
 
132.01


8.04-2
 
132.02


8.04-3
 
132.03


8.04-4
 
132.04


8.04-5
 
132.05


8.04-6
 
132.06


8.04-7
 
132.07


8.05-1
 
91.01


8.05-2
 
91.02


8.05-3
 
91.03


8.05-4
 
91.04


8.05-5
 
91.05


8.05-6
 
91.06


8.05-7
 
91.07


8.05-8
 
91.08


8.05-9
 
91.09


8.05-10
 
91.10


8.05-11
 
91.11


8.05-12
 
91.12


8.05-13
 
91.13


8.05-14
 
91.14


8.05-15
 
91.15


8.05-16
 
91.16


8.05-17
 
91.17


8.05-18
 
91.18


8.05-19
 
91.19


8.05-20
 
91.20


8.05-21
 
91.21


8.05-22
 
91.22


8.05-23
 
91.23


8.23-1
 
94.01


8.23-2
 
94.02


8.23-3
 
94.03


8.23-4
 
94.04


8.41
 
130.02


8.42
 
130.03


8.43
 
90.01


8.44
 
90.02


8.45
 
90.03


8.46
 
90.04


8.47
 
90.05


8.48
 
90.06


8.60
 
130.04


8.61
 
130.05


9.01
 
155.01


9.02
 
155.02


9.10
 
155.03


9.11
 
155.04


9.12
 
155.05


9.13
 
155.06


9.14
 
155.07


9.20
 
155.08


9.21
 
155.09


9.30
 
155.10


9.31
 
155.11


9.45
 
155.12


9.50
 
155.13


9.51-1
 
155.30


9.51-2
 
155.31


9.51-3
 
155.32


9.51-4
 
155.33


9.51-5
 
155.34


9.51-6
 
155.35


9.51-8
 
155.36


9.51-9
 
155.37


9.51-10
 
155.38


9.51-11
 
155.39


9.51-12
 
155.40


9.51-13
 
155.41


9.51-14
 
155.42


9.52
 
155.14


9.60
 
155.15


9.61-1
 
155.55


9.61-2
 
155.56


9.61-3
 
155.57


9.61-4
 
155.58


9.61-5
 
155.59


9.62
 
155.16


10.01
 
153.01


10.02
 
153.02


10.10
 
153.03


10.20
 
153.04


10.21
 
153.05


10.30
 
153.06


11.01
 
152.01


11.10
 
152.02


11.11
 
152.03


11.12
 
152.04


11.20
 
152.05


11.21
 
152.06


11.22
 
152.07


11.30
 
152.08


12.01
 
33.01


12.02
 
33.02


12.03
 
33.03


12.04
 
33.04


12.05
 
33.05


12.06
 
33.06


12.07
 
33.07


12.08
 
33.08


12.09
 
33.09


12.10
 
33.10


12.11
 
33.99


12.12
 
33.11


12.13
 
33.12


12.14
 
33.13


12.15
 
33.14


12.16
 
33.15


12.17
 
33.16


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


-
 
10-24-1941
 
TSO, Table III


96-142
 
9-3-1996
 
TSO, Table V


96-206
 
12-16-1996
 
TSO, Table V


02-98
 
6-3-2002
 
TSO, Table V


03-109
 
6-30-2003
 
TSO, Table V


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
1-4-1937
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
11-3-1948
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
2-1-1950
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
7-5-1950
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
4-21-1952
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
4-21-1952
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
7-7-1952
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
9-17-1952
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
12-3-1952
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
2-16-1953
 
153.02; 153.03; 153.05; 153.06; 155.01; 155.02; 155.05; 155.06;
155.08—155.11; 155.15; 155.42; 155.55; 155.56; 155.57; 155.58; 155.59


-
 
5-18-1953
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
7-6-1955
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
10-3-1955
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
8-20-1956
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
8-20-1956
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
11-5-1956
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
3-18-1957
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
1-5-1959
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
1-4-1960
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
3-21-1960
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
6-6-1960
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
11-19-1962
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
11-19-1962
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
6-17-1963
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
6-19-1967
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
3-4-1968
 
TSO, Table I


-
 
5-24-1968
 
152.01; 152.03; 152.06; 152.08


-
 
12-15-1969
 
TSO, Table V


73-1
 
6-8-1973
 
152.01


73-4
 
9-17-1973
 
TSO, Table V


73-4a
 
11-5-1973
 
TSO, Table V


73-7
 
12-3-1973
 
TSO, Table V


74-1
 
1-7-1974
 
TSO, Table I


74-3
 
6-7-1974
 
155.07; 155.13


74-4
 
10-21-1974
 
TSO, Table V


74-5
 
10-21-1974
 
TSO, Table V


75-4
 
7-7-1975
 
TSO, Table IV


75-5
 
9-9-1975
 
TSO, Table III


76-2
 
3-1-1976
 
TSO, Table V


76-5
 
6-7-1976
 
TSO, Table IV


77-1
 
3-31-1977
 
TSO, Table V


77-4
 
4-8-1977
 
153.03; 155.01; 155.02; 155.15; 155.56; 155.57; 155.58; 155.59


77-5
 
5-2-1977
 
TSO, Table V


77-9
 
9-6-1977
 
TSO, Table V


77-12
 
11-7-1977
 
TSO, Table III


77-13
 
11-21-1977
 
TSO, Table III


77-15
 
12-19-1977
 
TSO, Table IV


78-1
 
3-6-1978
 
TSO, Table I


78-2
 
3-6-1978
 
TSO, Table IV


78-4
 
7-5-1978
 
TSO, Table IV


79-2
 
10-18-1979
 
TSO, Table IV


80-1
 
3-14-1980
 
153.05


80-5
 
5-9-1980
 
155.02; 155.05


80-7
 
10-20-1980
 
TSO, Table III


81-3
 
4-6-1981
 
TSO, Table IV


81-5
 
5-18-1981
 
TSO, Table III


81-6
 
5-18-1981
 
TSO, Table III


81-10
 
10-26-1981
 
TSO, Table III


82-2
 
4-5-1982
 
TSO, Table I


82-5
 
11-1-1982
 
TSO, Table III


-
 
12-21-1982
 
TSO, Table II


83-1
 
5-16-1983
 
TSO, Table IV


83-2
 
6-6-1983
 
TSO, Table III


83-3
 
7-18-1983
 
TSO, Table IV


83-5
 
8-5-1983
 
155.58; 155.59


84-1
 
5-21-1984
 
TSO, Table III


74-6
 
11-4-1984
 
TSO, Table II


85-1
 
4-1-1985
 
TSO, Table IV


85-3
 
6-21-1985
 
31.14


85-6
 
11-18-1985
 
TSO, Table I


85-8
 
12-2-1985
 
TSO, Table IV


86-3
 
6-6-1986
 
155.12


86-6
 
8-4-1986
 
TSO, Table IV


86-9
 
11-14-1986
 
155.09


86-10
 
12-2-1986
 
TSO, Table IV


86-11
 
12-4-1986
 
155.08


2
 
5-29-1987
 
92.01—92.08


3
 
8-3-1987
 
TSO, Table IV


4
 
10-5-1987
 
TSO, Table IV


5
 
5-2-1988
 
TSO, Table I


7
 
9-23-1988
 
52.08; 111.08


9
 
12-5-1988
 
TSO, Table IV


10
 
9-15-1989
 
31.10


13
 
1-19-1990
 
111.07


14
 
2-9-1990
 
152.02


15
 
4-27-1990
 
31.14


17
 
6-18-1990
 
TSO, Table IV


18
 
8-24-1990
 
70.27


19
 
11-22-1990
 
52.02


21
 
12-28-1990
 
155.10; 155.11


22
 
3-22-1991
 
115.12


23
 
3-22-1991
 
115.42


26
 
4-26-1991
 
30.11


27
 
4-26-1991
 
52.02


28
 
4-26-1991
 
115.09; 115.28


31
 
5-17-1991
 
155.15


32
 
5-19-1991
 
111.02


33
 
1-6-1992
 
TSO, Table IV


35
 
6-29-1992
 
155.37


36
 
6-1-1992
 
TSO, Table IV


37
 
7-6-1992
 
TSO, Table IV


38
 
7-6-1992
 
TSO, Table IV


39
 
10-18-1993
 
TSO, Table II, TSO, Table III


40
 
7-1-1994
 
70.09


41
 
8-15-1994
 
TSO, Table IV


45
 
12-23-1994
 
130.05


46
 
12-23-1994
 
30.03


49
 
7-3-1995
 
TSO, Table IV


50
 
8-21-1995
 
TSO, Table IV


52
 
9-29-1995
 
152.07


53
 
10-16-1995
 
TSO, Table IV


54
 
11-9-1995
 
TSO, Table III


55
 
11-23-1995
 
TSO, Table III


56
 
1-24-1995
 
50.05


57
 
1-26-1996
 
90.04


59
 
4-19-1996
 
155.02


60
 
5-20-1996
 
TSO, Table II


61
 
5-31-1996
 
30.04; 30.15; 95.085; 95.086


63
 
5-31-1996
 
115.01; 115.02; 115.06; 115.14; 115.31; 115.38; 115.45


64
 
5-31-1996
 
70.07


65
 
5-31-1996
 
91.09


66
 
6-17-1996
 
TSO, Table II


68
 
9-20-1996
 
155.05; 155.06


70
 
12-2-1996
 
TSO, Table IV


69
 
1-1-1997
 
30.10


71
 
6-16-1997
 
TSO, Table III


73
 
10-6-1997
 
TSO, Table III


75
 
12-12-1997
 
114.01—114.13


76
 
12-12-1997
 
155.14


77
 
5-22-1998
 
111.05


78
 
9-8-1998
 
TSO, Table III


79
 
10-19-1998
 
TSO, Table III


80
 
10-29-1998
 
112.01—112.13; 130.02


80
 
10-30-1998
 
112.14


81
 
12-18-1998
 
70.08; 72.03; 72.09; 72.11; 72.12; 90.05


88
 
- -1999
 
TSO, Table I


82
 
2-26-1999
 
31.19


83
 
4-9-1999
 
91.12


84
 
6-7-1999
 
TSO, Table IV


86
 
7-19-1999
 
TSO, Table III


87
 
7-19-1999
 
TSO, Table III


88
 
10-26-1999
 
TSO, Table I


-
 
10-27-1999
 
TSO, Table I


89
 
2-11-2000
 
155.06


90
 
11-20-2000
 
TSO, Table IV


91
 
11-24-2000
 
33.01—33.16; 33.99


92
 
2-22-2001
 
150.05; 150.07


93
 
4-2-2001
 
TSO, Table III


94
 
5-11-2001
 
94.01—94.04


95
 
9-14-2001
 
91.22


96
 
10-10-2001
 
TSO, Table IV


98
 
11-19-2001
 
TSO, Table IV


99
 
12-7-2001
 
31.17


100
 
3-8-2002
 
155.16


101
 
3-8-2002
 
111.09


102
 
3-18-2002
 
TSO, Table IV


103
 
3-18-2002
 
TSO, Table I


104
 
9-20-2002
 
91.23


106
 
12-6-2002
 
155.15


107
 
12-06-2002
 
152.04


108
 
12-16-2002
 
TSO, Table III


109
 
1-6-2003
 
TSO, Table IV


121
 
1-5-2003
 
93.01—93.07


110
 
1-10-2003
 
115.47


111
 
2-14-2003
 
30.10


112
 
2-28-2003
 
70.12


115
 
5-19-2003
 
150.08


116
 
7-7-2003
 
155.05


117
 
8-4-2003
 
155.13


118
 
9-15-2003
 
155.02


119
 
9-15-2003
 
TSO, Table I


120
 
11-17-2003
 
TSO, Table III


122
 
1-5-2004
 
30.05


123
 
10-18-2004
 
134.01—134.09


124
 
12-6-2004
 
TSO, Table I


125
 
2-7-2005
 
91.07


126
 
3-2-2005
 
TSO, Table I


127
 
3-21-2005
 
TSO, Table I


128
 
12-5-2005
 
155.08


129
 
12-19-2005
 
32.01—32.07


130
 
6-5-2006
 
TSO, Table IV


132
 
6-22-2006
 
31.17


133
 
7-17-2006
 
TSO, Table III


134
 
9-5-2006
 
TSO, Table III


135
 
- -
 
TSO, Table III


135
 
9-5-2006
 
51.14


136
 
11-23-2006
 
91.01; 91.03; 91.04; 91.12


138
 
6-18-2007
 
150.08


137
 
6-20-2007
 
TSO, Table III


139
 
7-11-2007
 
TSO, Table IV


140
 
7-16-2007
 
TSO, Table III


141
 
8-22-2007
 
155.06


142
 
1-7-2008
 
150.01


143
 
6-2-2008
 
TSO, Table IV


144
 
6-2-2008
 
150.02


145
 
7-21-2008
 
TSO, Table IV


146
 
8-18-2008
 
TSO, Table III


148
 
11-3-2008
 
155.05


149
 
6-1-2009
 
31.12


150
 
6-1-2009
 
31.19


151
 
7-20-2009
 
TSO, Table IV


152
 
1-4-2010
 
TSO, Table III


153
 
1-19-2010
 
155.17


154
 
5-3-2010
 
155.33


155
 
5-3-2010
 
150.09


156
 
1-3-2011
 
115.40


157
 
1-18-2011
 
112.02; 112.06; 112.12


158
 
2-22-2011
 
72.10


159
 
6-20-2011
 
133.01—133.07


-
 
1-4-2012
 
154.01—154.17


161
 
3-5-2012
 
151.01—151.19


162
 
5-21-2012
 
155.08


163
 
7-1-2013
 
110.12; 150.10; 150.25—150.33


164
 
11-18-2013
 
TSO, Table V


165
 
12-2-2013
 
30.17; 110.13


166
 
3-17-2014
 
95.002


167
 
5-5-2014
 
115.01; 115.49; 115.50


168
 
6-5-2014
 
155.09


170
 
7-7-2014
 
91.01


171
 
7-21-2014
 
31.16


173
 
10-20-2014
 
95.025


174
 
6-15-2015
 
115.39


175
 
7-5-2016
 
72.02


176
 
7-18-2016
 
TSO, Table V


177
 
8-15-2016
 
155.18


178
 
12-5-2016
 
115.34; 115.39


179
 
1-3-2017
 
TSO, Table I


180
 
3-6-2017
 
131.99


181
 
3-20-2017
 
116.01—116.07


183
 
5-1-2017
 
71.02


185
 
6-5-2017
 
TSO, Table III


186
 
11-20-2017
 
155.16


188
 
6-18-2018
 
150.09


189
 
8-6-2018
 
30.02


190
 
8-20-2018
 
95.038, 95.040, 95.042


191
 
10-1-2018
 
155.02


192
 
11-19-2018
 
155.57


 
 
 
 
 




 


