Ham Lake City Code
Article 1
Page 1
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-100 Title and Scope of Ordinance
1-110 Repeal of Prior Ordinances
1-200 Definitions
1-210 Person
1-220 Street
1-230 City
1-240 Council
1-250 Code
1-260 Zoning Officer
1-300 Penal Provision
1-400 Rules of Construction
1-410 Plain Meaning
1-420 Gender
1-430 Singular or Plural
1-440 Tense
1-450 Computation of Time
1-460 Minnesota Rules of Construction
1-500 Payment of Real Estate Taxes
1-600 Real Estate Tax Delinquencies of Certain Licensed Facilities
1-700 Severability
Ham Lake City Code
Article 1
Page 2
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-100 Title and Scope of Ordinance
1-110 Repeal of Prior Ordinances
This ordinance containing Chapter 1 to 12 inclusive shall be known as the
City Code of the City of Ham Lake, Minnesota, 1990, and shall be treated
and considered as a new and comprehensive ordinance and shall supersede
all other general ordinances passed by the Council prior to the 7th day of May
1990, except such as are by reference expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force and effect for any purpose.
1-200 Definitions
1-210 Person
“Person” means any natural individual, organization, firm, partnership,
association, or corporation, or other group acting as a unit. As applied to
partnerships or associations, the term includes the partners of members; as
applied to corporations the term includes the officers, agents, or employees.
1-220 Street
“Street” means any public way, which includes highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, alley or public thoroughfare.
1-230 City
“City” means the City of Ham Lake.
1-240 Council
“Council” or “City Council means the City Council of the City of Ham Lake.
1-250 Code
“Code” means the City Code of the City of Ham Lake. Where the word
“Ordinance” may be found, said word may be interchangeable with the word
“Code: if not inconsistent therewith.
1-260 Zoning Officer
“Zoning Officer” shall be that person designated by Article 9-220 of this Code.
1-300 Penal Provision
Any person guilty of violating any provision of the Code of the City of Ham
Lake shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor, and subject to the
misdemeanor penalties imposed by then existing Minnesota statutory
provisions.
1-400 Rules of Construction
1-410 Plain Meaning
All words and phrases in this code are used and shall be construed in their
plain, ordinary and usual sense, and except where the context clearly
requires otherwise in accordance with this Chapter and any definitions,
general or special contained in this code, technical words and phrases having
Ham Lake City Code
Article 1
Page 3
a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law are to be understood according to
their technical import.
1-420 Gender
The use of either masculine, feminine, or neuter gender includes the other
genders.
1-430 Singular or Plural
The use of either the singular or plural includes the other.
1-440 Tense
The use of either past, present, or future tense includes the other tenses.
1-450 Computation of Time
The time within which an act is to be done is computed by excluding the first
day and including the last day. When the last day is a Sunday or legal
holiday, such day is excluded and the last day is the next following business
day.
1-460 Minnesota Rules of Construction
Unless they are clearly in conflict with the provisions of this Code, or
otherwise clearly inapplicable, the rules of construction established for the
State of Minnesota by statute or case law apply in the construction of this
code.
1-500 Payment of Real Estate Taxes
Whenever any individual or entity applies for any type of permit, license,
zoning approval, subdivision approval or other action for which municipal
consent is required, the application shall automatically be rejected if at the
time of application there are any delinquent taxes owing on the property
affected by the application, unless the applicant is able to demonstrate a
financial hardship, and that the approval requested will or is likely to result
in the ability to pay the delinquent taxes.
The following conditions and limitations shall apply to such hardship
requests:
a) In no case will payment of the delinquent tax amount extend beyond
six months from the date that payment was due; and
b) In a request for extension of time, the applicant shall clearly document
the reasons that applicant is unable to pay the taxes in a timely manner,
supplying such level of detail as may be requested by City staff; and
c) No more than three such extensions shall be granted within any tenyear
period of time.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, real estate taxes shall not be considered
delinquent if the owner of the property has entered into a confession of
judgment agreement with Anoka County and is current in all payments
required by such agreement, or if the owner of the property has otherwise
entered into a contractual agreement with Anoka County under which
arrangements to pay the unpaid taxes are present, and in which the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 1
Page 4
owner is current under all such obligations. It shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to document the existence of such arrangements, and
to provide written evidence from appropriate County officials that the
owner is current in all obligations under such arrangements.
1-600 Real Estate Tax Delinquencies at Certain Licensed Facilities
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1-500, the City Council may grant
additional grace periods to the license holders of licenses issued under
Articles 7-700 and 7-800 where the following circumstances are present:
a) The license holder and the owner of the real estate on which
taxes are delinquent are either the same entity or person or have
some commonality of ownership; and
b) The property does not qualify for the confession of judgment
provisions noted in Article 1-500 by reason of insufficient property
value; and
c) The City Council is satisfied that the reasons for the delinquency
are related to the national economic downturn that commenced
circa 2008, and not due to mismanagement or any deliberate
attempt to evade taxes; and
d) The taxpayer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City
Council that an overall plan is in place to remedy the situation, such
as placing the property for sale;
The grace period extensions contemplated herein are at the sole
discretion of the City Council and there shall be no vested right to any
such extension. The extensions are permitted solely in recognition of the
severity of the 21st century recession, and the devastating effect on a
business of this nature upon the loss of licensure.
Sunset clause: This Article 1-600 shall automatically be repealed as of
July 2, 2017 unless renewed by replacement ordinance.
1-700 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of any ordinance in
this Code is for any reason held to be invalid; that decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this Code.
Updated through Ordinance 13-11
Ham Lake City Code
Article 2
1
ARTICLE 2 - THE GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
2-100 Elections
2-110 Regular City Election
2-200 Mayor
2-210 Term
2-220 Duties
2-230 Compensation
(1) Salary
(2) Reimbursed Expenses
(3) Monthly Payment
2-300 City Council
2-310 Term
2-320 Duties
2-330 Compensation
(1) Salary
(2) Reimbursed Expenses
(3) Monthly Payment
2-340 Public Comment
2-400 Other City Officials
2-410 Probationary Period
2-420 Discharge for Cause
2-460 Clerk
2-470 Administrator
2-480 Public Works Superintendent
2-490 Zoning Officer
2-491 Building Inspector
2-492 Treasurer/Finance director
2-493 Fire Chief/Emergency Management Director
2-500 Fees
2-600 Legal Costs of Public Officials
2-700 Workers Compensation Coverage for Elected and Appointed Officials
2-800 Employment Background Checks
2.801 Employment Positions
2.802 Manner of Conducting Investigations
2.803 Conditions Precedent to Investigation, Denial of Employment
Ham Lake City Code
Article 2
2
ARTICLE 2 - THE GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
2-100 Elections
2-110 Regular Municipal Election
A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday of each even-numbered year at such place or places as the City
Council may designate. Notice shall be as required by the City Charter of
applicable state law.
2-200 Mayor
2-210 Term
The term of mayor shall be for four years.
2-220 Duties
The duties of the mayor shall be as prescribed by City Council.
2-230 Compensation
(1) Salary - The salary of the Mayor of the City shall be $6,000.00 per
year.
(2) Reimbursement Expense - The Mayor shall from time to time be
entitled to reimbursement for payment of expenses necessarily
incurred in the performance of the Mayor’s duties in an amount to
be established by Resolution of the City Council.
(3) Monthly Payment - The Mayor’s salary shall be paid monthly.
2-300 City Council
2-310 Term
The term of a City Council Member shall be four years.
2-320 Duties
The duties of a City Council Member shall be as prescribed by the City
Council.
2-330 Compensation
(1) Salary - The salary of each Councilmember shall be $4,900.00 per year.
(2) Reimbursed Expenses - Councilmember shall from time to time be
entitled to reimbursement for payment of expenses necessarily incurred in
the performance of the Councilmembers duties in an amount to be
established by Resolution of the City Council.
(3) Monthly Payment - The Councilmembers salary shall be paid monthly.
2-340 Public Comment
At any City Council meeting, thirty (30) minutes shall be set aside at the
beginning of the meeting for public comment. Any person desiring to address
the Council shall be given the opportunity to do so during the public comment
period. Each person addressing the Council shall give his/her name and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 2
3
address in an audible tone of voice for the records, and unless further time is
granted by the presiding officer, shall limit his or her address to five (5)
minutes. All remarks should be addressed to the Council as a body and not
to any member thereof. No person, other than the Council and the person
having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly
or through a member of the Council without the permission of the presiding
officer.
2-400 Other City Officials
2-410 Probationary Period
Each original appointment of any City employee shall be subject to a six (6)
month probationary period.
2-420 to 2-450 deleted with Ordinance 19-08
2-460 Clerk
There is hereby created the office of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall have the
duties as prescribed by statute, as modified by the City Charter and by
ordinance. The City Clerk shall perform all of those duties required of a City
Clerk, executing or certifying or otherwise being identified in official public
documents, proceedings or duties.
2-470 Administrator
There is hereby created the office of Administrator. The Administrator shall
be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term. The duties of the
Administrator shall be as determined by the City Council and shall have
overall supervisory responsibility for all City staff, including the offices created
under Article 2-400 of the Ham Lake City Code.
2-480 Public Works Superintendent
There is hereby created a Street Department and the position of Public
Works Superintendent. The Public Works Superintendent shall be appointed
by the City Council for an indefinite term. The duties of the Public Works
Superintendent shall be as determined by the City Council.
2-490 Zoning Officer
There is hereby created the office of Zoning Officer to be appointed by the
City Council for an indefinite term. The Zoning Officer shall enforce and
administrate the Zoning Code. The office of Zoning Officer may be combined
with the office of Building Inspector.
2-491 Building Inspector
There is hereby created the office of Building Inspector, to be appointed by
the City Council for an indefinite time. The Building Inspector shall enforce
the codes adopted under Articles 8 and 11, issue building permits, inspect
construction, and perform such other duties as prescribed by the City
Council. The office of Building Inspector may be combined with the office of
Zoning Officer.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 2
4
2-492 Treasurer/Finance Director
There is hereby created the office of City Treasurer, to have the duties as
prescribed by statute, as modified by City Charter and by ordinance. The
person holding this office shall use the title of “Finance Director” unless
directed otherwise by the City Council, or unless required by law to use the
title “Treasurer” in executing or certifying or otherwise being identified in
official public documents, proceedings or duties. The Finance Director shall
be appointed to an indefinite term by the City Council.
2-493 Fire Chief/Emergency Management Director
There is hereby created the office of Fire Chief/Emergency Management
Director and Public Safety Director. The person holding this office shall use
the title of “Fire Chief” unless directed otherwise by the City Council, or unless
required by law to use the title “Emergency Management Director” in
executing or certifying or otherwise being identified in official public
documents, proceedings or duties. The Fire Chief shall be appointed to an
indefinite term by the City Council. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to
supervise the Ham Lake Volunteer Fire Department, to serve in the capacity
of Emergency Management Director and to serve as liaison with the Anoka
County Sheriffs Office.
2-500 Fees
The City Council shall, by resolution in January of each year, adopt a
schedule of all municipal fees and charges required by the Ham Lake City
Code, or other jurisdictional authority. The City Council may, at any time, by
resolution, amend or alter the fee schedule.
2-600 Legal Costs of Public Officials
That in the event that any official, agent, or employee is a defendant in any
litigation arising out of conduct or alleged conduct performed during the
course of affairs directly or indirectly related to the interest of the City of Ham
Lake, upon resolution by majority vote of the City Council of the City of Ham
Lake, the City shall be authorized to discharge with municipal funds any and
all costs of private counsel incurred by said officials, agents and employees,
and to reimburse or to pay on behalf of said officials, agents or employees,
any judgment arising out of said litigation.
2-700 Worker’s Compensation Coverage for Elected and Appointed
Officials
Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 176.011, subd.9, clause 6, elected officials
and members of the following boards, commissions, and committees are
included in the coverage of the workers compensation act: Park and Tree
Commission and Planning Commission.
2-800 Employment Background Checks
Preamble: The Anoka County Sheriff’s Office is designated as the
exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history background
Ham Lake City Code
Article 2
5
investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the city,
unless the city’s hiring authority concludes that a background investigation
is not needed.
2-801 Employment Positions
All employees in all City departments and all prospective employees being
offered a conditional offer of employment shall be subject, as a condition
to employment, to undergo a criminal history background check.
2-802 Manner of Conducting Investigations
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen employment applicants, the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office is
authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in
accordance with BCA policy and any other State or Federal agencies
deemed necessary. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be
maintained at the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office under the care and
custody of the chief law enforcement official or his/her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff
involved in the hiring process.
2-803 Conditions Precedent to Investigation, Denial of Employment
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the
Anoka County Sheriff’s Department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection maintenance and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.09, the City will not reject an applicant for employment
position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor. If the City rejects the applicant’s request
on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
A. The grounds and reasons for the denial
B. The applicant complaint and grievance procedures set forth in
Minnesota Statutes Section 364.06
C. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment
D. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
Updated through Ordinance 19-08
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
1
ARTICLE 3 - MORALS AND CONDUCT
3-100 Curfew
3-110 Definitions
3-120 Prohibited Acts
3-130 Exceptions
3-140 Enforcement
3-150 Penalties
3-160 Severability
3-200 Discharge of Firearms
3-300 Drinking
3-400 Interference with Fire Department
3-500 Park Hours
3-600 Obscene Materials
3-610 Purpose
3-620 Offense
3-630 Definitions
3-640 Notice
3-650 Defenses
3-660 Exemption for Broadcasts
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
2
ARTICLE 3 - MORALS AND CONDUCT
3-100 Curfew
3-110 Definitions
(1) “Authorized adult” shall mean any person who is at least eighteen
(18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody and control of a juvenile.
(2) “County Board” shall mean the Anoka County Board of
Commissioners.
(3) “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances
or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, automobile
accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent
serious bodily injury or loss of life.
(4) “Juvenile” means a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
The term does not include persons under 18 who are married or
have been legally emancipated.
(5) “Parent” shall mean any person having legal custody of a juvenile
(i) as natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent; (ii) as a legal
guardian; or (iii) as a person to whom legal custody has been given
by order of the court.
(6) “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to,
streets, highways, roadways, parks, public recreation,
entertainment or civic facilities, schools, and the common areas of
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities,
and shops.
(7) “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of
any bodily member or organ.
3-120 Prohibited Acts
3-121 It is unlawful for a juvenile under the age of twelve (12) years to be
present in any public place within Anoka County:
(1) Any time between 9:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
(2) Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00
a.m. the following day.
3-122 It shall be unlawful for any juvenile age twelve (12) to fourteen (14)
years to be present in any public place within Anoka County:
(1) Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
3
(2) Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00
a.m. on the following day.
3-123 It shall be unlawful for any juvenile age fifteen (15) to seventeen (17)
years to be in any public place within Anoka County.
(1) Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
(2) Any time between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any Friday or
Saturday.
3-124 It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of
amusement or refreshment which is open to the public to knowingly and
habitually permit any juvenile to be in such place during the hours
prohibited by Paragraphs 3-121, 3-122, and 3-123 of this Subdivision
herein, under circumstances not constituting an exception to this
Ordinance as set forth herein. The term “person operating” shall mean
any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating,
managing or conducting any such establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
3-130 Exceptions
3-131 The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of the
curfew:
(1) At any time, if a juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent or an
authorized adult;
(2) At any time, if a juvenile is involved in. or attempting to remedy,
alleviate, or respond to any emergency.
(3) If the juvenile is engaged in a lawful employment activity, or is
going to or returning home from his or her place of employment;
(4) If the juvenile is attending an official school, religious, or other
social or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored
by a city or the county, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
(5) If the juvenile is going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a city or the county,
a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility
for the juvenile;
(6) If the juvenile is on an errand as directed by his or her parent,
without any detour or stop;
(7) If the juvenile is engaged in interstate travel;
(8) If the juvenile is on the public right-of-way boulevard or sidewalk
abutting the juvenile’s residence or abutting the neighboring
property, structure, or residence;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
4
(9) If the juvenile is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution (or those similar rights protected by
Article I of the Constitution of the State of Minnesota), such as free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the rights of assembly;
or
(10) If the juvenile is homeless or uses a public or semi-public place as
his or her usual place of abode.
3-132 It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subd. 3-124 that:
(1) The owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the police department that a juvenile was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to
leave.
(2) The owner, operator or employee reasonably and in good faith
relied upon a juvenile’s representatives of proof of age. Proof of
age may be established pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 340A.503, subd.
6, or other verifiable means, including, but not limited to, school
identification cards and birth certificates.
3-140 Enforcement
(1) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being
in a public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that
an offense has occurred and that no exception set forth in
Subdivision 3-130 is applicable.
3-150 Penalties
3-151 Violation of Subdivision 3-121, 3-122 and 3-123 will be prosecuted
pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 260.195 and will be subject to the penalties
therein.
3-152 Violation of Subdivision 3-124 shall be a misdemeanor.
3-160 Severability
3-161 If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this
ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
3-200 Discharge of Firearms and Bows and Arrows
(1) Except as permitted in subsection (2) below, no person shall
discharge a firearm upon, onto, or across any “Prohibited Areas”
within the City of Ham Lake. No person shall discharge an arrow
from a bow upon, onto, or across any Prohibited Area within the
City of Ham Lake. “Prohibited Area” shall include the following:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
5
a) The outside perimeter of all platted subdivisions, including
auditor’s plats;
b) The outside perimeter of all areas of residential concentration in
which lots have been created by metes and bounds, and which
have been identified by the Zoning Administrator as the equivalent
of platted areas;
c) All schools and churches, measured from the lot lines of the
parcel upon which the school or church is situated;
d) The outside perimeter of all City or County parks;
e) The traveled portion of any public road.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, firearms and bows and arrows may
be discharged upon, onto or across Prohibited Areas described in
Article 3-200(1)(a) and (b), under the following conditions:
a) The person is the owner or lessor of, or has the written or verbal
permission of the landowner who owns the land upon which the
firearm or bow and arrow is discharged, the land upon which the
projectile comes to rest, or the land over which the projectile
passes; and
b) The discharge of the firearm does not occur within 500 feet of
any residential dwelling, unless the written or verbal permission
referred to in item 2(a) above specifically permits discharge within
500 feet of the dwelling.
(3) In areas which are not Prohibited Areas, persons may discharge
firearms or bows and arrows, but only under the same conditions
as are listed in Article 3-200(2)(a) and (b).
(4) The provisions of paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of this section do not
apply to the discharge of firearm by law enforcement officers while
performing their duties.
(5) The term “firearm” as used in this section includes pistols, rifles,
revolvers, and shotguns.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 1 through 6,
inclusive, of Article 3-200, it shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge a firearm for the purpose of target practice, including the
terms clay pigeon shooting, skeet shooting, trap shooting, gunsighting
or other recreational shooting not aimed at actual game,
except under the following conditions:
a) The activity is carried out on premises which have a conditional
use permit for the activity; or
b) The activity is carried out on premises and under conditions
which meet the criteria outlined in Article 3-200 (2) of this Code,
and
i) The activity is limited to no more than two sessions every
seven days; and
ii) The activity takes place between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m., and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
6
iii) The activity introduces no lead shot onto any wetland
which has been so designated by the Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources.
3-300 Drinking
No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor in
any street or in any vehicle upon a street.
3-400 Interference with Fire Department
No person shall:
(1) Intentionally give, make or cause to be given or made, a false fire
alarm;
(2) Neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order by the Fire Chief:
or
(3) Interfere with the fire department in the discharge of its duties.
3-500 Park Hours
No person shall occupy or be present in any portion of any public park,
including parking lots, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The
City Council may for good cause shown grant a variance from these hours.
3-600 Obscene Materials
3-610 Purpose
The City Council of the City of Ham Lake has determined that it is in the best
interest of the citizens of this community that the dissemination of explicit
sexual materials to persons under 18 years of age be regulated. These
regulations are necessary to assist parents in supervising and controlling the
accessibility of such materials to children. These regulations do not prohibit
children from receiving whatever social or educational value there may be in
such materials, but give to parents an opportunity to exercise parental control
over the means and timing of such exposure.
3-620 Offense
A person who does any of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
1. Knowingly disseminates explicit sexual material to young persons.
2. Knowingly displays explicit sexual materials for sale, lease, or
rental in an area to which young persons have access
unaccompanied by parents or guardian.
3. Knowingly permits young persons to enter and remain
unaccompanied by parent or guardian in an area designated for the
display to adults of explicit sexual materials.
3-630 Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the terms used shall have the following
meanings:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
7
1. “Young Person” means any person under the age of 18 and
unmarried.
2. “Explicit sexual material” means any pictorial or three-dimensional
material including, but not limited to books, magazines, video
tapes, films, photographs, and statuary which is made up in whole
or in dominant part of depiction’s of human sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy (necrophilia or oral or anal intercourse),
direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals or flagellation or
torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or which emphasizes
the depiction of uncovered adult human genitals; provided,
however, that works of art or of anthropological significance shall
not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition.
3. “Disseminate” means to sell, lease, or exhibit commercially or, in
the case of exhibition, to sell an admission ticket or pass to the
premises whereon an exhibition is presented.
4. “Display for sale in an area to which young persons have access
unaccompanied by a parent or adult” means display of material for
sale so that young persons may see portions of the material
constituting explicit sexual material.
5. An offense is committed “knowingly” if:
a. The defendant knew that the recipient of material was a
young person or had grounds to believe it probable that the
recipient was a young person and failed to make reasonable
inquiries to determine the age of the recipient and if the
defendant was aware that contents of the material clearly fell
within the definition of explicit sexual material contained in
clause b.
b. Had reason to know that the contents of the material were
likely to fall within the definition of explicit sexual material and
failed to examine the material to ascertain the contents.
c. After notice from the City Attorney that he has determined
that specific material falls within the definition of explicit sexual
material, defendant fails to remove the materials from an area
to which young persons have access unaccompanied by a
parent or guardian.
3-640 Notice
The City Attorney, based upon information lawfully gathered and supplied to
him by the Police Department or other sources, shall give notice to a person
that specific material being displayed for sale in areas accessible to young
persons unaccompanied by parent or guardian constitutes explicit sexual
material under the terms of this Ordinance. Such notice shall be in writing
and shall be mailed or delivered in person to the alleged offender. The notice
shall describe the material so as to permit the person to readily identify the
same and shall state that legal action may be instituted five (5) days after
receipt unless the material is placed in an area which meets the requirements
of this Ordinance.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 3
8
3-650 Defenses
It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this Ordinance for
the defendant to show:
1. That the dissemination was made with the consent of a parent or
guardian of the recipient; that the defendant was misled as to the
existence of parental consent by a misrepresentation of parental
status, or that the dissemination was made to the recipient by a
person involved in the educational or religious training of the
recipient in the discharge of official responsibilities, including, but
not limited to teachers, librarians, clergymen, and medical
practitioners.
3-660 Exemption for Broadcasts
The prohibition of this Section shall not apply to broadcasts or telecasts
through facilities licensed under the Federal Communications Act, as
amended, 47 USC, Section 301, et seq.
Updated through Ordinance 17-02
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
1
ARTICLE 4 - NUISANCES AND OFFENSES
4-100 Public Nuisance Defined
4-200 Public Nuisances Affecting Health
4-300 Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency
4-400 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety
4-500 Abatement of Nuisances
4-510 Abatement and Costs
4-511 Preliminary Report of Nuisance
4-512 Findings of Fact
4-513 Notice of Abatement Proceedings
4-514 Hearing
4-515 Abatement Methodology
4-516 Collection of Abatement Costs
4-520 Summary and Emergency Abatement
4-521 Emergency Situations
4-522 Initial Abatement
4-523 Post Initial Abatement Procedures
4-524 Vacation of Dwelling Unit
4-525 Special Provisions for Methamphetamine-related Sites
4-530 Abatement of nuisances on Abandoned Property
4-531 Definitions
4-532 Declaration of Nuisance
4-533 Abatement of Abandoned Property Nuisances
4-434 Special Assessment to Recover City Costs
4-535 Appeals
4-600 False Emergency Alarms
4-700 Noise
4-710 Definitions
4-720 Noise Nuisances
4-800 Storage of Motor Vehicle Tires
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
2
ARTICLE 4 - NUISANCES AND OFFENSES
4-100 Public Nuisance Defined
Whoever by his act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of
the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a
misdemeanor:
(1) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any
considerable number of members of the public; or
(2) Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, any public
highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
(3) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this ordinance to
be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specified.
4-200 Public Nuisances Affecting Health
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(1) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter:
(2) All diseased animals running at large;
(3) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(4) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after
death;
(5) Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;
(6) Privy vaults or garbage cans which are not rodent free or fly-tight or
which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul
and disagreeable odors;
(7) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body
of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
(8) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property;
(9) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in unreasonable
quantities;
(10) All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease;
(11) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not licensed by
the County board of health as defined by law.
4-300 Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals
and decency:
(1) All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards, excepting
licensed (lawful) gaming activities.
(2) Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in such occupations;
(3) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
3
(4) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law or where in violation of law, persons are permitted to
resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law,
and all liquor and other property used for maintaining such a place;
(5) Any vehicle used for the transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for
promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
4-400 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(1) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 12 hours after the
snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(2) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons
from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(3) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(4) All unnecessary noises and annoying vibration;
(5) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such
conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(6) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner;
(7) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of
a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free uses of the streets or sidewalks;
(8) All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets and
sidewalks, situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by code;
(9) The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
(10) Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within
three feet of a public sidewalk or way;
(11) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;
(12) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public
property:
(13) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies, or other material, in a
manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or to
fire, health or safety hazards from such accumulation or from the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated;
(14) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such
other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child coming on the
premises where it is located;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
4
(15) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public
street drain, gutter, or ditch with trash or other materials;
(16) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property
of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may injure
any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over
such substance;
(17) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on
adjacent private property;
(18) The piling, storing and keeping of old machinery, wrecked or junked
vehicles, or other junk or debris upon open space. For the purpose of
this section, a junked vehicle is one which is not registered or which
does not possess a current state auto license, but said auto license
shall not be the sole factor determining the status of said vehicle. One
unlicensed but operable vehicle may be permitted to be stored on a
single parcel of record;
(19) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone;
(20) The operation of any motorized hang-glider, ultralite aircraft or other
motorized airborne device carrying one or more passengers within 200
feet of the roof of any building, or in such a manner as to cause fear or
injury or property damage to persons upon the ground, or in such a
manner resulting in noise levels at ground level in excess of 70 db.
(21) Shade tree disease as defined in Article 11-1400.2 (j) and nuisance
conditions for trees as specified in Article 11-1400.6 of this code.
(22) The failure to attain Exterior Completion of any structure within one year
of a building permit issuance, as required in Article 11-430 of the Ham
Lake City Code.
(23) The intentional undue undue interference with any Funeral-Related
Activity, including, without limitation, burial ceremonies, rituals,
gatherings, processions of persons or motor vehicles, receptions,
wakes, reviewals, services within or without a house of worship,
graveside ceremonies, ceremonial meals or celebrations, or other
activity related to the recognition of the cessation of a human life. The
following acts shall be deemed to be “undue interference”:
a) The generation of noise, including spoken words, which impairs the
ability of any person engaged in a Funeral-Related Activity to hear
words, music or other sounds which are part of the Funeral-Related
Activity.
b) The impairment of freedom of movement by pedestrians or motorists
engaged in the Funeral-Related Activity. Such impairment of
movement includes the actual blocking of roads or walkways, but may
also include activities which generate other traffic or crowds that result
in the impairment of freedom of movement by those engaged in the
Funeral-Related Activity.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
5
c) Picketing or other public gatherings or displays aimed at or taking
advantage of the existence of the Funeral-Related Activity that occur
at a distance closer than 300 feet from the Funeral-Related Activity;
(24) The failure to maintain key elements of any structure, including, without
limitation, roof, siding, brickwork, shakes or other exterior wall finishes,
windows, doors, joists or load bearing walls.
(25) The failure to maintain any portion of the area of any given parcel
outside of structures on the parcel, including, without limitation, any
steps, sidewalks, driveways, fences, patio, deck, swimming pool or pool
area, slope, vegetation, pond or yard under conditions in which the
failure to maintain creates a potential danger to invitees of the owner,
tends to promote erosion that could affect adjoining parcels, including
public roads, tends to promote flooding that could affect adjoining
parcels, including public roads, or that constitutes an attractive nuisance
to juvenile or adult trespassers.
4-500 Abatement of Nuisances
The record title owner of any parcel of land upon which is situate any public
nuisance shall bear the responsibility to abate the nuisance, regardless of
whether or not the nuisance has been caused by a tenant, trespasser or
other third party. Nuisances which have not been voluntarily abated by the
property owner or the agents of the property owner after efforts to obtain
such abatement through negotiation and advisement with City staff and law
enforcement personnel, may be abated by the City in the manner described
below. Nuisances which present an imminent threat to public health, safety
or welfare, may be initially abated in the manner provided in Article 4-520.
4-510 Abatement and Costs
4-511 Preliminary Report of Nuisance Upon being advised by City staff
of the existence of a nuisance for which abatement under this Code
appears to be appropriate, the City Council shall order the City
Administrator to cause a written report to be prepared which addresses
the following issues:
a) The nature of the nuisance;
b) The proposed method of abatement;
c) The estimated costs of abatement, including disposal fees;
d) The estimated costs of salvage, if any;
4-512 Findings of Fact The City Council, after review of the report
required under Article 4-511, together with any other relevant information,
shall determine if a nuisance exists, and if so, shall make written findings
of fact in a resolution form setting forth the nature of the nuisance, the
steps needed to cure the nuisance, and directing the abatement of the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
6
nuisance after affording the responsible parties the opportunity to be
heard and the opportunity to cure the nuisance.
4-513 Notice of Abatement Proceedings Following adoption of a
resolution as required by Article 4-512, the City Administrator shall cause
a written Notice of Abatement Proceedings, along with a certified copy of
the resolution described in Article 4-512 to be forwarded to the record
owners of the parcel of land upon which the nuisance is present. The
Notice shall state essentially the following information:
To: (List names of record title owners from County Taxpayer Records,
PIN of parcel)
Date:
1. You are hereby notified that the City of Ham Lake hereby institutes
abatement proceedings relative to the above described parcel of
land in order to abate the conditions of public nuisance as found in
the hereto attached Resolution.
2. “Abatement” of the nuisance means that the City will come upon
the property, remove and/or correct the items which constitute the
nuisance, and, if appropriate, dispose of the items in the manner
provided by law. You will bear all costs of this correction, removal
and disposal, either through a setoff against the salvage sale of
any removed items, or through the imposition of a regulatory
service fee to be certified and collected with your real estate taxes,
or both.
3. You have ten days from the date which appears on this notice to
contest the abatement, by making a written request for a hearing
before an independent hearing examiner to be selected by
yourself from a list of hearing examiners maintained at City Hall,
15544 Central Avenue NE, Ham Lake, Minnesota 55304
4. If you request a hearing, the hearing will be held as soon as the
hearing examiner can be available. If the hearing examiner finds
in favor of the City, meaning that if the hearing examiner finds that
a public nuisance does in fact exist, then the costs of the hearing
examiner will be added to your costs of abatement. In the
hearing, you have the right to be heard, to present evidence and
witnesses, to cross-examine the City’s witnesses, and to be
represented by legal counsel at your own expense, if you so
choose.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
7
5. If you fail to request the hearing, or if there is a hearing, and the
hearing examiner finds in the City’s favor, the City will proceed in
the manner described in paragraph 2 above.
4-514 Hearing If a property owner requests a hearing, the hearing shall
be conducted as soon as practical. The City Administrator shall maintain
a list of qualified hearing examiners, who shall be appointed to the list
annually by the City Council after an initial screening process to be
conducted by the City Council. Hearing examiners shall be learned in the
law, and, as a condition to appointment to the list of approved hearing
examiners, shall agree to follow any hearing rules set forth from time to
time by resolution of the City Council. Regardless of whether or not the
City Council establishes hearing rules, the following minimum procedures
shall apply to each hearing:
a) Opportunity to be Heard The property owner shall be entitled
to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented
by legal counsel;
b) Recording A court reporter shall be retained for each hearing
to record the proceedings. Transcripts may be obtained by either
party directly from the court reporter at the requesting party’s
expense;
c) Liberal Rules of Evidence The primary purpose of the hearing
shall be to obtain a just result; accordingly, the examiner shall
liberally allow evidence to be presented;
d) Decision The hearing examiner shall prepare written findings
of fact which support a conclusion that a nuisance does or does not
exist on the property in question, and shall describe the nature of
the nuisance. The decision shall be rendered within seven days of
the hearing.
e) Appeal The decision of the hearing examiner shall, for the
purpose of appeals to the courts, be deemed to be a final decision
of the City Council. Appeals to the courts shall be taken in the
manner provided by law for appeals of decisions of a municipal
governing body.
4-515 Abatement Methodology If the property owner fails to
request a hearing on the abatement within the required time, or if
upon hearing, a hearing examiner finds that a public nuisance does
in fact exist, the City shall proceed as follows:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
8
a) Notice of Entry City staff shall notify the property owner of the
date and approximate time, to be not earlier than three business
days from the date of notice, at which the City’s agent will come
upon the property. The notice shall be personally delivered to the
residence address, and, if no one is present to receive the notice,
then the notice shall be left in a conspicuous place on the property.
The notice shall also be mailed by Certified Mail, return receipt
requested, to the persons listed as taxpayers for the property.
b) Notice of Method of Abatement The notice shall briefly
summarize what will be done on the property in order to abate the
nuisance. If personalty is to be removed from the property, the
notice shall indicate how the City intends to dispose of the
personalty.
c) Abatement On the date specified in the notice, the City’s
agents shall come upon the property and abate the nuisance,
documenting such abatement in a reasonable manner, such as
through still photographs or videotape. All items removed shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law, or in a commercially
reasonable manner if no method of disposition be otherwise
prescribed by law.
4-516 Collection of Abatement Costs All of the costs incurred by the
City in abating a nuisance shall be assessed against the property housing
the nuisance, as a Regulatory Service Fee. The city’s costs shall be
reasonable and related to the regulatory expense, and shall include,
without limitation, all attorneys’ fees, engineering fees, hearing examiner
fees, court reporter’s fees, labor, trucking costs, tipping fees, other
disposal fees, environmental remediation fees, consultants’ fees, storage
fees, transport costs, equipment rental, towing fees, storage fees,
materials costs. Abatement costs shall be established by resolution of the
City Council when known, and then invoiced to the property owner. If not
paid by the time for certification of special assessments for collection with
real estate taxes, the abatement assessment shall be certified to Anoka
County for collection with real estate taxes in the May and October
installments of the next succeeding year, together with interest at a rate to
be established by the resolution setting the amount of the abatement
costs. The invoice shall set the last date for payment, and shall advise
the obligor that no interest will be charged if the assessment is paid prior
to the date is it to be certified to the County. Otherwise, interest shall
begin to accrue on the date the assessment is certified to the County.
4-520 Summary and Emergency Abatement
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
9
4-521 Emergency Situations An Emergency Situation shall be deemed
to exist for any condition which presents an imminent danger to public
health, welfare or safety, including, without limitation, the following
conditions:
a) Abandoned refrigerators;
b) Improperly fenced swimming pools;
c) Live or exposed electrical wires;
d) Discharge of raw sewage above the ground or into bodies of water;
e) Presence of dangerous or hazardous wastes in open containers, upon
the ground, or otherwise in a condition susceptible to release or exposure;
f) Neglected or abused animals;
g) Accumulations of waste or putrescible items within an inhabited
dwelling unit;
h) Structurally unsound buildings or other devices;
i) Unsecured and operable mechanical devices;
j) Presence of highly flammable materials in open containers or in a
condition susceptible to immediate ignition.
k) Infected oak trees.
l) Sites where methamphetamines or other controlled substances (as
defined in Minnesota Statutes) involving hazardous materials or
chemicals have been used in the manufacture, storage or production
of such substances.
4-522 Initial Abatement Where an Emergency Situation is found to
exist, in the judgment of any law enforcement officer, the Superintendent
of Public Works, the City Administrator, a Fire Department Chief or
Assistant Chief, or the Building Official, City Staff may take such steps as
are necessary to immediately protect the public against the peril
presented by the Emergency Situation. If practical, the initial action of the
City Staff shall be limited to the erection of warning signs or devices,
barricades, or other deterrents to prevent public contact with the condition.
If entry upon private property, installation of remedial measures and/or
removal of personal property is essential to the immediate safety of the
public, or to prevent an imminent life-threatening situation from continuing
to exist, then such entry, remediation and removal shall be authorized.
4-523 Post Initial Abatement Procedures As soon as is practical
following the implementation of the abatement of a nuisance under an
Emergency Situation, the property owner shall be notified in writing in a
manner likely to reach the property owner, advising the property owner of
the action taken and further advising the property owner of the need for
any additional action to be taken by the property owner. Once the
situation has ceased to be an Emergency Situation, the nuisance shall be
dealt with as provided by this Code and as otherwise provided by law. If
an assessment proceeding is commenced in connection with any
permanent abatement as provided for in Article 4-510 of this code, the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
10
costs of any emergency remediation or abatement shall, if allowed by law,
be included in the amount of assessment.
4-524 Vacation of Dwelling Unit If an Emergency Situation is present in
an occupied dwelling unit, or in any other structure or device in which
human beings are dwelling, the City Administrator, after conferring with
the City’s legal counsel, may declare the dwelling unit unfit for human
habitation, and may order the occupants thereof to immediately vacate
the dwelling unit. The Order to vacate shall, if practical, be delivered in
written form, but if written delivery of notice is not practical, oral notice
given by a law enforcement officer shall be sufficient notice. It shall be a
misdemeanor for any person to disobey such an order to vacate, and
upon arrest for a violation of such an order, the City’s legal staff shall
endeavor to obtain the continued cessation of occupancy as a condition of
release from custody. No person shall be taken into custody pursuant to
such an arrest, however, unless the person shall have been given at least
one hour’s notice to vacate the premises.
4-525 Special Provisions for Methamphetamine-related Sites In
addition to the remedies and procedures provided in Articles 4-522, 4-523
and 4-524 above, if any site is discovered to have been a manufacturing
or storage site for methamphetamines or other hazardous materials or
chemicals which have been used in the manufacture, storage or
production of such substances, the following procedures may be followed:
a) Immediate Quarantine
The site may be immediately quarantined by law enforcement
personnel, placing such warning tape or other devices as is
necessary to prevent the accidental or deliberate entry into the
premises by persons other than authorized by the City’s law
enforcement personnel. The City may also erect such
informational signs as may be warranted.
b) Notifications to Governmental Agencies
The existence of the site shall be promptly provided to the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and the State Department of
Health.
c) Notifications to Neighbors
Mailed notice of the existence of the site shall be given to the
owners of all properties which abut the property lines of the site, or
which are within a reasonable distance of any property line of the
site. The notice shall inform the neighbors of the basic findings of
law enforcement, insofar as such notice may be given without
violation of the Data Privacy Act, and shall provide the name and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
11
phone number of a contact person at City Hall for the purpose of
answering further questions.
d) Environmental Study
The City may commission a Phase I Environmental Study on the
property, to ascertain what, if any, environmental hazards may be
present. If recommended by the Phase I Study, a Phase II Study
shall also be commissioned.
e) Remedial Action
If the Environmental Studies noted in subparagraph d) above
discover the presence of any environmental hazards on the
property, the property shall be ineligible for any municipal permit or
subdivision until and unless the conditions noted in the
environmental studies have been remediated to the satisfaction of
the City. If notification is required or made to the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, completion of all remediation to the
satisfaction of that agency shall be required prior to the issuance of
any subsequent municipal permit or subdivision approval on the
property.
f) Notice to Future Purchasers
If remedial action is required on the Property, the City shall cause
an affidavit substantially in the form below, executed by the City
Administrator, to be recorded with the Anoka County Recorder, for
the purpose of notifying any future purchasers of the property of
the potential environmental hazards, and the ineligibility of the
property for municipal permitting or subdivision approval:
State of Minnesota )
) Affidavit
County of Anoka )
The following described property is the subject of certain
remediation action required to correct certain environmental
matters, and until and unless an affidavit executed by the
City Administrator of the City of Ham Lake, Minnesota,
attesting to the successful completion of such remediation, is
recorded with the Anoka County Recorder, the following
described property will be ineligible for any subdivision or
permit issued by the City of Ham Lake, Minnesota, including
any building permit.
(Insert Legal Description)
(Signature Block and Notarization)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
12
g) Costs
The costs incurred by the City in implementing any of the matters
set forth in Article 4-525 shall all assessed against the property as
a Regulatory Service Fee in the same manner as described in
Article 4-516, but with no requirement that any advance notice or
hearing shall be given.
4-530 Abatement of Nuisances on Abandoned Property
4-531 Definitions
a) Abandoned Property – means a parcel of real estate upon
which there exists a formerly occupied structure, having no
apparent sign of present occupancy, and in which the public
records show that a Power of Attorney to foreclose a
mortgage on the property has been filed with the Anoka
County Recorder.
b) Debris – means abandoned personal property located on
Abandoned Property that would ordinarily not be found on
lawn, porch or other exposed areas, or may also mean
personal property ordinarily found on lawn, porch or other
exposed areas that is in such apparent disrepair as to make
the property functionally useless. Debris includes, without
limitation, those items described in Article 4-200, 4-300, 4-
400 and 4-521 that constitute personal property.
c) Unmowed Grass - means common yard grass of any
variety located on Abandoned Property that has grown to a
height of more than six inches over more than ten percent of
the yard area of any Abandoned Property.
d) Weeds - means any vegetative growth, except for trees and
common yard grass, located on Abandoned Property
growing to a height of more than six inches over more than
ten percent of the yard area of any Abandoned Property.
e) Unsecured Building – means any structure located on
Abandoned Property intended to be secure from the
elements or from intruders which is susceptible to the
elements or intrusion by virtue of holes in roofs or walls,
open windows (including broken windows affording access
to the interior) and open doors.
4-532 Declaration of Nuisance
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
13
Pursuant to the authority granted in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 412.221,
Subd. 23, the City does hereby declare Abandoned Property, Debris,
Unmowed Grass, Weeds and Unsecured Buildings as defined above to
be public nuisances, to be known as Abandoned Property Nuisances.
4-533 Abatement of Abandoned Property Nuisances
Whenever the City’s Building Official observes the existence of any
Abandoned Property Nuisance, the Building Official shall notify the
property owner of record by U.S. mail of the condition, and shall state a
deadline to bring the property into compliance with City Codes. If the
deadline is not met, the Building Official shall report same to the City
Council at its next available meeting. If the City Council confirms that the
condition constitutes an Abandoned Property Nuisance, the City Council
shall approve such summary abatement measures as deemed
appropriate to the situation, including, without limitation, the following:
a. The mowing by City crews or contractors of any Weeds or
Unmowed Grass;
b. The covering of open holes in structures with tarps, plywood
or other suitable material;
c. The boarding up or nailing shut of any open or exposed
doorways or windows to prevent access to the interior of any
structure;
d. The removal or relocating on or off the site of the
Abandoned Property of any Debris.
Once any Abandoned Property Nuisance condition has been confirmed by
the City Council and abated, but subsequently reappears, the City’s
Building Official may continue to cause the abatement of the nuisance
without reconfirmation from the City Council. Abatement shall cease
when it becomes apparent that the property is occupied, or when any
entity having legal or equitable control of the property comes forward and
confirms in writing an intention to properly maintain the Abandoned
Property.
4-534 Special Assessment to Recover City Costs
The costs incurred by the City in implementing any of the matters set forth
in Article 4-525 shall all assessed against the property as a Regulatory
Service Fee in the same manner as described in Article 4-516, but with no
requirement that any advance notice or hearing shall be given.
4-535 Appeals
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
14
Any aggrieved party may appeal any charge levied under this article to the
District Court in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes to challenge
any municipal action.
4-600 False Emergency Alarms
It shall be the duty of the owner of any automatic alarm system to properly
maintain such system to insure that false alarm signals do not occur with
frequency, whether for fire, police or other emergency. If, within any twelve
month period, a given alarm system produces three alarms which are not
generated by a bona fide emergency, such as a fire, break-in or other causal
factor which would generate a response from municipal or county emergency
service system, the owner of the building shall be obligated to pay an
inspection fee to be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. If, in the ensuing twelve months, from the third false alarm, another
false alarm occurs, the owner shall either disable or dismantle the system, or
provide evidence satisfactory to the City’s Building Official that the system
has been repaired. Thereafter, if false alarms continue to occur, the
inspection fee will be required every false alarm.
4-700 Noise
4-710 Definitions - The following definitions shall apply to this Article:
4-711 MPCA Definitions Adopted by Reference - The definitions
of the following terms shall be as found in Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 7030 (Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise
Regulations), which are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
forth herein: "A-Weighted"; "dB(A)"; "Decibel"; "Impulsive Noise";
"L10"; "L50"; "Sound Pressure Level".
4-712 Additional Definitions
A) "Stationary Source" - noise which emanates from a source
which remains stationary;
B) "Mobile Source" - noise which emanates from a source which
is either in motion or capable of being in motion;
C) "Circulating Mobile Source" - noise which emanates from a
Mobile Source, but which source remains in a close proximity to a
single location;
D) "Daytime" - those hours between 7:01 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
E) "Nighttime" - those hours between 10:01 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
F) "Personal Recreational Vehicle" - motorized vehicles
designed for usage by one person, sometimes including a
passenger, including, without limitation, vehicles commonly known
as snowmobiles, jet skis, motocross bikes, motorized dirt bikes,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
15
motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts, motorized gliders, threewheelers,
four wheelers and ATV’s;
G) "Residential Area" - any parcel of land upon which is situate a
residence;
H) "Excessive Noise" - noise received by a Residential Area
which exceeds an L10 of 65dB(A) during daytime, an L10 of
55dB(A) during nighttime, an L50 of 60dB(A) during daytime, or an
L50 of 50dB(A) during nighttime.
I) "Permitted Excessive Noise" - Excessive Noise which is
generated by activities which are necessary to other residential
uses, including, without limitation, lawn mowing, snow removal,
non-commercial lot clearing, housing maintenance activities, hobby
farming, gardening, residential construction (including landscaping,
repair, remodeling), vegetation trimming or removal, sidewalk, patio
or driveway construction.
J) "Abatable Excessive Noise" - Excessive Noise generated
from any source which is reasonably capable of being reduced by
muffling, creating barriers, or other means, so as to reduce the
noise levels to levels which do not constitute Excessive Noise, or to
levels which are significantly less than the noise produced without
abatement of any kind;
K) "Chronologically Pre-Existing Noise Source" - a Stationary
Source of Excessive Noise which existed prior to the establishment
of Residential Areas which receive Excessive Noise from the
Stationary Source;
L) "Temporary Excessive Noise" - Excessive Noise which is
generated by construction projects which have been approved
by the City, including subdivision construction, building
construction, excavation, dredging, ditch cleaning, land clearing,
street construction or utility construction/repair;
4-720 Noise Nuisances – No activity shall be permitted in any
area zoned R-1, R-M, R-A, R-AH, PUD, RS-1, or RS-2 which
constitutes a noise nuisance. Further, regardless of the level of
noise levels generated, the use of Personal Recreational Vehicles
in a manner which constitutes a Circulating Mobile Source of
Noise, as defined in Article 4-712(C) of this Code, shall be
prohibited in or within 1,000 feet of areas zoned R-1, R-M, R-A, RAH,
PUD, RS-1, or RS-2. In particular, activities commonly known
as “motocross tracks”, “dirt bike courses”, motocross or dirt bike
“jumps”, “ramps” or “trails” shall be prohibited in or within 1000 feet
of areas zoned R-1, R-M, R-A, R-AH, PUD, RS-1, or RS-2.
4-721 Generators of Excessive Noise - Any activity which
produces Excessive Noise, excepting those activities excepted
under Article 4-722 below;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
16
4-722 Personal Recreational Vehicle Noise - Noise generated
by Personal Recreational Vehicles which is received by any
Residential Area, either as a Stationary Source, a Mobile Source,
or a Circulating Mobile Source, and which exceeds 60dB(A) for any
period of five consecutive minutes.
4-723 Exceptions - The following activities shall be exempt from
the provisions of Article 4-721 above:
A) Permitted Excessive Noise;
B) Chronologically Pre-Existing Noise Sources, to the
extent that the activity does not constitute Abatable
Excessive Noise. A Chronologically Pre-Existing Noise
Source which produces Abatable Excessive Noise shall
implement abatement techniques to reduce noise levels as
much as is practical. In the absence of an agreement
between the City and the entity producing the Excessive
Noise as to what constitutes a reasonable reduction in the
noise levels generated, the practical level to which noise
shall be reduced shall be determined by the City Council,
after reviewing the following:
i) recommendations of a qualified and competent
noise consultant;
ii) the financial consequences of requiring
abatement;
iii) the degree to which occupants of Residential
Areas affected by the noise were or should have
been aware of the noise prior to taking up occupancy;
C) Generators of Temporary Excessive Noise;
4-800 Storage of Motor Vehicle Tires
It shall be unlawful to store any complete or partial motor vehicle tire other than
within the confines of a fully enclosed and code-compliant building except under
the following conditions.
A. Bona Fide Dealers
Business engaged in retail tire sales, motor vehicle repair, motor vehicle
sales or other businesses that generate a frequent need to temporarily
store tires may store tires in a covered but not enclosed structure, where:
1. The structure prevents rainwater from collecting in the tire casings;
2. During the period from April 1 through October 31 of each year the
tires are removed from the site at least weekly;
3. During the period from November 1 through March 31 of each year the
tires are removed from the site at least every thirty days.
4. Appropriate visual screening is made to prevent the viewing of the
storage area from nearby properties.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 4
17
5. The property owner has obtained a permit issued by the City Building
Official, approving the structure, after verifying the need for the
business to use such a structure. The Building Official may attach
such additional conditions to the issuance of such permits as the
Building Official deems appropriate, and may establish standards and
criteria for the proper construction and maintenance of tire structures.
B. All Other Land Uses
Residences, institutions, farms, businesses and all other land uses not
possessing a permit for outside tire storage may store not more than four
tires out of doors for not more than seven days, under conditions in which
the tires are awaiting pickup by a rubbish collector or other service, or are
otherwise awaiting transport by the property owner for proper disposal.
C. Exceptions
This portion of the Code shall not apply to tires or parts thereof that have
been incorporated into bona fide functional or recreational uses, such as a
tire swing or boat dock bumper, provided that the usage is done in a
manner so as to prevent the accumulation of water within the tire that
could serve as mosquito breeding habitat.
Updated through Ordinance 13-11
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
1
ARTICLE 5 - ANIMAL CONTROL
5-100 Dogs
5-110 through 5-115 deleted with Ordinance 19-09
5-120 Running at Large Prohibited
5-130 Barking Dogs
5-140 Reserved
5-150 Multiple Dog License
5-151 License Required
5-152 Procedure of Issuance
5-153 Conditions of License
5-154 Renewal of License
5-155 Denial or Revocation of License
5-156 Fees
5-160 Public Dog Kennel
5-161 Definition
5-162 Conditional Use Permit required
5-163 Standard of Operation
5-170 Lost or Stolen License
5-180 Anti-Rabies Vaccination Required
5-190 Impounding
5-191 Notice of Impounding
5-192 Interference with Pound
5-193 Alternative Discretionary Impoundment
5-200 Horses, Donkeys or Mules
5-210 Licensing
5-211 Application for Permit
5-212 Inspection
5-213 Duration
5-214 Fee
5-215 Hearing
5-216 Permission of Neighbors
5-220 Running at Large
5-221 Impounding
5-222 Sale of Impounded Animal
5-223 Proceeds of Sale of Impounded Animal
5-230 Riding in Public Places
5-231 General Prohibition
5-232 Parks and Beaches
5-233 Riding on Streets
5-234 Private Property
5-240 Acreage, Fencing and Stable Requirements
5-241 Lot Size
5-242 Number of Animals
5-243 Additional Animals
5-244 Pen Size
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
2
5-245 Fence and Pen Construction Standards
5-246 Fence Setbacks
5-247 Feed Lots
5-250 Manure and Waste Control
5-251 Removal of Manure and Waste
5-252 Insect Control
5-260 Permit Revocation and Enforcement of Code
5-300 Animal Permits
5-310 Exception for white-tailed Deer
5-320 Exception for Certain Reptiles
5-330 Exception for Chickens
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
3
ARTICLE 5 - ANIMAL CONTROL
5-100 Dogs
The following provisions shall govern the keeping and maintaining of dogs:
5-110 Reserved
5-120 Running at Large Prohibited
No dog shall be permitted to run at large within the City. The police officers
and Animal Control Officer of the City or anyone else designated by the City
Council to do so shall take up and impound any dog so running at large in
violation of this provision, and such dog shall thereafter be handled in the
same manner as provided herein for other impounded dogs. The restriction
imposed by this Article shall not prohibit the appearance of any dog upon the
streets, roads, or public property, or on property owned, leased or where
permission is granted for such presence by the owner of such dog and such
dog is on a leash and accompanied by, and under the immediate control of a
competent person or is, if not so leashed, under the immediate control of a
competent person charged with its care.
5-130 Barking Dogs
No Person shall own, harbor, keep, or have in their possession or on their
premises any dog which barks, cries, howls excessively, continuously or in an
untimely manner, The phrase “barks, cries, or howls excessively,
continuously or in an untimely manner” includes, but is not limited to, the
creation of any noise by any dog which can be heard by any person, including
a law enforcement officer or animal control officer, from a location outside of
the building or premises where the dog is being kept, and which noise occurs
repeatedly over at least a five minute period of time, with a thirty second or
less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five minute period.
5-140 Reserved
5-150 Multiple Dog License
A Multiple Dog License shall be required at a residence which five or more
dogs are kept as pets, bred for show, hunting, field trials or pleasure. The
licensing requirement herein shall only apply for dogs six months of age or
older.
5-151 License Required A license shall be required for any residence
with five or more dogs as outlined above. All licenses shall be for a period
of one year from the date of issuance.
5-152 Procedure for Issuance No Multiple Dog License shall be issued
until after a public hearing is held before the Planning Commission.
Written notices of the public hearing shall be mailed to all residences
within 750 feet of the outside perimeter of any location where dogs will be
kept outside. Published notice of the public hearing shall also occur.
Publication and mailing of notices shall occur not less than 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
4
5-153 Conditions of License
A. Licenses shall be issued only for property that is zoned R-1, RS-1,
RS-2 and R-A (or PUD carrying a single-family residential usage), and,
depending on lot size, licenses shall further be restricted as follows:
1) On R-A lands, no license shall be issued for any lot containing less
than one acre. For lots containing between one acre and 2.5 acres, a
maximum of six dogs will be allowed. For lots in excess of 2.5 acres, a
maximum of eight dogs will be allowed.
2) On lands zoned R-1, RS-1 and RS-2 (or carrying one of those uses
if a residential PUD), no license shall be issued for any lot containing
less than one acre. For lots containing more than one acre, a
maximum of six dogs will be allowed.
3) Lot size shall be measured from the center line of abutting
roadways.
5-154 Renewal of License If no written complaints, including
memorandum complaints from City staff or law enforcement personnel
are received, all Multiple Dog Licenses shall be automatically renewed by
City Staff each year, upon payment of the renewal fee. If one or more
written complaints are received, the Planning Commission shall review the
renewal, and at the discretion of the Planning Commission, a public
hearing meeting the requirements for initial issuance may be required.
The City Council, after receiving the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, may alter or amend the conditions of a Multiple Dog License
as the City Council deems appropriate.
5-155 Denial or Revocation of License If a license is denied upon
initial application, the license holder shall be given written notice of the
denial stating the reasons for the action. If the Planning Commission
recommends revocation of a license, the license holder shall be given
written notice of the reasons for the proposed revocation, and shall be
given the opportunity to be heard by the City Council prior to their taking
action on the revocation.
5-156 Fees An initial license fee, and an annual license fee shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. In addition,
a license applicant shall reimburse the City for all costs of processing,
publishing and mailing notices regarding any license or renewal.
5-160 Public Dog Kennels
5-161 Definition
A “public dog kennel” means a kennel where dogs owned by others are
boarded for a fee.
5-162 Conditional Use Permit Required
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
5
Public dog kennels shall be permitted only by Conditional Use Permit,
issued in accord with Article 9, and shall be permitted only in the following
zoning classifications:
R-A Residential-Agriculture
5-163 Standard of Operation
a. Health and Safety Standards
All public dog kennels must conform to the statutes and regulations
of any State or County agency having jurisdiction over such
matters as fire control, cleanliness, temperature control, waste
disposal, diet and animal treatment. Waste shall not be
permitted to accumulate so as to create any odor detectable by
adjoining property owners.
b. Noise Control
All public dog kennels shall be housed in masonry buildings, or well
insulated buildings, constructed in such a manner that animal
noise cannot be heard from adjoining properties.
c. Lot Size and Setback
No public dog kennel shall be permitted on any lot containing less
then 10 acres. All buildings and runways comprising the public
dog kennel shall be constructed at a distance of at least 300
feet from adjoining property owners’ dwellings or occupied
business structures.
d. Outside Runways
Outside runways must be completely screened by an attractive
solid fence at least six feet in height. The kennel operator shall
not permit noise to be emitted from outside runways which can
be heard by adjoining property owners.
e. Fee
Annual fee shall be required for all public dog kennels, to be
established by resolution of the City Council.
5-170 Lost or Stolen License
Upon due proof, to the satisfaction of the City Clerk or person authorized to
issue licenses, that said dog has been licensed, a duplicate license may be
issued. The duplicate will be stamped with the letter “D”.
5-180 Anti-Rabies Vaccination Required
No person shall keep any dog over six months of age within the City for a
period of time in excess of 15 days unless said dog has been vaccinated with
a current anti- rabies vaccine. This requirement shall apply to all dogs,
including those being kept or boarded at a kennel. Before issuing a dog
license as provided in this Article, the City Clerk shall require that the person
applying for a license for a dog present a signed statement from a licensed
veterinarian certifying the date on which said dog was vaccinated with antirabies
vaccine. If said vaccination is not current, the City Clerk shall not issue
a license for said dog.
5-190 Impounding
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
6
The police officer, or such person so authorized by the City Council may
impound any dog found unleashed or so running at large. Also, in the event
that any dog bites a human being on public or private property, the police
officer will immediately have the dog impounded at the animal shelter for the
quarantine period or shall at their discretion, follow the Alternative
Discretionary Impoundment as written in Article 5-193. The City Council
shall, from time to time appoint an animal control contractor, who shall
maintain a shelter for impounded animals (the “pound”) and perform such
other duties as may be contracted for. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the
owner of any dog so impounded shall prefer that the dog be confined for the
quarantine period with a licensed veterinarian, the dog, once in the pound,
may be transferred to the designated veterinarian upon compliance with the
following conditions:
5-190.1 Payment to pound
The owner shall provide evidence that all charges for the initial transport
and kenneling at the pound have been paid in full.
5-190.2 Transport
The owner shall arrange for the transport of the dog from the pound to the
veterinarian in a manner acceptable to City staff; the owner shall provide
evidence that costs of such transport have been paid in full.
5-190.3 Confirmation by Veterinarian
Prior to transporting the dog from the pound to the veterinarian, the City
Staff shall be provided with a written statement from the veterinarian
stating that the veterinarian will:
a) Confine the dog in the manner required by law for the entire
quarantine period.
b) Look only to the dog owner, and not to the City, for payment of
any veterinary or boarding costs associated with the
confinement.
5-191 Notice of Impounding
Notice of impounding shall be given to the owner of such dog if known. In
case the owner is unknown, the animal control contractor shall post notice at
the pound that if the dog is not claimed within 5 days of the posting of the
notice it will be sold to private party as a pet, or humanely killed and its
carcass disposed of or may be sold. The animal control contractor shall
house and feed in a humane manner any dog held at a pound. An
impounding fee and charge for feeding shall be charged for any dog held at
the pound which latter sum shall be paid to the animal control contractor.
5-192 Interference with Pound
It shall be a violation of this Article for any unauthorized person to break open
the pound or to attempt to break open the pound or to take or let out any
dogs therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from a police officer, dog
catcher, or any other person authorized by the City Council in the discharge
of his duties pursuant to this Code.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
7
5-193 Alternative Discretionary Impoundment
Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 5-190 through 5-193, a peace
officer required by this Code to impound a dog who has bitten a human
being, may, in the officer’s discretion, make arrangements with the dog owner
for the dog owner to impound the dog on the owner’s own premises, for a
quarantine period of ten (10) days, under the following conditions:
a) The peace officer must reasonably believe that the dog owner is a
responsible person likely to observe the conditions of the quarantine, and
that the premises in which the quarantine will take place is suitable. The
only suitable premises will consist of a single family home having a garage
or a fenced kennel area.
b) The bite committed by the dog must have been a bite which did not
require suturing to treat the wound of the bite victim;
c) The dog must be kept indoors or within an outdoor fenced kennel,
surrounded on all four sides by adequate fencing materials which are not
penetrable by the dog, at all times within the quarantine period;
d) On the next business day following the commencement of the
quarantine period, the dog owner must make a deposit of $150.00 with
the City Administrator, in cash or by personal check payable to the City, to
reimburse the City for kennel charges if the owner violates the terms of
the self-quarantine; if the dog owner observes all of the conditions of the
self-quarantine, the entire $150.00 deposit shall be refunded to the dog
owner;
e) The owner must furnish evidence that the dog is currently licensed
and within the required time period has had a rabies vaccination; a dog
which, by reason of being less than six months of age, is not required to
have a rabies vaccination, shall not be eligible for discretionary
impoundment, and must be quarantined under the -provisions of Article 5-
190 through 5-190.3;
f) If the dog owner fails to observe any of the above conditions, the dog
shall be immediately removed by a peace officer and quarantined as
provided in Article 5-190 through 5-190.3.
5-200 Horses, Donkeys or Mules
The following provisions shall govern the keeping and maintaining of horses,
donkeys or mules.
5-210 Licensing
No person, firm or corporation will keep, stable or maintain horses, donkeys
or mules within the City on land other than lands classified as R-A without
first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk to so keep, stable or maintain such
animals. For the purposes of this Article the word “animal” or “animals” shall
hereafter refer collectively to horses, donkeys or mules. No permit shall be
issued on any lands zoned RS-1 or RS-2.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
8
5-211 Application for Permit
Application for the permit shall be made in writing by the owner of the lands
where such animals are to be kept, and upon blanks and forms furnished by
and obtained from the City Clerk. Each application for a permit will contain
the correct description of the property where such animal or animals will be
kept and the name of the owner of the land; the amount of contiguous area
available for such animal or animals; the total number of such animals and
information identifying each such animal to be kept or stabled on the land;
and the description of the shelter provided for such animal or animals.
5-212 Inspection
The Zoning Officer shall inspect or have inspected the premises before
issuing a permit to assure that each person, firm or corporation has complied
with the standards and regulations contained in the Articles of this Code.
5-213 Duration
The permit will be of indefinite duration, but subject to revocation for violation
of any Article of this Code, for failure to keep current the information required
by Article 5-211 or for good cause. Revocation will be a majority vote of the
City Council after ten (10) days notice and hearing.
5-214 Fee
The owner of the premises where such animals will be kept or stabled will pay
a licensing fee as set by resolution of the City Council. This fee will be used
to compensate the cost of issuing the permit and the cost of inspecting the
owner’s premises. This fee shall not be refunded if the application is denied,
or if issued, the permit is later revoked by the City Council.
5-215 Hearing
Any person, persons, firm or corporation objecting to questioning the
application of this licensing requirement may petition the City Council for a
hearing and decision.
5-216 Permission of Neighbors
To qualify for a Horse Permit, permission by letter must be obtained from
heads of households, who reside in a dwelling, within one thousand (1,000)
feet of corral.
5-220 Running at Large
No person, firm or corporation shall permit any horse, pony or colt of which
he is the owner, caretaker or custodian to run at large within the City. Such
animal will be deemed to run at large when it is off the premises owned or
rented by its owner and unaccompanied by the owner, or an agent or
employee of the owner.
5-221 Impounding
A peace officer or any designated agent of the City may impound any such
animal found at large, and shall provide proper sustenance for any and all
such animals impounded. The peace officer or his designated agent shall
then within twenty-four (24) hours after any such animal has been
impounded, post written notice in two (2) conspicuous places in the city
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
9
describing such animal and stating that it has been impounded. If the owner
of such impounded animal is known to the person so impounding, personal
service shall be made of notice of such impounding upon such owner in the
manner prescribed by State law for the service of process. No such animal
impounded shall be released except to a person displaying a receipt from the
City Clerk showing payment of the reasonable costs of impounding and the
cost of feeding at a rate as set by resolution by the City Council.
5-222 Sale of Impounded Animal
If any horse, pony or colt impounded is not redeemed within two (2) weeks,
the peace officer or his designated agent shall give an additional three (3)
days’ notice of the time and place where such animal or animals will be sold
by posting and servicing notices as required for notice herein. If such animal
cannot be sold on the day stated, it may be sold as soon thereafter as
possible without notice.
5-223 Proceeds of Sale of Impounded Animal
The City Clerk shall turn over the proceeds of any sale to the City Treasurer.
On order of the City Council the City Treasurer shall pay to the owner of such
animal the balance of the funds received for the sale of such animal after
deducting the cost of impounding, feeding, and sales charges, if the owner
makes claim for monies within one (1) year from the date of the sale;
otherwise, it shall be forfeited to the City.
5-230 Riding in Public Places
5-231 General Prohibition
No person may ride or drive a horse after the hour of sunset and before the
hour of sunrise along or crossing any public way without appropriate lighting
or reflectorized clothing. No person may ride a horse in any public park or
beach except in areas duly designated as a trailway or hitching area.
5-232 Parks and Beaches
The City Park and Beach Commission shall designate and properly post
those areas in public lands, parks and beaches where horses may be ridden.
5-233 Riding on Streets
No horse may be ridden on any public street, alley or highway unless said
street, alley or highway is adjacent to land zoned R-A. Every person riding a
horse or driving any horse-drawn vehicle upon a public roadway shall be
subject to City Code and state law applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle,
except those provisions which by their nature have no application.
5-234 Private Property
No person shall ride any horse upon private property without the prior
permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
5-240 Acreage, Fencing and Stable Requirements
5-241 Lot Size
No such animal shall be kept on any lot or parcel of land containing less than
Three (3) acres.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
10
5-242 Number of Animals
As many as three (3) such animals may be kept on a lot or parcel of land
containing three (3) acres.
5-243 Additional Animals
One (1) additional such animal, per acre, may be kept upon lots or parcels of
land containing more than three (3) acres.
5-244 Pen Size
For three (3) such animals, said animals shall be enclosed in a pen or corral
containing at least 3,200 square feet and there must be a stable under roof of
at least 144 square feet; for each additional animal at least 1,100 additional
square feet of enclosed pen or corral shall be provided and 35 additional
square feet of stable under roof shall be provided.
5-245 Fence and Pen Construction Standards
Fences for pens, corrals, pasture or similar enclosures must be of sufficient
height and strength to retain such animals. Reasonable extra care must be
taken to ensure that stallions are properly enclosed.
5-246 Fence Setbacks
Fences for pens, corrals, pastures, or similar enclosures or stables shall not
be less than one hundred (100) feet from the road right-of-way line or lines
nearest the owner’s land or any road passing through a lot or parcel of land
where any animal is kept; and such fences for pens, corrals, pasture or
similar enclosures or stables shall be no closer to adjoining real estate and
shall have a setback or side yard therefrom, of at least twenty (20) feet.
5-247 Feed Lots
The feed lot or feeding area of any pasture or similar enclosure shall be a
reasonable distance from the fence line thereof.
5-250 Manure and Waste Control
5-251 Removal of Manure and Waste
Manure and other waste material must be removed from the pen, corral,
stable or similar enclosure every seven (7) days, except where the horses,
ponies, or colts are confined to an area of four (4) acres. If however, in an
area of four (4) acres or more the City Council finds that the manure and
other waste materials create a nuisance by attracting flies, other insects and
rodents or by creating offensive odors, the City Council may order that the
manure and other waste materials be removed within four (4) days of notice
to the owner of the land ordering him to do so.
5-252 Insect Control
Corrals, pens, stables, or similar enclosures shall be maintained in a manner
to eliminate fly breeding.
5-260 Permit Revocation and Enforcement of Code
Any permit issued pursuant to this Article may be revoked by the City Council
if the City Council finds, after investigation and after holding a public hearing
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
11
(written notice of the hearing to be given to the holder of the permit and other
interested parties at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing), that any of the
Articles of this Code have been violated.
5-300 Animal Permits
Domesticated pets mean dogs, cats, tropical fish, goldfish, parrots,
parakeets, gerbils, hamsters, and rabbits. Except domesticated pets, and as
permitted under Chapter 5-200, no raising, breeding, keeping or occupancy
of livestock, poultry or other animals shall be permitted on any lands other
than those zoned R-A Rural Single Family Residential. In land zoned R-A
such activities may be permitted on parcels in excess of five contiguous
acres, provided the occupant has obtained an Animal Permit. Animal Permits
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer upon approval by the City Council,
which may impose such conditions on this issuance of such permits as the
Council may deem appropriate. In deciding on the issuance of an animal
permit, the Council shall consider the effects of the use on adjacent
properties, sanitary condition, disposal of animal waste, noise, odor, or any
other factor affecting the health, safety or welfare of the City.
5-310 Exception for White Tailed Deer
White Tailed Deer, as that species is commonly known, shall be allowed
in areas zoned other than R-A by Temporary Conditional Use Permit, but
only under controlled circumstances, which shall include, at a minimum,
the following:
a) The usage has been approved by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources;
b) The physical facilities have been inspected and approved by the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources;
c) The facilities are completely screened by adequate fencing;
d) The permit limits the number of deer which can be kept;
e) The permit shall be for no more than two years at a time;
5-320 Exception for Certain Reptiles
Non-venomous snakes or lizards may be considered to be Domesticated Pets
and kept by their owners in all of the zoning districts of the City under the
following conditions:
1) These animals shall be kept only as household pets, and shall not be raised
or kept for sale to third parties; and
2) These animals shall at all times be confined in secure cages designed to
prevent their escape from the structure in which they are located, and shall be
removed from cages only to permit such handling by their owners or persons
authorized by their owners as is necessary for feeding, exercise, treatment or
inspection of condition; and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
12
3) These animals shall be housed and areas of confinement maintained at all
times in a manner that is sanitary and prevents no danger of attraction of vermin,
spread of disease or other unhealthy conditions; and
4) These animals shall not be kept in quantities or under conditions that require
stocks of food for the animals that:
a) Require storage facilities occupying more than ten square feet of floor
or ground space;
b) Consist of live animals, such as rats, mice other rodents, reptiles or
insects;
c) Consist of dead animals that are not stored in sealed, sanitary
containers.
5) These animals shall not be kept in quantities that require more than 100
square feet of total floor or ground space for all cages and food storage.
6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, these animals shall not be kept if to do so
would violate the terms of private covenants imposed on the property by any
developer or owners’ association through documents of record with the Anoka
County Recorder or Registrar of Titles.
5-330 Exception for Chickens
The keeping or raising of chickens in areas zoned R-1 and RS-1 shall be
allowed, subject to the following terms, limitations, and conditions.
1) The following conditions shall apply to every person who owns, controls,
keeps, or maintains chickens on a residential city lot in areas zoned R-1 and
RS-1:
a) No more than 15 chickens shall be allowed.
b) No roosters or other poultry shall be allowed.
c) The chickens shall be housed in a coop, which shall be of wood frame
construction, with a pitched roof. Roofing and siding shall match the
house.
d) The chicken coop shall be located in the rear or side yard, not in the front
or street side of the lot.
e) The area in which the chickens are allowed to roam shall contain no more
than 400 square feet, and shall be completely enclosed by chicken wire
mesh, including mesh over the top to prevent any escape by the chickens.
The frame of the enclosure shall be of wood construction, painted to blend
with the colors of the other buildings, and the enclosure of the coop shall
be maintained to present a neat and orderly appearance at all times.
f) At no time shall chickens be allowed out of the enclosed screened area or
coop.
g) So long as the structure comprising the coop is less than 150 square feet
or less at the foundation level, no building permit shall be required, and
the structure shall not be considered an “accessory building”. The coop
shall be a freestanding building, and may not be attached to or be a part
Ham Lake City Code
Article 5
13
of a garage or house. The coop and screened enclosure shall be located
at least fifty feet from any well, and at least thirty feet from any other
building on the property.
h) Removal and proper disposal of all manure shall be completed at least
every four days. Manure shall not be deposited in household trash bins.
i) If eggs are harvested, they may not be sold to others.
j) Every person owning, keeping, controlling, or maintaining chickens shall
be responsible for the care and the welfare of the chickens on a daily
basis, and shall not violate any code, rule or regulation of any
governmental entity relating to the raising of animals.
2) The City Council may impose additional conditions at any time, including the
requirement that opaque fencing or vegetative screening be installed to prevent
the coop and enclosure from being viewed by nearby residential uses. Such
additional conditions may be imposed after providing notice to the person raising
chickens on a particular lot and providing that person an opportunity to be heard.
If, however, the City, in its sole discretion, believes in good faith that the chickens
on a particular lot pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare, the City may
order the immediate removal of the chickens. Every person owning, keeping,
controlling, or maintaining chickens shall allow unlimited access to the City’s
agents, without notice, for the purpose evaluating the threat of communicable
diseases or other public health threat associated with the presence of the
chickens.
Updated through Ordinance 19-01, 19-09
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
1
ARTICLE 6 - PARKING AND TRAFFIC
6-100 Parking
6-110 Definitions
6-120 Prohibited Parking
6-121 Snowfall Parking
6-130 Placement of Traffic Signs
6-140 Maintenance of Traffic Signs
6-150 Unnecessary Speed
6-160 Prohibited Parking in Business Areas
6-200 Additional Vehicle and Traffic Regulations
6-300 Snowmobiles
6-310 Registration
6-320 Operation
6-330 Other Prohibited Conduct
6-340 Operator Responsibility
(1) First Violation
(2) Second Violation
6-400 Special Vehicles: Motorized Golf Carts, Utility Task Vehicles, Class 1 All-
Terrain Vehicles, and Mini-Trucks
6-410 Prohibition
6-420 Definitions
6-430 Permit
6-440 Operation
6-500 Motor Vehicles in City Parks
6-510 Temporary Seizure of Motor Vehicles
6-520 Costs of Temporary Storage
6-530 Posting of Warning Signs
6-600 Parking of Truck-Tractors, Garbage Trucks and Semi-Trailers in
Residential Neighborhoods
6-610 Legislative Intent
6-620 Definitions
6-630 Prohibited Conduct
6-640 Exceptions
6-650 Owner Deemed to Have Consented
6-660 Limitation
6-700 Trail System
6-710 System Established
6-720 Usage Restrictions
6-721 Organized Activities
6-722 Excessive Speed Prohibited
6-730 Trail Designation and Marking
6-740 Physical Standards
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
2
6-750 Development
6-751 New Subdivisions
6-752 Existing Subdivisions
6-753 Other Components
6-760 Administration
6-800 Parking of Personal Vehicles in Residential Areas
6-810 Definitions
6-811 Personal Vehicle
6-812 Residential Area
6-813 Parking Surface
6-814 Street Setback Area
6-815 Non-Operating Vehicle
6-816 Screening
6-820 Prohibited Parking
A. Locations
B. Maximum Number of Vehicles
6-900 Usages in the Plat of Hiawatha Beach
6-910 Definitions
6-910 Parking of Trailers
6-920 Vehicle Parking in Connection with Path Usage
6-930 Travel on Paths
6-940 ATV Travel on Public Roads
6-950 Towing or Removal of Illegally Stored or Parked Objects
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
3
ARTICLE 6 - PARKING AND TRAFFIC
6-100 Parking
6-110 Definitions
The terms used in this Code are used as they have been defined in
Minnesota Statute 169.01 as it now exists or as it is amended. Further,
wherever in this code there is a prohibition or regulation on parking a motor
vehicle, such prohibition or regulation shall apply to all right-of-way within the
regulated area.
6-120 Prohibited Parking
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, the City Fire Chief or one acting under
his direction, in any of the following places:
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of or directly across from a public or private driveway and,
except for cul-de-sacs and eyebrows, within three feet of either
side of a public or private driveway, measured at the curb or side
limits of a driveway as projected to the intersecting public street;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, or within a properly marked fire
lane;
(5) Within 20 feet of a cross-walk at an intersection;
(6) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(7) On a cross-walk;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the City Council has directed a different length by signs or
markings;
(9) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing;
(10) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance;
(11) Alongside or opposite any excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
(12) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
of or curb of a street;
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway or within a highway tunnel, except as otherwise
provided by the City Council;
(14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, which signs shall
be placed as directed by the City Council acting through the City
Police Officers or City Fire Chief;
(15) When directed or ordered to proceed by any Police Officer or
Firefighter of the City of Ham Lake or other person otherwise
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
4
invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic for
any given purpose;
(16) No motor vehicle shall be parked within the right-of-way of any
municipal street between the hours of 12 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
between October 1 and April 30 of any year; during the period
between May 1 and September 30 of any year, the City may
impose selective non-street parking restrictions by City Council
resolution and signage.
6-121 SnowfallParking
The following regulations shall apply to parking following snowfall.
(1) No person shall permit a vehicle under his operation or control to
be parked unattended upon any street, alley, or highway in the City
of Ham Lake during a snowfall or thereafter, in such a manner as to
obstruct traffic or the removal of snow from such street, alley or
highway until such street, alley or highway has been cleared of
snow.
(2) When a Police Officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street,
alley, or highway in the City of Ham Lake during a snowfall, or
thereafter, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic
or the removal of snow from such street, alley, or highway, the
Officer shall issue a tag, providing twenty-four (24) hours notice to
the owner to remove the vehicle. If following said twenty-four (24)
hour period, such vehicle shall not have been moved, the Officer
may provide for the removal of such vehicle and remove the same
to the nearest convenient garage or other place of safety. The
owner or operator of the vehicle may obtain the same from such
place of removal upon paying the costs of the removal and
reasonable storage charges.
(3) For the purposes of this ordinance, the term “Owner” of any motor
vehicle shall be the registered owner according to the records of
the Minnesota Department of Public Safety. The owner shall be
presumed to have given consent to the parking of any vehicle, and
shall be the individual responsible for the removal. Notice to the
owner shall be by placing the tag upon the vehicle’s windshield in
the usual manner of issuing tags for parking violations.
(4) Any person violating the provisions of the Ordinance shall be
deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). For offense of paragraph 1
above, if a single individual receives a second conviction in the
same snow season, the fine shall not be more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
(5) Notwithstanding the forgoing, if during or after a heavy snowfall, an
illegally parked vehicle constitutes an obstruction to snow removal
equipment, the vehicle shall be immediately towed without the
notice required under Article 6-121 (2) above; and the provisions of
Article 6-121 (2) relating to costs of removal shall apply.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
5
6-130 Placement of TrafficSigns
The City Council shall, after recommendation from the City Police Officers,
City Fire Chief, or City Engineer, direct the placement of proper signs to
regulate stopping, standing, or parking, which signs shall conform to the
standards as established by the Minnesota State Department of
Transportation.
6-140 Maintenanceof TrafficSigns
The signs referred to in Article 6-130 of the Code shall be paid for and
adequately maintained as follows:
(1) If on a public right-of-way, of which the City has ownership or an
easement, by the City of Ham Lake.
(2) If on private property, open to the public, including that of other
governmental entities other than the City of Ham Lake, by the
owner of such private property. The owners of such property shall
have 30 days to install such signs as required by order of the
Council hereunder after written notice thereof from the City Clerk.
Such signs shall thereafter be kept in place and unobstructed.
6-150 Unnecessary Speed
No persons shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with unnecessary
speed on any public or private way. Prima facie evidence of unnecessary
speed shall be squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires as a
result of friction with any paved surface, or the throwing of sand, gravel or
other loose surface material from the tires of said vehicle.
6-160 ProhibitedParking in BusinessAreas
The provisions of this Article 6-160 shall apply to areas that are zoned
Commercial Development 1 (CD-1), Commercial Development 2 (CD-2),
Commercial Development 3 (CD-3), Commercial Development 4 (CD-4),
Industrial Park (I-P), and Light Industrial (I-1), hereafter referred to as
“Commercial Lands”.
A. Definitions
1) Approved Parking Area - areas which were designated as areas
upon which to park vehicles in a site plan approved by the City at the time
of review of any building permit or certificate of occupancy for any
business location, or which were approved by the City as the result of a
specific request for such approval under the provisions of Article 6-160 (E)
below.
2) Allowed Parking Area - areas within Commercial Lands which are
paved with bituminous or concrete surfaces which meet the standards for
parking lots found elsewhere in this code, and which existed as legal
parking lots as of the effective date of this portion of the City Code, to wit,
January 6, 2002.
3) Vehicles - any wheeled vehicle, any vehicle intended to have wheels,
whether or not currently attached, and any vehicle intended for
transporting people or property. “Vehicles” shall include, without limitation,
passenger cars, trucks, truck-tractors, motorcycles, motorbikes, boats,
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
6
tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, busses, lawnmowers, snowmobiles, gokarts,
jet skis, four-wheelers, three-wheelers, dirt bikes, or aircraft.
Vehicles” shall not include bicycles, non-motorized scooters or sleds.
4) Responsible Party - The registered owner of any vehicle found to be
unlawfully parked upon Commercial Lands, and the fee owner, contract
purchaser, tenant or subtenant of any real estate upon which any vehicle
is found to be unlawfully parked on Commercial Lands. If a Responsible
Party is a corporation or limited liability company, then any person in
responsible charge of the day to day business activities of the business at
any Ham Lake location shall also be considered a Responsible Party.
B. ProhibitedParking
No vehicle shall be parked on any Commercial Lands except inside of a
legal structure, or upon an Approved Parking Area or an Allowed Parking
Area.
C. Enforcement
Upon the observation of any vehicle found to be unlawfully parked on
Commercial Lands, a law enforcement officer shall issue a misdemeanor
citation as follows:
1) If the vehicle is one which has a registered owner, such as a car or
truck, the law enforcement officer shall issue the citation to such
registered owner, in person if the registered owner can be found at the
time of and in the immediate vicinity of the offense, or by regular U.S. Mail
if the registered owner cannot be so found.
2) If the vehicle is not one which has a registered owner, or if the
registered owner cannot be readily located, then the officer shall issue the
citation to any Responsible Party (including more than one Responsible
Party) in person if the Responsible Party can be found at the time of and
in the immediate vicinity of the offense, or by regular U.S. Mail if the
Responsible Party cannot be so found.
3) At the time of the offense, the officer shall affix a notice to the vehicle,
in some manner calculated to be observed by a person in control thereof,
which notice shall read as follows:
NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATION
You have been issued a citation for unlawful parking of this vehicle.
Ham Lake City Code prohibits parking of this vehicle in this location.
Continued parking of this or any other vehicle in this location may
subject you to additional sanctions.
D. Towing
If any part of a vehicle which is unlawfully parked on Commercial Lands is found
to be overhanging or encroaching upon any public road right of way or drainage
or utility easement, the vehicle may be towed and stored, with the costs of the
towing and storage being the responsibility of the owner thereof.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
7
E. EstablishmentofApprovedParking Areas
The owner or occupant of any business located on Commercial Lands that does
not already have an area or areas designated as Approved Parking Areas in a
site plan which was approved by the City may apply to the City for such a
designation. Such requests shall be acted upon by the City Council after review
by the Planning Commission.
6-200 Additional Vehicle and Traffic Regulations
The regulatory provisions of the following state statutes are adopted as they
now exist, or as amended to regulate the use of highways, streets, and alleys
in the City of Ham Lake.
(1) Highway Traffic Regulation Act, M.S.A. 169 and amendments
thereto:
(2) Safety Responsibility Act, M.S.A. 169 and amendments thereto:
(3) Drivers’ License Law, M.S.A. 171 and amendments thereto.
6-300 Snowmobiles
6-310 Registration
The registration of snowmobiles is governed by M.S.A. 84.88 and
amendments thereto.
6-320 Operation
The provisions of M.S.A. 84.81 through 84.88 as they relate to the operation
of snowmobiles are adopted to govern the operators of snowmobiles within
the City of Ham Lake.
6-330 Other Prohibited Conduct
No person shall:
(1) Operate a snowmobile within 100 feet of any skating rink, sliding
area or fish house, except that a snowmobile may be operated to a
fish house which is being used by the operator if same is operated
with due care and consideration to all others.
(2) Operate any snowmobile upon private property without the prior
permission of the owner or occupant.
(3) Tow on City roadways, any sled or other object without a rigid tow
bar attached between the snowmobile and the sled or object being
towed.
(4) Intentionally drive, chase, run over, injure or kill any animal while
operating a snowmobile.
(5) Operate a snowmobile on any public property, including but not
limited to, school grounds, parks, playgrounds and recreation
areas, except when authorized by a resolution of the City Council.
(6) No snowmobile shall be operated on any municipal street, except
in the following manner.
a) Operation shall be restricted to the far right edge of the traveled
portion of the roadway, in the same direction as the normal direction
of traffic.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
8
b) No snowmobile shall be driven at a speed in excess of 15 miles
per hour.
c) Travel in ditches, side slopes, back slopes and boulevard areas
is prohibited.
(7) No snowmobile shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner
likely to endanger persons or property, or in a manner so as to
create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the quiet
enjoyment of others;
6-340 Operator Responsibility
The operator of every snowmobile operated in the City of Ham Lake shall be
responsible to insure that the snowmobile is operated in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
(1) FirstViolation
If a snowmobile is observed being operated in violation of this Code, and
the operator is identified by witnesses or through investigation of the
Minnesota Registration Number of the snowmobile in question, the
operator may be cited for a petty misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to
$300.
(2) SecondViolation
If a second violation by the same operator within any given twelvemonth
period occurs, the violation shall constitute a misdemeanor as that
term is defined by Minnesota Statutes.
6-400 Special Vehicles: Motorized Golf Carts, Utility Task Vehicles, Class 1
All-Terrain Vehicles, and Mini-Trucks.
6-410 PROHIBITION
No person shall operate a motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, or mini-truck on city streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property
without obtaining a permit as provided herein.
6-420 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this section, the definitions of the following special
vehicles shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV). As defined by Minn. Stat. § 84.92, subd. 8, a
motorized vehicle with: (1) not less than three, but not more than six low pressure
or non-pneumatic tires; (2) a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and (3) a
total width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire rim that is 65 inches or less.
DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over the motorized
golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck and being the licensee.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
9
MOTORIZED GOLF CART. Any passenger conveyance being driven with four
wheels with four low-pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement of less
than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
UTILITY TASK VEHICLE (UTV). As defined by Minn. Stat. § 169.045, subd. 1
(3), a side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off-road vehicle that has four wheels, is
propelled by an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of
1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has a total dry weight of 1,800 but less than
2,600 pounds.
MINI-TRUCK. As defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.011, subd. 40(a), a motor vehicle
that has four wheels; is propelled by an electric motor with a rated power of 7,500
watts or less or an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity
of 660 cubic centimeters or less; has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds;
contains an enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly
resembles a pickup truck or van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear
of the vehicle; and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle
safety standards required of motor vehicles in the Code of Federal Regulations,
title 49, sections 571.101 to 571.404, and successor requirements. A mini-truck
does not include: a neighborhood electric vehicle or a medium-speed electric
vehicle as defined by § 73.11; or a motor vehicle that meets or exceeds the
regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations, title 49, section 571.500, as it may
be amended from time to time.
6-430 PERMIT
(1) Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
city and shall contain all of the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) Model name, make, and year and number of the motorized golf
cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck.
(c) Current driver’s license or reason for not having a current license.
(d) Other information as the city may require.
(2) The permit fee shall be as set forth in the ordinance adopting a
schedule for municipal fees and charges adopted pursuant to Article 2-
500 of this code, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time.
(3) Permits shall be granted for a period of up to three years and may be
renewed.
(4) No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions
are met:
(a) The applicant must demonstrate that he or she currently holds a
valid Minnesota driver’s license to operate a mini-truck.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
10
(b) The applicant may be required to submit a certificate signed by a
physician that the applicant is able to safely operate a motorized
golf cart, utility task vehicle or all-terrain vehicle on the roadways
designated.
(c) The applicant must provide evidence of insurance and registration
in compliance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
concerning insurance coverage and vehicle registration for the golf
cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or mini-truck.
(d) The applicant has not had his or her driver’s license revoked as
the result of criminal proceedings.
6-440 OPERATION
(1) Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, and minitrucks
are permitted to operate only on city streets, not state or federal
highways, except to cross at designated intersections.
(2) Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, and minitrucks
shall not be operated on any city street at any time prior to 6:00
am or after 10:00 pm on any given day, provided: that a vehicle
operated at any time prior to sunrise or after sunset must be equipped
with original and working headlights, taillights, and rear-facing brake
lights.
(3) Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, and minitrucks
shall not be operated in inclement weather conditions or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles
on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(4) All drivers and passengers of utility task vehicles and all-terrain vehicles
under the age of 18 years must wear an approved safety helmet and a
seat belt when provided by the manufacturer as provided for in Minn.
Stat. § 84.9256.
(5) Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem
provided for in Minn. Stat. § 169.045, as it may be amended from time
to time, when operated on designated roadways.
(6) Motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles, and minitrucks
shall be equipped with a rear-view mirror to provide the driver
with adequate vision from behind as required by Minn. Stat. § 169.70.
(7) The operator of a motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, or mini-truck may cross any street or highway intersecting a
designated roadway.
(8) Every person operating a motorized golf cart, a utility task vehicle, an
all-terrain vehicle, or a mini-truck under permit on designated roadways
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
11
has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle
under the provisions of Minn. Stat. Ch. 169, as it may be amended
from time to time, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be
applied to motorized golf carts, utility task vehicles, all-terrain vehicles,
or mini-trucks and except as otherwise specifically provided in Minn.
Stat. § 169.045, subd.7, as it may be amended from time to time.
(9) The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder
upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions
of this section or Minn. Stat. ch. 169, as it may be amended from time
to time, or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely
operate the motorized golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or
mini-truck on the designated roadways.
(10) The number of occupants on the golf cart, utility task vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, or mini-truck may not exceed the design occupant load.
(11) Authorized city staff may operate city owned motorized golf carts and
mini-trucks without obtaining a permit within the city on city streets,
sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and public property when conducting
city business.
(12) A Mini-truck may be operated under permit on designated roadways
only if it is equipped with all of the following:
(a) At least two headlamps.
(b) At least two tail lamps.
(c) Front and rear turn-signal lamps.
(d) An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side of the vehicle
and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger’s side
of the vehicle or an interior mirror.
(e) A windshield.
(f) A seat belt for the driver and front passenger.
(g) A parking brake.
6-500 Motor Vehicles in City Parks
No person shall operate or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle in
any public park, except on the surface of the traveled roads, driveways and
temporary or permanent parking lots. This section shall not apply to the parking
of vehicles, trailers or equipment in connection with any municipally approved
carnival, festival or gathering. For the purposes of this Code, the term “motor
vehicle” shall be as defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169.01 (Subdivision
3). The City Council shall, in its discretion, post appropriate signs advising of the
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
12
prohibition, but the lack of any such sign shall not excuse violation of this section
of the City Code.
6-510 Temporary Seizure of Motor Vehicles
Any motor vehicle found within any City Park in violation of this section may
be seized by law enforcement officers for the following purposes:
a) To photograph the vehicle and to record relevant registration
numbers or markings for future reference;
b) To identify the registered owner of the vehicle and notify the
owner of the illegal usage if the operator and the owner were not one
and the same person;
c) To serve as physical evidence if needed in any criminal
prosecution.
6-520 Costs of Temporary Storage
Prior to releasing any seized vehicle under this section, the owner thereof
shall be required to pay for the reasonable towing and storage costs of the
seizure.
6-530 Posting of Warning Signs
City staff shall post warning signs in the public parks of the City advising the
public of the prohibition on vehicular traffic in the parks, and further advising
that violation of the ordinance may result in the seizure of the vehicle and
owner responsibility to pay for towing and storage costs.
6-600 Parking of Truck-Tractors, Garbage Trucks and Semi-Trailers in
Residential Neighborhoods
6-610 Legislative Intent
The City Council of the City of Ham Lake finds it in the best interests of the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Ham Lake to regulate
the parking of certain trucks and trailers in areas zoned R-1, single family
residential, and RS-1, single family residential (shoreland). The purpose of
this regulation is for the protection of property values, for the preservation of
the residential character of areas so zoned, for the enhancement of sanitation
in residential areas; for the protection of the structural stability of municipal
streets and roads in such areas, by keeping to a minimum the number of
truck-tractors, garbage trucks and semi- trailers traveling thereon.
6-620 Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the terms used shall have the following
meanings:
(1) “Truck-Tractor” shall mean that term as defined in Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 168.002, Subdivision 38, herein adopted by
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
13
reference.
(2) “Semi-Trailer” shall mean that term as defined by Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 168.002, Subdivision 30.
(3) “Garbage Trucks” shall mean any truck meeting the definition of
“truck” in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 168.002, Subdivision 37,
intended or used for the collection on a fee basis, of the garbage,
trash and rubbish of persons other than the owner.
(4) “Park”. This definition shall include the word park, and any
derivative of said word, including but not limited to the words
“parking” and “parked”. Truck-tractor, garbage truck or semi-trailer
shall be deemed to have been parked if it remains at rest or if it
remains physically present within an area which comprises R-1 or
RS-1 zoning, for more than two consecutive hours.
6-630 ProhibitedConduct
It shall be unlawful for any person, business or other entity to park a trucktractor,
garbage truck or semi-trailer within the confines of any areas zoned
R-1 or RS-1, unless the large truck-tractor, garbage truck, or semi-trailer is
situated in a location which is totally screened from view by adjacent property
owners’ residences, and totally screened from view from members of the
public traveling on nearby public roadways.
6-640 Exceptions
There shall be excepted from the requirements of this Article truck-tractors
and semi-trailers which are in use pursuant to a bona fide construction project
on the site, which are moving occupants into or out of the home, engaged in
the performing of services at the residence which would require the presence
of a truck-tractor or semi-trailer for more than two consecutive hours.
Garbage trucks, while actually engaged in the activity of traveling through R-1
areas pursuant to the completion of a garbage pick-up route or while
performing such services shall be excepted from this ordinance during said
times.
6-650 Owner Deemed to Have Consented
Regardless of the ownership of the truck-tractor, garbage truck, or semitrailer,
the owner of the land upon which a truck-tractor, garbage truck, or
semi-trailer is illegally parked shall be deemed to have given consent to the
illegal parking, and therefore to have violated the provisions of this ordinance.
6-660 Limitation
The lawful parking of a truck-tractor, garbage truck, or semi-trailer within the
scope of this article shall be limited to a single vehicle. In no case shall more
than one such vehicle be permitted to be parked in any area zoned R-1, RS-
1, or RS-2, regardless of screening or confinement in a building.
6-700 Trail System
6-710 SystemEstablished
There is hereby established in the City of Ham Lake a Trail System to be
used for the recreational purposes hereafter described. The Trail System
shall consist of interconnected pathways and “user-friendly” public streets, as
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
14
designated from time to time by the City Council, upon recommendation of
the Park Commission. The regulations established herein pertaining to
usage, hours of operation, and the like shall not pertain to those portions
of the Trail System which exist within the traveled portion of dedicated public
roads and streets.
6-720 UsageRestrictions
The Trail System shall be for the exclusive use of pedestrians and bicyclists.
No motorized vehicle shall be permitted to be operated upon the Trail
System, excepting personal devices adapted for use by handicapped
persons using the Trail System, such as motorized wheelchairs. The term
“pedestrian” shall be deemed to include persons using roller skates, in-line
skates, and skate boards (all of which activity shall be collectively referred to
as “skating”); and persons using cross-country skis. No horses, donkeys,
mules or other beasts of burden shall be ridden or otherwise permitted on the
Trail System.
6-721 OrganizedActivities
Organized activities, such as running races, “walk-a-thons” and the like
shall be permitted for walkers and runners only, and shall require a permit
to be issued by the City Staff after review by the Parks Commission, which
body shall set reasonable limits on the activity, as well as requirements for
control. No bicycle racing, ski racing or skate racing shall be permitted.
6-722 ExcessiveSpeed Prohibited
No person shall run, skate, ski or ride a bicycle at a speed which creates a
danger to other persons using or who may be using the Trail System.
6-730 Trail Designation and Marking
The various components of the Trail System shall be adopted by
Resolution of the City Council from time to time, after review by the Parks
Commission. A map displaying the precise location of the Trail System
shall be maintained at City Hall, and maps depicting the Trail System,
together with the basic operational regulations, shall be available for
public distribution. Once designated as a part of the Trail System, the
areas so designated shall be a part of the City Park System, and shall be
marked and signed as follows:
A. Major Entrance Points
All major entrance points to the Trail System shall display a sign
containing the following information:
HAM LAKE TRAIL SYSTEM
No Motorized Vehicles or Horseback Riding
Trail Hours: Sunrise to Sunset Daily
Yield to persons walking
Obey all signs
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
15
In winter months, a supplemental sign shall be affixed to the above sign
displaying the following information:
Cross-Country Skiing Permitted at Your Own Risk
Trails are not groomed
B. Intersections with Public Streets
A stop sign shall be placed at all points where the Trail System intersects
with public streets, and a “Trail Crossing” sign placed on all public streets
to advise motorists of intersecting Trail System traffic.
6-740 PhysicalStandards
The physical standards of each component of the Trail System shall be
determined by the Parks Commission on a case-by-case basis, taking into
account the need for drainage, buffer from adjoining area, anticipated
traffic levels, interfering vegetation, and any other physical feature which
might affect Trail System efficiency and safety. All portions of the Trail
System shall be paved with a hard surface. Where public streets are a
part of the Trail System, clearly visible painting shall identify the Trail
System portion of the street if possible. Where possible, the Trail System
shall interconnect with trail systems being maintained by Anoka County or
neighboring municipalities.
6-750 Development
6-751 New Subdivisions
The developer of any subdivision under Article 10 of the Ham Lake City
Code may be required to dedicate and construct portions of the Trail
System which lie within the proposed subdivision. Developer costs shall
be limited to the amount of park dedication fee which would otherwise be
owing for the subdivision, and if a developer is required to dedicate an
easement for the Trail System and pay for the cost thereof, no other park
dedication or park dedication fee shall be required unless the amount of
acreage dedicated for Trail System is less than ten percent of the total
acreage in the subdivision, or unless the amount of money paid for
development costs of the Trail System is less than the amount of park
dedication fee which would otherwise be owing for the subdivision.
6-752 Existing Subdivisions
Portions of the Trail System may be established in existing subdivisions in
the same manner as the construction and acquisition of public roads,
either within existing public road right-of-way or within right-of-way
established for Trail System purposes. Prior to designating any portion of
the Trail System in such areas, however, the City Council shall first direct
the Parks Commission to conduct a public hearing, with notice to those
landowners reasonably anticipated to be affected by the Trail System
establishment. Persons applying for municipal permits, variances or lot
splits may be required to dedicate Trail System components as a part of
the approval requirements.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
16
6-753 Other Components
The City may acquire other components of the Trail System, including
easements in unplatted or undeveloped lands, by any lawful means,
utilizing such funding as may be available from any municipal source,
grant or dedicated MnDot fund. Further, the City may establish
neighborhood committees for the purpose of offering input to the City
regarding issues created by aspects of the Trail System which affect
particular neighborhoods.
6-760 Administration
The City Council, after review by the Parks Commission, may, by
Resolution, establish such rules, policy and regulations concerning the
Trail System as the Council deems appropriate. Such administrative
details may include the establishment of a permanent sub-committee of
the Parks Commission for ongoing review of the Trail System, a volunteer
maintenance system patterned after the MnDot “Adopt-a-Highway”
system, and ongoing changes in usage, specially permitted usage, hours,
or dedication requirements.
6-800 Parking of Personal Vehicles in Residential Areas
6-810 Definitions
6-811 PersonalVehicle
A Personal Vehicle is a vehicle or vehicle device intended for the
personal usage of an occupant of a residential dwelling in any
Residential Area, including, without limitation, passenger vehicles,
pickup trucks, collector cars, vans, recreational vehicles,
motorcycles, motorbikes, motor scooters, go-karts, boats,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, other trailers (empty or occupied),
campers, camper trailers, camper tops, truck tops, riding lawn
mowers, tractors (including garden tractors) farm implements,
construction equipment and sport utility vehicles.
6-812 ResidentialArea
Areas zoned R-1, PUD residential, RS-1, RS-2 and R-A parcels
less than three acres in size.
6-813 ParkingSurface
A Parking Surface is an area located outside of a garage, barn,
accessory building or other building, intended to accommodate
driveways or parking areas in Residential Areas, that is paved with
bituminous or concrete surfacing not less than two inches in depth,
or that is covered with a class V aggregate surface that is
maintained adequately to prevent the growth of vegetation, erosion
of the surface, and with edges defined by some type of edging
material, curbing or that clearly shows a line of demarcation
between the aggregate surface and abutting vegetation.
6-814 StreetSetbackArea
The Street Setback Area of any lot in any Residential Area is that
portion of the lot that lies between the street right of way and an
imaginary line drawn parallel to the street abutting the lot and the
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
17
nearest point of any dwelling or garage on the lot. For corner lots,
the Street Setback Area shall include both street frontages, and if
the corner lot contains a dwelling with a detached garage or
accessory building, the building edges closest to the abutting
streets shall be used to demark the line.
6-815 Non-Operating Vehicle
A Non-Operating Vehicle is a Personal Vehicle that either does not
have displayed current motor vehicle registration tags issued by the
Minnesota Department of Transportation or a division thereof, or
which cannot be immediately legally driven on public roads by
reason of required missing parts, such as bumpers or turn signals
or by reason of damage or disrepair. A Personal Vehicle having a
flat tire or tires, missing wheel or wheels, lack of an engine or
critical component parts thereof preventing immediate ignition of
the engine, broken or cracked windshield, broken on nonfunctioning
headlights or other characteristic of a vehicle not
capable of being immediately legally driven on a public road shall
be presumed to be a Non-Operating Vehicle.
6-816 Screening
Screening means either opaque fencing meeting all city codes, or
an opaque vegetation screen composed of conifers, a house,
garage or other structures that block views from abutting streets or
parcels, or any combination thereof. Where gates are used,
fencing incorporating gates shall not be considered to be Screening
unless the gates are closed during all times when not in actual use
to provide current entry or egress from areas outside the Street
Setback Area.
6-820 Prohibited Parking
A) Locations
No Personal Vehicle shall be parked within the Street Setback Area
of any Residential Lot unless parked on a Parking Surface. One
unlicensed but operable personal vehicle may be permitted to be
stored on a single parcel of record.
B) Maximum Number ofVehicles
No more than eight Personal Vehicles may be parked at any time
within the Street Setback Area of any given lot. Where Screening
is present that prevents Personal Vehicles from being observed
from abutting streets or parcels, there shall be no limit on the
number of Personal Vehicles that can be parked outside of Street
Setback Areas, nor shall there be any requirement that Personal
Vehicles be parked on a Parking Surface, provided, that no more
than one of such vehicles may be a Non-Operating vehicle. The
maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional or
temporary guests who do not reside on the property.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
18
6-900 Usages in the Plat of Hiawatha Beach
The following conditions apply exclusively to dedicated roads and paths in the plat
of Hiawatha Beach.
6-910 Definitions
A. All-Terrain Vehicles (“ATVs”) shall be as defined in Ham Lake City Code
Article 6-410.
B. “Paths” mean those facilities illustrated in the original plat of Hiawatha
Beach as providing access between public roads and the shorelines of
Coon Lake or Little Coon Lake, whether or not so labeled, which exist
between:
Lot 1, Block 2 and Lot 6, Block 1, Hiawatha Beach
Lot 19, Block 2 and Lot 1, Block 3, Hiawatha Beach
Lot 13, Block 9 and Lot 1, Block 13, Hiawatha Beach
Lot 11, Block 13, and Lot 1, Block 14, Hiawatha Beach
Lot 1, Block 4 and Lot 12 Block 3, Hiawatha Beach
Lot 1, Block 7 and Lot 16, Block 8, Hiawatha Beach
And which exist easterly and southerly of Lots 1 and 2, Block 8 and westerly
of Lots 11 and 12, Block 9, Hiawatha Beach;
And which exist southerly of Lot 13, Block 14, and westerly of Lots 8, 9, 10,
11, 12 and 13, Block 14, Hiawatha Beach.
6-910 Parking of Trailers
No trailers may be parked or stored on any dedicated path in the plat of Hiawatha
Beach, nor may any such item be parked or stored within the right-of-way of any
public street in the plat of Hiawatha Beach.
6-920 Vehicle Parking in Connection with Path Usage
No motor vehicle (including ATV’s) may be parked or stored within the right-of-way
of any dedicated path or dedicated public road in the plat of Hiawatha Beach in
connection with the concurrent usage of any path in the plat of Hiawatha Beach.
This prohibition includes, without limitation, vehicles that have been used to pull or
push trailers bearing watercraft, snowmobiles, fish houses or other devices to the
shore of Coon Lake or Little Coon Lake.
Ham Lake City Code - Article 6
19
6-930 Travel on Paths
Paths in the plat of Hiawatha Beach may be used by pedestrians, bicycles,
snowmobiles or all terrain vehicles. Paths may also be used to convey watercraft
or fish houses to the shore of Coon Lake or Little Coon Lake if pulled or pushed by
an ATV. No travel on any path is permitted at a speed in excess of 15 miles per
hour.
6-940 ATV Travel on Public Roads
ATV’s may travel on public roads outside of paths in the plat of Hiawatha Beach
under the following conditions:
A. The travel must be for the sole purpose of accessing one of the paths in
the Plat of Hiawatha Beach.
B. The ATV shall not exceed a speed of 15 miles per hour.
C. The origin of the trip must be from a point within the plat of Hiawatha
Beach, and return trips from paths must be to a point within the plat of
Hiawatha Beach.
D. The course of travel must be the shortest route on dedicated public
roads between the point of origin and the path that is used or intended to be
used, and the course of travel may not extend beyond the boundaries of the
plat of Hiawatha Beach.
E. Travel in conformance with Article 6-400 is permitted.
6-950 Towing or Removal of Illegally Stored or Parked Objects
The City may cause the towing or other removal of any vehicle, trailer, ATV,
snowmobile or other object found to be stored or parked in violation of this
ordinance, and may post signage on or near all paths in the plat of Hiawatha
Beach advising of the prohibition on parking and storage, and further advising of
the possibility of removal of any illegally stored or parked object without notice to
the owner thereof.
Updated through Ordinance 17-10
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
1
ARTICLE 7 - LICENSES
7-100 General Provision
7-110 Fees
7-120 Violations
7-130 Special Provisions for Alcohol, Non-Intoxicating Malt Liquor and
Tobacco Licenses
7-131 Age Compliance Checks
7-132 Definitions
7-133 Conditions of Compliance Checks
7-134 Civil Procedures on Sales to Minors
7-135 Eligibility for License
7-136 Criminal History Background Investigations
7-136.1 Required Investigations
7-136.2 Use of Data
7-136.3 Consent Form
7-136.4 Denial of Employment or Request
7-200 Construction Activities
7-210 License Required
7-220 Insurance
7-230 Expiration
7-300 Public Dances and Cabaret Licenses
7-310 Public Dances
7-311 Licenses
7-312 Security
7-313 Exceptions
7-314 Persons Ineligible for License
7-320 Cabaret Licenses
7-321 License Required
7-322 Term
7-323 Persons Ineligible for License
7-324 Exceptions
7-400 Tobacco and Tobacco Products
7-410 Term
7-420 Posting
7-430 Persons to Who License May be Issued
7-440 Location of Sales
7-450 Cigarette Vending Machines
7-460 Prohibited Sales
7-470 Conflicting State or Federal Provisions
7-500 Amusement and Vending Machines
7-510 License Required
7-520 Term
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
2
7-530 Posting
7-600 Field Parties and Large Assemblies
7-610 Field Parties
7-611 Definitions
7-612 Licensing Provisions
7-613 Application for License
A. Forms
B. Fees
7-614 Issuance of Licenses
A. Issuance Criteria
B. Review by City Council
C. Report to Sheriff
D. Conditions of License
7-615 Exceptions
7-620 Large Assemblies
7-621 Definitions
7-622 License Required
7-623 Conditions for Issuing License
7-624 Application
7-625 Issuance
7-626 Revocation
7-627 Enforcement
7-628 Exemptions
7-629 Summary License Issuance by Administrator
7-700 Off-Sale Liquor
7-710 Provisions of State Law Adopted
7-720 License Required
A. General Requirement
B. “Off-Sale” Licenses
C. Brew pub, “Off-Sale” Licenses
D. Small brewer, “Off-Sale” Licenses
7-730 Application for “Off-Sale” License
A. Form
B. Liability Insurance
C. Approval of Security and Insurance
7-740 License Fees
A. Fees
B. Payment
C. Term; Pro Rata Fee
7-750 Granting of Licenses
A. Investigation and Issuance
B. Investigation Fee Required
C. Person and Premises Licensed; Transfer
7-760 “Off-Sale” Regulations
7-770 Off-Sale License Standards
7-772 Places Ineligible for License
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
3
A. In General
B. Licensee’s Responsibility
C. Inspections
D. Federal Stamps
7-773 Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption
7-774 Suspension and Revocation
7-775 Number of “Off-Sale” Liquor Licenses to be Issued
7-800 Beer, Wine and On-Sale Liquor
7-810.1 Provisions of State Law Adopted
7-810.2 Exceptions
7-810.3 Approval of Insurance
7-810.4 License Fees
7-810.5 Payment
7-810.6 Term Pro Rata Fee
7-810.7 Granting Licenses, Investigation and Issuance.
7-810.8 Persons and Premises Licensed; Transfer.
7-810.9 Persons Ineligible for License.
7-810.10 Places Ineligible for License. General Prohibition.
7-810.11 Delinquent Taxes and Charges
7-810.12 Distance from School or Church
7-810.13 Certain Acts and Conduct Prohibited
7-810.14 Definitions
7-810.15 Alcohol on Licensed Premises
7-820 Requirements Exclusive to Off-Sale and On-Sale Beer Licenses
7-821 License Required
7-822 Application for License
7-823 Conditions of the License
7-824 Closing Hours (Repealed)
7-825 Bars, Partitions, Boxes or Screens
7-826 Clubs
7-827 Revocation
7-828 Special Licenses
7-829 Beer/Wine Licenses
7-830 Requirements Exclusive to On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor
7-831 License Required, General Requirements
A. On-Sale Licenses
B. Special Club Licenses
C. Special License for Sunday Sale
D. Brew pub, “On-Sale” Licenses
E. Brewer Taproom, “On-Sale” Licenses
7-832 Application for License
7-833 Conditions of License, In General
7-834 Licensee’s Responsibility
7-835 Inspections
7-836 Hours of Operation
7-836.1 General (Repealed)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
4
7-836.2 Hours
7-837 Federal Stamps
7-838 Restriction on Consumption.
7-839 Consumption in Public Places
7-840 Suspension and Revocation
7-850 Compliance with Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act
7-851 Definitions
7-852 Building Materials
7-853 Size and Height
7-854 Doorway Proximity
7-855 Compliance with Fire and Building Codes
7-856 Seating and Parking
7-857 Separation and Roof Connections
7-858 Permit and Site Plan Approval
7-900 Motor Vehicle Sales Lots
7-901 License Required
7-902 Prohibited Conduct
7-903 Definitions
7-904 Fee
7-905 Additional Requirements
7-906 Insurance
7-1000 Licensing of Non-Regulated Aircraft
7-1000.1 Definition of Non-Regulated Aircraft
7-1000.2 Number Display
7-1000.3 Activities and Number Display
7-1000.4 Registrant Responsibility
7-1000.5 Severability
7-1000.6 Violation
7-1100 Transient Merchant, Peddler, Canvasser, and Solicitor
7-1110 Definitions
7-1120 License Required
7-1130 Exclusions
7-1140 Religious & Charitable Organizations
7-1150 Application
7-1160 Prohibited Practices
7-1170 License Fees
7-1180 List of Prohibited Contacts
7-1200 Lawful Gambling
7-1210 Regulations Supplemental to Statutory Control
7-1220 Places Eligible for License
7-1230 Conditions
7-1240 Investigation
7-1250 Filings of Records; inspection; access to records
7-1260 Fee
7-1270 Organizations Eligible for License
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
5
7-1280 Charitable Gaming
A. Contribution Required
B. Annual Report
C. Computations
D. Due Date
E. Repealer
7-1300 Short-Term Rentals
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
6
ARTICLE 7 - LICENSES
7-100 General Provision
This Article related to the licensing of certain activities within the City. All
licenses shall be applied for on application forms prepared by the City
Administrator, and unless specified to the contrary, all licenses shall be issued by
the City Administrator.
7-110 Fees
Excepting matters for which fees are established by State or Federal law,
the fees for all licenses issued under this Article shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.
7-120 Violations
Requirements for all licenses are ongoing in nature, and the violation of
any condition of issuance of a license shall be grounds for sanctions to be
imposed by the City, including, without limitation, revocation or suspension
of a license, after due process of law.
7-130 Special Provisions for Alcohol, Non-Intoxicating Malt Liquor
and Tobacco Licenses
7-131 Age Compliance Checks
At least one time each calendar year, the City’s law enforcement
personnel shall conduct age compliance checks of every holder of
a license issued under Articles 7-400, 7-700, 7-800, 7-829 and 7-
831 of this code
7-132 Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms are defined.
a) “Alcohol” means any liquor, beer wine, intoxicating or
non-intoxicating malt beverages sold by a licensee under
Articles 7-700, 7-800, 7-829 or 7-831 of this Code.
b) “Tobacco” means cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco,
chewing tobacco or any other tobacco product sold by a
licensee under Article 7-400 of this Code.
c) “Minor” the word “minor” means a person under the age
of 18 years for tobacco age compliance checks, and means
a person under the age of 21 years for alcohol age
compliance checks; the phrase “of legal age” means 18
years old or older for tobacco age compliance checks, and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
7
means 21 years old or older for alcohol age compliance
checks.
d) “Drug Paraphernalia” includes any of the following:
cigarette paper sold or offered for sale without the availability
of pouch cigarette tobacco from the retailer; smoking pipes
sold or offered for sale without the availability of pipe
tobacco from the retailer; roach clips; one-hitters; bongs;
water-pipes.
7-133 Conditions of Compliance Checks The following general
guidelines shall be observed by the law enforcement
personnel in conducting age compliance checks.
a) A minor shall be recruited (with parental consent if under
18) for the purpose of attempting to purchase tobacco or
alcohol at the premises of each licensee.
b) No attempt shall be made to disguise a minor to appear
of legal age, nor shall minors whose natural appearance
makes them appear to be of legal age be recruited for
compliance operations.
c) The minor shall not attempt to induce a sale by any gift,
offer of extra money or means other than a direct request to
buy tobacco or alcohol, nor shall the minor attempt to cajole,
persuade or intimidate a salesperson into making a sale
once identification has been requested of the minor.
d) Inquiry shall be made of each minor used in the
operation as to any history of that person’s usage of a fake
identification, and no minor shall be used in the compliance
operation if the minor has any history of ever having used or
possessed a fake identification card.
e) The City’s law enforcement personnel will notify the City
Administrator of each age compliance check, and the result
thereof, within two business days after each compliance
check. This information will include the date and time of day
of the check, the location, and if a failure resulted, the name
of the salesperson and the details of the sale.
f) If a licensee has not failed a compliance check after five
checks have been made at the licensee’s location, efforts
will be made to limit compliance checks at that licensee’s
premises so that on average, that licensee is not checked
more than one time per twelve months. This clause does
not prohibit more than one compliance check for such a
licensee in a given twelve-month period, but merely
establishes a general guideline for an average over an
extended number of years. If a licensee fails an age
compliance check, there is no limit on the frequency of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
8
compliance checks until five consecutive successful checks
have been made.
g) If a licensee passes an age compliance check, the City
Administrator shall promptly notify the licensee by letter
signed by the City Administrator, of the successful result,
including the date and time of day that the compliance check
was made.
7-134 Civil Procedures on Sales to Minors
If the agent of any licensee shall sell tobacco or alcohol to a minor,
whether in an age compliance check or otherwise, the following
civil procedures shall take place in addition to, and not in place of,
any criminal proceedings which may take place.
a) Notification to Licensee
The City Administrator shall notify the licensee in writing of
the failure, within fourteen days of any sale to a minor,
including the date, time and circumstances of the sale, and
the consequences of the failure.
b) Civil Penalty
The notice to the licensee shall also inform the licensee that
a civil penalty is assessed against the licensee as a result of
the sale to a minor. The civil penalty shall be in the following
amounts:
i) For tobacco licensees, the penalty shall be
$250.00, plus $250.00 for each previous compliance
check failure in the preceding ten years, up to a
maximum of $1,500.00;
ii) For alcohol licensees, the penalty shall be
$500.00, plus $500.00 for each previous compliance
check failure in the preceding ten years, up to a
maximum of $3,000.00;
The civil penalty shall be due and payable in full within 30
days after notice of the penalty is given to the applicant. No
subsequent license for tobacco or alcohol shall be issued to
the licensee, or to any subsequent applicant for a license for
sales of tobacco or alcohol from the location at which the
delinquent licensee operated, until and unless the penalty is
paid in full.
c) Hearing on Penalty
Within ten days after receipt of the notice of the penalty, the
licensee may request a hearing before the
City Council for the purpose of appealing the penalty. The
request must be in writing and addressed to the City
Administrator. The payment requirement shall be in
abeyance during the appeal period, and the City Council
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
9
may, in their discretion, either hear the appeal at a regular
City Council meeting or at a special meeting. Following the
hearing, the City Council may, in their discretion, ratify the
penalty, reduce the penalty, or abate the penalty. Any
penalty owing after the hearing shall be due and payable
immediately if the original 30 days for payment have
elapsed, and due and payable within the original 30 days if
those days have not yet elapsed.
d) Suspension or Revocation of License
In addition to, and not in place of the civil penalties
prescribed above, licensees who fail age compliance checks
repeatedly shall be given the following sanctions:
i) If a licensee fails a check which results in a
circumstance in which one of the sanctions listed in
Article 7-134 (d) (ii) or (iii) below will take place if the
next check is failed, the licensee shall be given
written notice of the consequence of the subsequent
failure.
ii) If a licensee fails three consecutive checks, the
license shall be summarily suspended by the City
Administrator as soon as the appeal time has
elapsed, or, if an appeal is heard, upon ratification of
the suspension by the City Council. The suspension
shall be for thirty days.
iii) If a licensee fails four consecutive checks, or if a
licensee fails seven checks within a ten-year period,
the license shall be summarily revoked by the City
Administrator as soon as the appeal time has
elapsed. If an appeal is requested, the license shall
remain in effect until a decision is made by the City
Council as to sanctions
e) Hearing on Suspension or Revocation
Within ten days after receipt of a notice of failure which
might result in suspension or revocation of a license, the
licensee may request a hearing before the City Council for
the purpose of appealing the sanction. The request must be
in writing and addressed to the City Administrator. The City
Council may, in their discretion, either hear the appeal at a
regular City Council meeting or at a special meeting.
Following the hearing, the City Council may, in their
discretion, revoke the license, suspend the license for any
period of time, or abate the sanctions. If a license is
revoked, no new license shall be issued to that licensee or
its principals for any alcohol or tobacco sales, nor shall the
premises from which the illegal sales were made be
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
10
subsequently eligible to house a licensed seller of alcohol or
tobacco.
7-135 Eligibility for License
No applicant shall be eligible to receive a license to sell alcohol or
tobacco if the premises at which the sales are to be made carries
as part of its stock in trade any drug paraphernalia as defined by
Article 7-132 (d) of this Code.
7-136 Criminal History Background Investigations
Criminal History Background Investigations may be conducted by City Staff using
publicly available websites, by the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office for liquor, beer,
wine or non-intoxicating malt liquor licenses or for other lawful purposes on
request of City Staff, or by the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
where nationwide background data is required. All background investigations
shall first be approved by the City Administrator.
7-136.1 Required Investigations
A. Employment with City. All persons seeking employment with the
City shall be subject to a criminal history background investigation at
such time and the person is selected for a job interview. The extent of
the background check shall be in accord with State and Federal laws
pertaining to the nature of the duties to be performed by the
prospective employee.
B. Beverage Licenses. Persons seeking City on-sale or off-sale
licenses to sell intoxicating liquor, beer, wine or non-intoxicating malt
liquor shall be subject to statewide background checks.
C. Specific Permits or Licenses. Persons seeking permits or
licenses for Transient Merchant, Peddler, Canvasser, Solicitor,
Massage Therapy or Lawful Gambling shall be subject to statewide or
nationwide background checks.
D. Institutional Ownership. If the applicant for a liquor, beer, wine,
non-intoxicating malt liquor or lawful gambling license is a corporation,
limited liability company or partnership, the entity shall designate a
responsible managing person, and the person so designated shall be
subject to the background check.
7-136.2 Use of Data Data obtained in any background check shall not be public
data, and shall be maintained in the manner provided by law by all agencies
having possession of the data.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
11
7-136.3 Consent Form Prior to conducting or requesting a background check,
the applicant shall be required to execute a written consent form compliant with
the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 13. The City staff shall maintain
and update such forms for this purpose.
7-136.4 Denial of Employment or Request No person shall be denied
employment by reason of information discovered in a background check unless
the information consists of a criminal history that relates directly in whole or in
part to the position being sought, and the conviction level is higher than a petty
misdemeanor. No person shall be denied a permit or license based on
information discovered in a background check unless the information consists of
a criminal history that relates directly in whole or in part to the activity for which
the license or permit is being sought, and the conviction level is higher than a
petty misdemeanor. If employment, permitting or licensure is denied to any
applicant based on information received in a background check, City staff shall
give a written notice to the applicant stating the following:
A. The reason for the denial;
B. The complaint and grievance procedures set forth in Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 364.06;
C. The earliest date that the applicant may re-apply;
D. That if the applicant has competent evidence of rehabilitation, all
such evidence will be considered by the City upon reapplication.
7-200 Construction Activities
7-210 License Required
Before any person, firm, corporation or other entity shall engage in the
business of doing or performing any of the various types of work listed in this
Article, they shall obtain a license: A license may be obtained from the City,
or, if the activity is licensed or bonded by the State, then a State License or
bond shall suffice or, in the case of a City License, no license shall be
recognized until the applicant shall furnish a policy of insurance. Licenses
shall be required for:
(1) Cement work, cement block work, cement block laying or brick
work;
(2) General construction including erection, alteration or repair of
buildings;
(3) The moving or wrecking of buildings;
(4) Plastering, outside stucco work, or lathing;
(5) Blacktopping (parking lots, driveways, etc.);
(6) Plumbing including installation, repair and pumping of outside
sewer disposal systems;
(7) Roofing;
(8) Sign and billboard erecting;
(9) Excavators (for basements, foundations, grading of lots, etc.);
(10) Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
12
7-220 Insurance
No license shall be issued, or, in the case of a State License, no License
shall be recognized, until the applicant shall furnish a policy of insurance
insuring such applicant against liability imposed by law on account of injury to
persons in the amount of $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 for each
accident and a policy insuring the applicant against liability imposed by law on
account of damage or destruction to property in the amount of $50,000.00.
The licensee shall furnish the City with a copy of or evidence of the insurance
policy or policies, which shall provide that same shall not be canceled by the
insurer or the insured without ten days prior written notice thereof being given
to the City. In case of cancellation of such insurance, such license shall be
suspended automatically until such insurance shall be replaced.
7-230 Expiration
All licenses, except those relating to liquor or beer, issued under this Article
shall expire on December 31, following the date of issuance unless sooner
revoked or forfeited. If a license granted hereunder is not renewed previous
to expiration then all rights granted by such license shall cease and any work
performed after the expiration of the license shall be in violation of this Code.
7-300 Public Dances and Cabaret Licenses
7-310 Public Dances
7-311 License
No person, corporation or other party shall hold or maintain or permit any
public dance in the City except in accordance with the provisions of this
Article and after obtaining a license. License shall be issued on application
for either a single dance or for periodic dances through a year’s period of
time. Licenses for single dances may be issued by the City Clerk in the
discretion of the Clerk; licenses for a year’s period shall be issued by the City
Clerk only after approval by the City Council.
7-312 Security
There shall be in attendance at the expense of the licensee at all public
dances held in the City, a trained security officer.
7-313 Exceptions
Public dances subject to license and regulation under this Article shall include
both those dances for which admission is charged and those for which
admission is not specifically charged for entry to the premises upon which the
dancing is to be presented or conducted, but shall not include private dances
where admission is obtained by prior invitation such as wedding dances and
similar dances, and shall include any dancing by two or more persons
whether to music personally played or to recorded or other mechanically
produced music, unless a special cabaret license is in effect, pursuant to
other articles of the City Code.
7-314 Persons Ineligible for License
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
13
No such license shall be granted to any person of bad character or who has
been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or violation of any provision
of Article 7-300, nor to any person who is or has been a keeper of any
disorderly house of any kind, nor for any place which has direct or indirect
communication with any room in which intoxicating liquor is sold or otherwise
used, except establishments possessing a valid on-sale liquor license, nor for
any place other than a licensed hotel, having so-called private apartments or
private rooms which adjoin such dancing place, or which may be reached by
stairs, elevator or passageway leading from such dancing place, and no such
license shall be issued under this Article, unless the City Council is satisfied
that the place where said dance is to be given or held is properly ventilated
and equipped with necessary toilets, washrooms, lighting facilities, and that
such place is not likely to become a public nuisance or detrimental to public
morals.
7-320 Cabaret Licenses
7-321 License Required
No person holding any on-sale intoxicating liquor license, or on-sale nonintoxicating
malt liquor (beer) license shall hold, provide, maintain or permit
any of the following activity, without first obtaining a cabaret license: Dances
or dancing, or the provision of any form of entertainment for patrons,
including, but not limited to instrumental music, singing or vaudeville
entertainment, stage shows or amusement, whether by an individual or more
than one person.
7-322 Term
Such license shall be either for a yearly period or for a period to be set
therein.
7-323 Persons Ineligible for License
No such license shall be granted to any person of bad character or who has
been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or violation of any provision
of Article 7-300 nor to any person who is or has been a keeper of any
disorderly house of any kind.
7-324 Exceptions
Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of radio, television or jukeboxes, without
dancing in conjunction therewith, when such does not constitute or become a
nuisance or violate any other portion of the City Code or of the State of
Minnesota.
7-400 Tobacco and Tobacco Products
No person, firm, or corporation shall directly or indirectly or by means of any
device keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise dispose of any cigarette,
cigarette paper, cigarette wrapper, cigar, electronic delivery devices or other
tobacco or tobacco items, at any place in the City unless a license therefore
shall first have been obtained.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
14
7-410 Term
All such licenses shall be issued only after approval of the City Council.
Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.
7-420 Posting
Every license shall be kept conspicuously posted at the location for which the
license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
7-430 Persons to Whom License May Be Issued
No license shall be issued to any of the following:
a) Persons under the age of 18 years;
b) Persons who have had a tobacco license revoked within twelve
months of the application;
c) Persons who have been convicted of violating any state or federal law
pertaining to tobacco sales, transport or possession;
d) Persons who have been convicted of violating any City Ordinance
pertaining to tobacco sales or possession.
7-440 Location of Sales
No license shall be issued to an applicant for the sale of cigarettes, cigarette
papers, cigarette wrappers, cigars or other tobacco or tobacco items at any
place other than his established place of business. No license shall be
issued for the sale of cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigarette wrappers, cigars,
or other tobacco or tobacco items at a movable place of business, nor shall
any one license be issued for the sale of cigarettes, cigarette papers,
cigarette wrappers, cigars or other tobacco or tobacco items at more than
one place of business.
7-450 Vending Machines
Vending Machines shall be prohibited, except where located in sections of
on-sale liquor establishments which are primarily used for the preparation
and dispensing of alcoholic beverages, more commonly referred to as the
"bar" area, and on condition that a remote lockout device be installed on the
machine which permits the machine to be activated only by an employee over
the age of eighteen years.
7-460 Prohibited Sales
No licensee shall sell any tobacco product under the following
circumstances:
a) to any person under the age of eighteen years;
b) in any manner violative of any State or Federal law or regulation;
c) by any means other than the direct exchange of the tobacco product
between the customer and an employee of the licensee.
d) in any form other than manufacturer's cartons or sealed individual
packages.
7-470 Conflicting State or Federal Provisions
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
15
In the event that any State or Federal law or administrative rule is
established subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance which is in
conflict with this ordinance, including, without limitation, a complete
prohibition on cigarette vending machines, any such conflicting provision
shall be automatically adopted by reference, and compliance with such
law or rule shall be a condition of continued licensure.
7-500 Amusement and Vending Machines
7-510 License Required
Excepting non-profit organizations, no person or corporation or business shall
keep, for public operation, any billiard device, jukebox, or other machine used
for amusement, or vending machine of any kind, without first securing a
license therefore.
7-520 Term
Licenses shall be issued for one-year periods, and shall expire on December
31 of each year.
7-530 Posting
The license, one issued, shall be affixed to the machine or device, in a
conspicuous place.
7-540 Exception
Machines which vend items for human consumption, except cigarettes, shall
be exempt from municipal licensing, but shall be required to meet the rules
and regulations of all other governmental jurisdictions having authority with
respect to such machines.
7-600 Field Parties and Large Assemblies
7-610 Field Parties
7-611 Definitions
A. “Field Party” is defined as a gathering of 50 or more people, held
partially or completely out of doors, on public or private property
and at which intoxicating beverages, non-intoxicating malt liquors or
other intoxicating chemicals are used or dispensed by any
participant, whether or not a fee is collected for any participant.
B. “Out of Doors” is defined as any place outside of a building as
defined in Minn. State. Ch. 609.58 (Subd. 1 (2)).
7-612 Licensing Provisions
No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, participate in,
be present at, act as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, or sell or
give tickets to, a field party held in any area of the City of Ham Lake whether
on public or private property, unless a license to hold the assembly has first
been issued by the City Administrator, application for which must be made at
least 30 days in advance of the assembly. Furthermore, if any police officer,
upon discovering a field party which is unlicensed or upon declaring any
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
16
license to be void, shall order the persons present to disperse, it shall be
unlawful for any person to continue to be present at the field party.
7-613 Application for License
A. Forms. Application shall be made to the City Clerk on forms to be
supplied by the City and shall contain the following information:
(1) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant(s).
(2) The precise location of the proposed field party, as well as the date
and specific times during which the field party will be in progress
and the expected number of guests.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
land.
(4) A written acknowledgment of consent by the owner of the land to
the conducting of the proposed field party.
(5) A statement as to whether or not intoxicating beverages or nonintoxicating
malt liquors will be furnished, and if so, whether a fee
of any kind will be collected, or whether voluntary contributions will
be collected. If a fee of any kind will be collected or if voluntary
contributions will be collected, it shall be necessary for the
applicant to comply with the licensing, bonding and insurance
provisions of Ham Lake City Code Article 7-800, and for the
purposes of this Code, the following shall apply:
a. If intoxicating beverages are involved, then the field party
shall be deemed to be a “club” as contemplated by
Minnesota Statutes and the seating capacity requirement
found therein shall be deemed satisfied.
b. If non-intoxicating malt liquors are involved, the field party
shall be deemed to be a “bona fide club” as contemplated by
Article 7-810.15 (D).
c. Any license issued for a field party under the provisions of
Article 7-600 shall be for no longer than the duration of the
field party.
(6) A written statement demonstrating that the applicant has adequate
plans for measures designed to protect the safety of participants,
including the following:
a. The means by which the field party will be illuminated;
b. The means by which emergency vehicles may be
summoned, the means of access of emergency vehicles to
the field party site; and the provisions for on-site first aid to
be present on the field party site.
B. Fees. A fee shall be charged for field party licenses as set by the
City Council by resolution from time to time.
7-614 Issuance of Licenses
A. Issuance Criteria. Licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk. The
City Clerk shall issue the license if all of the provisions of this Code
have been satisfied, PROVIDED, that with regard to Article 7- 613
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
17
(A) (6) hereof, the following shall be prohibited to protect the safety
of participants:
1. Illumination primarily from motor vehicle headlights, ground
fires, or other light sources located less than 10 feet above
ground.
2. The lack of a reliable communication device located within
1,000 feet of the proposed site. A common citizens band
radio shall not be deemed a reliable communication device.
3. The existence of the site at a location greater than 1,000
feet from any traveled public road, or the existence of
access to a traveled public road which access is not marked
by reflectorized markings, or not passable by a four wheeled
motor vehicle, or not of sufficient width to accommodate the
passage of emergency vehicles.
B. Review by City Council. If the City Clerk refuses to issue a
license, the applicant shall have the right to have the application
reviewed by the City Council, by placement on the agenda of the
next regular Council Meeting.
C. Report to Sheriff. If a license is issued, a copy thereof shall be
forwarded to the office of the Anoka County Sheriff.
D. Conditions of License. Any license issued shall be subject to the
following conditions, which shall be printed on the face of the
license, and shall read as follows:
“This license shall be rendered void if any of the following
conditions are found to exist at the field party site.”
1. The commission of the crime of assault, disorderly conduct, or
breach of the peace by any participant on the field party site;
2. The consumption or possession of any intoxicating beverage or
non-intoxicating malt liquor by any person 21 years of age or
younger;
3. The failure of any applicant to be physically present at the field
party site during the entire duration of the field party.
4. The maintenance of any nuisance under any existing or future
municipal ordinance.
Upon observing the violation of any of the conditions of a license, a
peace officer shall declare the license to be void, and shall order
the participants to disperse.
7-615 Exceptions
Any field party which commences during daylight hours, and is completely
dispersed prior to sunset shall be exempt from the requirements of obtaining
a field party license. This exemption shall in no way affect the duty to comply
with Article 7-800 if the same applies.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
18
7-620 Large Assemblies
7-621 Definitions
“Assembly” means a company of persons gathered together at any
location at any single time for any purpose.
7-622 License Required
No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, or sell or give tickets to an
actual or reasonable anticipated assembly of 200 or more people which
continues or can reasonably be expected to continue for four or more
consecutive hours, whether on public or private property, unless a license
to hold the assembly has first been issued by the governing body of this
City. When applying for any assembly license, the sponsor must submit
certified copies of other necessary Minnesota State licenses and/or
permits to support the application. A license to hold an assembly issued
to one person or entity shall permit any person to engage in any lawful
activity in connection with the holding of the licensed assembly. The
following shall apply to all licenses:
A. A separate license shall be required for each event and each
location in which 200 people assemble or can reasonably be
anticipated to assemble. The non-refundable application and
license fee shall be in accordance with the City fee schedule as
adopted by the City Council.
B. A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number
of people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to
nor permit to assemble at the licensed location more than the
maximum permissible number of people.
C. This Code shall not apply to any regularly established permanent
place of worship, stadium, golf course, athletic field, arena,
auditorium, coliseum, or other similar permanently established
place of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more
than 250 people the maximum seating capacity of the structure
where the assembly is held. This license requirement shall not
apply to activities carried on by a Farm Winery licensed by the
State of Minnesota under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A. 315
and which also operates under a Conditional Use Permit issued
under Ham Lake City Code Articles 9-210.32 (b) (vi) and 9-330.4.
D. This Code shall not apply to government sponsored fairs held on
regularly established fairgrounds nor to assemblies required to be
licensed by other state laws and regulations of this City.
E. No overnight camping or other occupancy overnight shall be
permitted.
F. No license shall be issued unless there is in full force and effect a
liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota with a
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
19
minimum combined single limit of $500,000 per occurrence and
$1,500,000 aggregate covering personal injury and property
damage.
G. The event shall not exceed 72 hours in duration;
H. Application forms shall be submitted with the application which
contain the following information:
1. The name, residence, and mailing address of all persons.
2. The address and legal description of all property upon which
the assembly is to be held, together with the name,
residence, and mailing address of the record owner(s) of all
such property;
3. Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly
is to be held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation
by the record owner(s) of all such property that the applicant
has permission to use such property for an assembly of 200
or more persons;
4. A site plan drawn to scale, showing the dimensioned
locations of all activities, structures, parking and driveways,
concession areas, rest rooms/toilet facilities, vendor booths,
tents or other vendor areas, and any other physical features
to be involved.
5. A written narrative describing the activity, its purpose, the
charitable beneficiaries of the event, if any, the hours of
operation and duration of the event, and the estimated
attendance for each day.
7-623 Conditions for Issuing License
Prior to acting on the license, the City Administrator shall refer the plan for
comment to the Planning Commission, the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office
and any other agency deemed appropriate by the City Administrator,
which comments shall be due within 30 days after request by the City.
For purposes of the Minnesota “60-day rule”, the submission shall not be
deemed complete until the City has received responses from all agencies
solicited, or until the deadline for comments has elapsed, whichever
occurs first.
The City Administrator may also direct that the Planning Commission hold
a public hearing on the proposed license, with notice being given in the
manner provided by law for zoning change proposals. If a public hearing is
required, then the Planning Commission response shall not be due for 45
days after request.
Agencies or institutions from which comment is solicited may address any
or all of the following areas in their comments, but are not limited to the
following areas:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
20
1. The need for any fencing or gating;
2. The need and standards for potable water supplies;
3. The need and specifications for toilet facilities;
4. Solid waste disposal, including recycling methods;
5. The need for health care professionals and facilities on site;
6. The need for illumination;
7. Parking, traffic circulation and access-ingress points to public roads,
including traffic control measures;
8. Security issues, including, without limitation, security measures to be
taken and the number and qualifications of security personnel to be
provided;
9. Fire protection/prevention needs;
10. Sound abatement needs;
11. Central administration (contact persons) and chain-of-command;
12. Limits on attendance both as to the event in general and occupancy
loads of any tents, bleachers or other structures;
7-624 Issuance
The application for a license shall be processed in accord with the
Minnesota “60-day rule”.
7-625 Revocation
The license may be revoked by the governing body of this City at any
time, if any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in
the license are not complied with, or if any condition previously met
ceases to be complied with.
7-626 Enforcement
Violations of the conditions of the license shall be considered
misdemeanors and may be subsequently prosecuted in the manner
provided by law. The City may take into account the occurrence of such
violations in determining whether to issue a license in the succeeding
year. In the event of a situation present that constitutes a serious threat
to the health, safety or welfare of a substantial number of persons or
which constitute a significant threat of property damage, the City may
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
21
impose any or all of the following sanctions by action of its City
Administrator, after conferring with law enforcement representatives, the
Mayor or Acting Mayor, and the City Attorney:
A. The applicant may be directed to cease or modify certain
practices or activities;
B. The applicant may be directed to implement certain preventive
or safety measures;
C. The License may be summarily revoked and the applicant
directed to discontinue all activities. This latter measure shall not
be invoked unless the applicant has failed to comply with sanctions
ordered under items 7-626 (A) or (B), or if the threat to public
health, safety or welfare is immediate and dangerous, including,
without limitation, rioting, drunkenness, brawling, vandalism,
assault, illegal drug usage or presence or unsafe conditions of a
particular nature.
7-628 Exemptions
Private social gatherings held on the premises of a private residence and
confined to the immediate area of the dwelling unit, garage or accessory
buildings on the parcel and which meet the following criteria shall be
exempt from the provisions of this Article 7-620.
a) The gathering is a bona fide celebration of a high school graduation
or religious rite, a wedding, wedding anniversary, a family reunion,
memorial or other similar event;
b) No more than 300 persons are present on the premises at the
same time;
c) All persons present are either residents of the dwelling or invited
guests personally invited by and known to the dwelling occupant;
persons present in response to blanket announcements made to
the general public through social media or otherwise are not
“invited guests”.
d) There is no direct or indirect fee, contribution or other consideration
paid or given by attendees as a condition of attendance or a
condition of consuming food or beverages;
e) The event does not generate noise from music or sound
amplification equipment that can be heard on neighboring
properties;
f) The event does not run for more than twelve consecutive hours;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
22
7-629 Summary License Issuance by Administrator
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of Article 7-620, the City
Administrator may summarily issue Large Assembly Licenses without
referral to either the Planning Commission or City Council under the
following circumstances:
A. The activity for which the license is sought has been previously
issued a license, and the new application does not present any significant
changes in the scope of the previous license, and under conditions in
which activities under the previous license did not generate any significant
complaints or verified allegations of violations of the conditions of the
previous license; or
B. The activity for which the license is sought has not had a previous
license issuance, and is to take place mainly on or making use of city
owned property or parks, public roads or trails, public waters or other
public open space, and the event is sponsored by an entity promoting
charitable, non-profit, civic, benevolent or public awareness causes;
C. The activity does not include any non-licensed dispensing of liquor
or non-intoxicating malt liquor;
D. The activity does not generate any excessive noise from live music;
E. The activity is sponsored by the City, such as a fireworks display.
Consistent with the foregoing summary license procedures, in reviewing
an application for a license that may qualify for summary issuance, the
City Administrator may waive certain other submission requirements for
license issuance. The issuance of a summary license does not operate to
obligate the City Administrator to issue a summary license in any
subsequent renewal application.
7-700 Off-Sale Liquor
7-710 Provisions of State Law Adopted
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A, relating to the definition
of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, condition of bonds of licensees,
hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail “off-sale”,
distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor are adopted and made a
part of this Code as if set out in full herein.
7-720 License Required
A. General Requirement. No person, except a wholesaler or
manufacturer to the extent authorized under State license, shall
directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for “off-sale” in the City,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
23
any intoxicating liquor without an “off-sale” license to do so as
provided in this Code.
B. “Off-Sale” Licenses. Except for Brew pub and Brewer licenses
outlined below, “Off-sale” licenses shall be issued only to exclusive
stores and shall permit “off-sale” of liquor only at retail in the
original package for consumption off of the licensed premises.
C. Brew pub, “Off Sale” Licenses. A brew pub, with the approval of
the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety,
that meets the criteria established in Minnesota Statute 340A.24 as
it may be amended from time to time, may be licensed for the “offsale”
of intoxicating malt liquor or 3.2 malt liquor produced and
packaged on the licensed premises, subject to the following special
conditions:
1. “Off-sale” of malt liquor shall be limited to the same legal hours
for “off-sale” at exclusive liquor stores in the city.
2. The malt liquor sold at “off-sale” must be removed from the
licensed premises before the applicable closing time at exclusive
liquor stores in the city.
3. The malt liquor shall only be packaged in “growlers” and must
be sealed in compliance with Minnesota Statute 340A.285, as it
may be amended from time to time.
4. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year.
5. A licensee may hold both an “on-sale” brew pub license and an
“off-sale” brew pub license. If a brew pub licensed under this Article
also possesses an “on-sale” license under Article 7-831(D) the
brew pub’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year, provided that “off-sales” may not total more
than 500 barrels.
6. Brew pubs eligible for “off-sale” brew pub licenses issued under
this Article are exempt from the population-based limitations on the
number of “off-sale” licenses available as set forth in Article 7-775.
D. Small Brewer, “Off Sale” Licenses. A brewer, with the approval
of the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Public
Safety, who holds a brewer’s license under Minnesota Statute
34A.301, subd. 6(c), (i), or (j) and meets the criteria established in
Minnesota Statute 340A.28 as it may be amended from time to
time, may be licensed for the “off-sale” of intoxicating malt liquor or
3.2 malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises,
subject to the following special conditions:
1. “Off-sale” of malt liquor shall be limited to the same legal hours
for “off-sale” at exclusive liquor stores in the city.
2. The malt liquor sold at “off-sale” must be removed from the
licensed premises before the applicable closing time at exclusive
liquor stores in the city.
3. Sales under this license shall not exceed 500 barrels annually.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
24
4. The malt liquor shall only be packaged in “growlers” and must
be sealed in compliance with Minnesota Statute 340A.285, as it
may be amended from time to time.
5. Brewers eligible for “off-sale” brewer licenses issued under this
Article are exempt from the population-based limitations on the
number of “off sale” licenses available as set forth in Article 7-775.
7-730 Application for “Off-Sale” License
A. Form. Every application for a license to sell “off-sale” liquor shall
state the name of the applicant, his age, representation as to his
character, with such references as the City Council may require, his
citizenship, that the proposed business is an exclusive liquor store
and its location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long he has been in that business and such other
information as the City Council may require from time to time. In
addition to containing such information, the application shall be in
the form prescribed by the Liquor Control Commissioner and shall
be verified and filed with the City Clerk. No person shall make a
false statement in an application.
B. Liability Insurance.
1) At the time of application, renewal or transfer of any Off-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor license, the applicant shall furnish to the City the proof
of financial responsibility required by Minnesota Statutes Chapter
340A.409, in the manner therein provided, in limits of not less than
$300,000.00 per occurrence.
2) The issuing liability insurance agent shall certify on the Certificate
of Insurance words to the effect as follows:
In the event of a policy cancellation, the insurer will send notice to the City
of Ham Lake in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes Chapter
340A.409, Subd. 1(e).
3) If a liability insurance policy is cancelled, for any reason, the license
affected thereby shall be deemed automatically suspended, and the
licensee shall suspend all sales of intoxicating liquor until a replacement
policy has been issued, proof thereof provided to the City, and a written
notice of reinstatement of the license has been issued by the City
Administrator or Clerk.
4) A licensee who has their liability insurance cancelled shall notify the
City Administrator or Clerk, in writing, immediately upon notice of
cancellation. Failure to so notify the City, or the continuation of sales of
intoxicating liquors during any period of cancellation, shall be grounds for
additional sanctions by the City, including, without limitation, the
revocation of the license.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
25
5) The City may reject any Certificate of Liability Insurance issued by
any agent or insurer who has in the past failed to notify the City of any
cancellation of a liability insurer in the manner provided above. This
provision shall apply only to events occurring after the effective date of
this code amendment. The duty to notify the City of any cancellation shall
be absolute as to the agent or insurer, and shall not be excused if the
cancellation is originated by a party providing financing for premiums.
C. Approval of Insurance. The insurance offered under Article 7-730
(B) shall be approved by the City Council and by the Liquor Control
Commissioner. Liability insurance policies shall be approved as to
form by the City Attorney. Operation of a licensed “off-sale”
business without having on file with the City at all times effective
liability insurance as required by Article 7-730 (B) is a cause for
revocation of the “off-sale” license.
7-740 License Fees
A. Fees. An annual fee for an “off-sale” liquor license shall be
charged.
B. Payment. Each application for an “off-sale” liquor license shall be
accompanied by the fee, and a receipt from the City Treasurer for
payment in full of the license fee will then be issued. All fees shall
be paid into the general fund. If an application for a license is
rejected, the City Treasurer shall refund such amount so paid.
C. Term; Pro Rata Fee. Each “off-sale” license shall be issued for a
period of one year except that if the application is made during the
license year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year
for a pro rata fee, with any expired fraction of a month being
counted as one month. Every “off-sale” license shall expire on the
last day of June.
7-750 Granting of Licenses
A. Investigation and Issuance. The City Council shall investigate all
facts set out in the application. Opportunity shall be given to any
person to be heard for or against the granting of the “off-sale”
license. After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall, in its
discretion, grant or refuse the application.
B. Investigation Fee Required. Each new application for an “offsale”
license shall be accompanied by a fee, and a receipt from the
City Treasurer for payment by the applicant for an investigation fee
will then be issued. Any unused portion of said sum shall be
refunded to any applicant whether or not the City Council does
issue a license. The City shall not be obligated to pay any interest
on said sum during the time the City Treasurer holds same in the
City Account.
C. Person and Premises Licensed; Transfer. Each “off- sale”
license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application. No “off-sale” license may be
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
26
transferred to another person or place without City Council
approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate license is deemed a
transfer of the license and a transfer of stock without prior Council
approval is a ground for revocation of the “off-sale” license.
7-760 “Off-Sale” Regulations
1. No “off-sale” liquor license shall be issued except in commercial
use district.
2. All applications, along with complete building plans and
specifications and site plans, including landscaping data, shall first
be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City
for consideration, approval and recommendation to the City
Council.
3. The building housing an “off-sale” liquor establishment shall
conform to the architectural plan of the surrounding area; and shall
be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the City Engineer and the City Council.
4. Adequate security measures shall be provided in each such “offsale”
liquor business, which security measures shall include a
burglar alarm system approved by the Anoka County Sheriff’s
office.
5. No parking or placement of trucks, trailers, or other objects, on the
premises of the building housing said “off-sale” liquor business,
shall occur except during reasonable times for loading and
unloading of goods for such business.
6. Adequate interior storage for all stock, empty cartons, cases or
other items used in or associated with such “off-sale” liquor
business shall be provided.
7. All signs, whether part of or on the “off-sale” liquor business
building or upon land upon which such building is situated, shall
comply with the City Sign Code.
8. Adequate security lighting, both inside the “off-sale” liquor business
building and on the lands upon which such building is situated shall
be provided.
9. All licensees must prove to the City Council that they are financially
responsible and of good moral character.
10. The entire property of the “off-sale” liquor business shall be kept in
a neat and orderly state at all times.
11. There shall be no “off-sale” of liquor on credit.
7-770 Off-Sale License Standards
7-772 Places Ineligible for License
A. In General. Every “off-sale” liquor license is subject to the
conditions in the following articles and all other provisions of this
Code and any other applicable code, State law or regulation.
B. Licensee’s Responsibility. Every “off-sale” liquor licensee is
responsible for the conduct of his place of business and the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
27
condition of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on
the licensed premises authorized to sell “off-sale” intoxicating liquor
is deemed to be an act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
shall be liable to all penalties provided by this Code and the law
equally with the employee.
C. Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any police officer, health
officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the City to
enter, inspect and search the premises of the licensee during
business hours without a warrant.
D. Federal Stamps. No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale
liquor dealer’s special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
7-773 Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption.
With the exception of Brew Pubs and Brewer Taprooms licensed for “onsale”,
no person shall consume any liquor in the building for which an “offsale”
liquor license is granted or upon the lands upon which same is situated.
7-774 Suspension and Revocation.
The City Council may revoke any “off-sale” liquor license for violation of any
Statute or Code relating to the sale of liquor or may suspend the license for a
period not exceeding 60 days if revocation is not mandatory. No suspension
or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been offered an
opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Sections 15.0418
to 15.0426.
7-775 Number of “Off-Sale” Liquor Licenses to be Issued.
The City Council may issue one “off-sale” liquor license for each 5,000
residents or fractional part thereof. The number of residents shall be
determined by the most recent U.S. Census or a reasonable written estimate
by the Twin Cities area Metropolitan Council, whichever results the higher
figure. The City Council shall be the sole judge of whether or not the
Metropolitan Council estimate is reasonable.
7-800 Beer and On-Sale Liquor
7-810 General Requirements for all Beer and On-Sale Liquor Licenses.
7-810.1 Provisions of State Law Adopted.
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes relating to the definition of terms,
licensing, consumption, sales, conditions of bonds of licensees, hours of
sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and non-intoxicating malt liquor are
adopted and made a part of this Code as if it were set out in full.
7-810.2 Exceptions
The dispensing of liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor at any organized
social gathering where no direct fee or charge is made to guests shall not
be considered to be engaging in “on- sale” liquor or beer sales, and shall
not require licensing. Further, the use of the Ham Lake Senior Center and
adjoining grounds within 500 feet thereof, for such gatherings, shall not be
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
28
subject to the licensing requirements of this code and shall be excepted
from Article 7-839 of this code, where beer or liquor is served, provided
that no direct or indirect charge or fee is made to guests. The use of
organizational funds which are generated in part from membership dues
shall not be considered a “charge” or “fee” to guests where such funds are
used to purchase beer or liquor supplies for dispensation at a social
event.
7-810.3 Liability Insurance.
1) At the time of application, renewal or transfer of any On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor license, or any Beer License or Wine License not
exempt by reason of qualification under Minnesota Statutes Chapter
340A.409, subd. 4, the applicant shall furnish to the City the proof of
financial responsibility required by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A.409,
in the manner therein provided, in limits of not less than $300,000.00 per
occurrence.
2) The issuing liability insurance agent shall certify on the Certificate
of Insurance words to the effect as follows:
In the event of a policy cancellation, the insurer will send notice to the City
of Ham Lake in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes Chapter
340A.409, Subd. 1(e).
3) If a liability insurance policy is cancelled, for any reason, the
license affected thereby shall be deemed automatically suspended, and
the licensee shall suspend all sales of intoxicating liquor, beer or wine until
a replacement policy has been issued, proof thereof provided to the City,
and a written notice of reinstatement of the license has been issued by
the City Administrator or Clerk.
4) A licensee who has their liability insurance cancelled shall notify
the City Administrator or Clerk, in writing, immediately upon notice of
cancellation. Failure to so notify the City, or the continuation of sales of
intoxicating liquors, beer or wine during any period of cancellation, shall
be grounds for additional sanctions by the City, including, without
limitation, the revocation of the license.
5) The City may reject any Certificate of Liability Insurance issued by
any agent or insurer who has in the past failed to notify the City of any
cancellation of a liability insurer in the manner provided above. This
provision shall apply only to events occurring after the effective date of
this code amendment. The duty to notify the City of any cancellation shall
be absolute as to the agent or insurer, and shall not be excused if the
cancellation is originated by a party providing financing for premiums.
7-810.4 License Fees.
There shall be an annual fee for an “on-sale” liquor license, a special club
license, a special license for Sunday sales, a Brew Pub “on-sale” license,
a Brewer Taproom “on-sale” license, and an “on- sale” beer license.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
29
7-810.5 Payment.
Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from the
City Treasurer for payment in full of the license fee. All fees shall be paid
into the general fund. If an application for a license is rejected, the City
Treasurer shall refund the amount paid.
7-810.6 Term Pro Rata Fee.
Each license shall be issued for a period of one year except that if the
application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for
the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired fraction of
a month being counted as one month. Every license shall expire on the
last day of June. Further, in the event that the holder of any license which
has been issued for one year desires to terminate the license, on a
voluntary basis, said license holder shall be entitled to a pro rata refund
with any portion of any month during which the license was utilized being
counted as one month.
7-810.7 Granting Licenses, Investigation and Issuance.
The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application.
Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the Council
shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application.
7-810.8 Person and Premises Licensed; Transfer.
Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another
person or place without City Council approval. Any transfer of stock of a
corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license and a transfer of
stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the
license.
7-810.9 Persons Ineligible for License
No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for such a
license by state law.
7-810.10 Places Ineligible for License
General Prohibition. No license shall be issued for any place or any
business ineligible for such a license under state law.
7-810.11 Delinquent Taxes and Charges
No license shall be granted for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments, or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and
unpaid.
7-810.12 Distance from School or Church
Excepting off-sale of beer, no license shall be granted for any place that is
not a reasonable distance from any school or church. In evaluating what
constitutes a reasonable distance, the City Council shall take into account
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
30
such factors as the effect of intervening land uses, topography or
structures between the proposed location of the licensee and a school or
church; anticipated traffic patterns and volumes, additional functions to be
provided by this proposed licensee and the need for such functions in the
community; and such other factors as the Council deems appropriate. The
reasonable spacing requirement shall not apply where the beer or liquor
license was in existence prior to the time of construction of the school or
church building.
7-810.13 Certain Acts and Conduct Prohibited
The following acts or conducts on licensed premises are deemed contrary
to public welfare and morals and therefore no “on-sale” license shall be
held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted.
A. To employ or use any person in the sale or service of alcoholic
beverages in or upon the licensed premises which such person
is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing to expose to
view any portion of the female breast below the top of the
areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the
buttocks, vulva or genitals.
B. To employ or use the services of any hostess while such
hostess is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as
described in the above paragraph.
C. To encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to
touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of
any other person.
D. To permit any employee or person to wear or use any device or
covering exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals,
anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof.
E. To permit any person to perform acts or acts of which simulate:
1. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law.
2. The touching, caressing or fondling on the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals.
3. The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or the
nipples or areola of the female breast.
F. To permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate
objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described
above.
G. To permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed
premises who exposes to public view the pubic hair, anus,
vulva, or genitals except where said pubic hair, anus, vulva, or
genitals are covered with transparent clothing, in the form of
pants or panties, and in addition where the breast and the pubic
hair, anus, vulva and genitals are covered with transparent
clothing.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
31
H. To permit the showing the film, still pictures, electronic
reproduction, or other visual reproductions depicting:
1. Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual
acts which are prohibited by law.
2. Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast,
buttocks, anus or genitals.
3. Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, or the anus or the
genitals.
4. Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of
the prohibited activities described above.
I. To permit any employee, or person under contract to perform
on the premises, to dance on any table, bar or other elevated
platform, except on a duly designated stage designed
exclusively for the entertainment of patrons of the premises,
said stage to be located at least three feet from any patron.
7-810.14 Definitions
A. “Beer” or “non-intoxicating malt liquor” means any malt
beverage with an alcoholic content of more than one-half of one
percent by volume and not more than (3.2) three and two-tenths
percent by weight.
B. “Intoxicating liquor” means any distilled, fermented, malt, or
vinous beverage containing more than (3.2) three and twotenths
percent of alcohol by weight.
C. “Original package” means the bottle or sealed container in which
the liquor is placed by the manufacturer.
D. “Bona fide club” means a club organized for social or business
purposes for intellectual improvement or for the promotion of
sports, where the serving of beer is incidental to and not the
major purpose of the club.
E. “Restaurant” means a place of which the major business is
preparing and serving lunches or meals to the public to be
consumed on the premises.
F. “Beer Store” means an establishment for the sale of beer, cigars,
cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, beverages and soft drinks at
retail.
G. “Wine” shall be defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 297G.01
(subd. 20).
H. “Brew Pub” means a brewer who also holds a municipal on- or
off-sale license in conjunction with a restaurant and who
manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year,
at any one or more licensed premises as permitted in
Minnesota Statutes 340A.24.
I. “Brewer” means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale
and holds a Brewers License issued by the State of Minnesota.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
32
J. “Brewer Taproom” means a facility on or adjacent to the licensed
brewery which allows for the on- or off-sale of malt liquor
produced by the brewer.
K. “Growler” means 64-ounce containers or 750 milliliter bottles of
malt liquor, manufactured and sold by a brewery licensed under
Minnesota Statutes 340A.301, for consumption off premises.
7-810.15 ALCOHOL ON LICENSED PREMISES
A. DEFINITIONS
1. Alcoholic Beverages - All alcoholic beverages and nonintoxicating
malt liquors as those terms are defined by
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A, and any amendments
thereto.
2. Licensee - The entity (and any authorized agent thereof) which is
named as the licensee of any license issued by the City of Ham
Lake to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises licensed. The licensee need not be the owner of the
real property upon which the licensed establishment is located.
3. Premises - The premises identified in the application for license of
any licensee as the locations at which alcoholic beverages may
be sold for consumption on the premises.
4. Notice - A sign or printed handout sheet which contains the
following warning. In the case of a sign, the warning must be
legibly printed in lettering at least one inch in height, in the case
of a printed handout, the warning must be typewritten in at least
12 point type. The warning may contain additional language
which describes sanctions to be imposed by the licensee, such
as expulsion from the premises.
WARNING
IT IS A VIOLATION OF HAM LAKE CITY CODE ARTICLE 7 TO POSSESS
OR CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UPON THESE PREMISES
WHICH ARE NOT PURCHASED DIRECTLY FROM (NAME OF LICENSEE).
THE MAXIMUM PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE IS 90
DAYS IN JAIL, A $700 FINE, OR BOTH.
B. PROHIBITED CONDUCT
It shall be unlawful for any person who has received NOTICE from the
licensee to possess or to consume any alcoholic beverages on the
PREMISES which were not purchased directly from the LICENSEE.
NOTICE shall be deemed to have been given if any one of the following
conditions are met:
1. Signs - The licensee has posted a sign or signs in locations
reasonable capable of being seen by the patron, such as at the
location where usage fees are paid, parking lots, check-in
locations, or other conspicuous locations on the PREMISES.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
33
2. Usage Materials - The licensee has printed the Warning on
scorecards, score sheets, or other printed material customarily
and normally used by patrons in connection with usage of the
PREMISES.
3. Handout Sheets - The licensee has given to the patron a handout
sheet containing the Warning as a part of printed materials in
connection with any organized event on the PREMISES, or has
handed the patron a handout sheet containing the WARNING
after discovery the patron’s consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages not purchased from the LICENSEE.
C. OPPORTUNITY TO COMPLY
It shall be an element of the offense of violation of this Code that any
person claiming not to have received NOTICE of the prohibition contained
herein, and found by the LICENSEE to be consuming or possessing
alcoholic beverages not purchased from the LICENSEE, shall be given
the opportunity to comply with the Licensee’s policy by immediately
surrendering to the LICENSEE all alcoholic beverages then in possession
or control of the person. This element shall not be required, however, if
the offending party has been given the Warning on previous occasions or
visits to the premises. Alcoholic beverages surrendered to the LICENSEE
which are in closed containers shall be returned to the person upon the
person’s departure from the PREMISES, or, if in the judgment of the
LICENSES the person is intoxicated, at a reasonable later date.
7-820 Requirements Exclusive to Off-Sale and On-Sale Beer Licenses
7-821 License Required
A. No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent
authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or
otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any beer within the City without
first having received a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses
shall be of two kinds: (1) Retail “on-sale”; (2) Retail “off-sale”.
B. “On-Sale” licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs, beer
stores, drug stores, restaurants and hotels where food is prepared
and served for consumption on the premises. “On-sale” licenses
shall permit the sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.
C. “Off-Sale” licenses shall permit the sale of beer at retail, in the
original package for consumption off the premises only.
7-822 Application for License
Every application for a license to sell beer shall be made on a form supplied
by the City and shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s age,
representations as to the applicant’s character, with such references as may
be required, the applicant’s citizenship, whether the application is for “onsale”,
or “off-sale”, the business in connection with which the proposed
licensee will operate and its’ location, whether applicant is owner and
operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that business at
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
34
that place, and such other information as the Council may require from time
to time. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.
Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk.
7-823 Conditions of the License
A. Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the
following sub-articles and all other provisions of this Code and of
any other applicable code of the City or state law.
B. All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.
C. No beer shall be sold or served to any intoxicated person or to any
minor.
D. No minor shall be permitted to be on the licensed premises unless
accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
E. No minor shall be employed on the premises of a beer store or be
permitted to sell or serve beer in any “on-sale” establishment.
F. No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any
licensed premises unless a lawful gambling license has been
obtained.
G. No manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall have any ownership of
or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to
the provisions of M.S.A. 340.02. No retail licensee and
manufacturer or wholesaler of beer shall be party to any exclusive
purchase contract. No retail licensee shall receive any benefits
contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of beer and no
such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary
to law upon a retail license.
H. No licensee shall sell beer while holding or exhibiting in the
licensed premises a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp
unless he is licensed under the laws of Minnesota to sell
intoxicating liquors.
I. No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating liquor shall
sell or permit the consumption or display of intoxicating liquors on
the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing
with intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or serve any
liquids for the purposes of mixing with intoxicating liquor, unless the
licensee complies with the State set up law and obtains a valid
permit.
7-824 Repealed
7-825 Bars, Partitions, Boxes or Screens
All windows in the front of any place licensed for “on-sale” of beer shall be of
clear glass, and the view of the whole interior shall be unobstructed by
screens, curtains or partitions. There shall be no partition, box, stall, screen,
curtain or other device which obstructs the view of any part of the room from
the general observation of persons in the room; but partitions, subdivisions,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
35
or panels not higher than forty-eight inches from the floor shall not be
considered obstructions.
7-826 Clubs
No club shall sell beer except to members and to guests in the company of
members.
7-827 Revocation
The violation of any provision or condition of this Code by a beer licensee or
his agent shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. The
license of any person who holds a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax
stamp without a license to sell intoxicating liquors at such place shall be
revoked without notice and without hearing. In all other cases, a license
granted under this Code may be revoked or suspended by the Council after
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at
least eight days notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the
nature of the charges against the licensee. The Council may suspend any
license pending a hearing on the revocation or suspension.
7-828 Special Licenses
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, upon proper written
application, the City Council may issue special licenses to any non-profit
organizations existing for social or business progress or for intellectual
improvement, or to one responsible member thereof, acting in behalf of such
organization, for the “on-sale” only of non- intoxicating malt liquors, for special
events or occasions, property to be designated, such organization to furnish
evidence to the Council of public liability insurance of a minimum of $100,000
per person, $300,000 per occurrence, and $50,000 property damage
coverage to cover the premises of such operation, such insurance to be in a
form acceptable to the Council, and in addition to the liability insurance
required by Article 7- 810.3 of this Code. An annual license fee for such
special license shall be charged, for one specific place of sale and not
transferable to another place or organization, and such license shall contain
any conditions or restrictions deemed necessary by the Council, including the
specific date or dates which sales may be held.
All other provisions of this Code which do not conflict with the foregoing in
this section shall apply to such sales.
7-829 Beer/Wine Licenses
Pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A.404, Subd. 5,
restaurants having facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time, and
which derive at least 60% of their gross revenue from the sale of food, are
eligible to receive an on-sale license to sell wine having an alcohol content of
up to 14% alcohol by volume, for consumption with the sale of food. If the
wine licensee also holds a 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale license, the wine
licensee may also sell intoxicating malt liquors without an additional license.
Licenses for such facilities shall be issued in the same manner as for other
on-sale licensees. Wherever, in Articles 7-810 through 7-827 of this code,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
36
there is a reference to the word “beer”, the requirements of each such portion
of this code shall also be applicable to Beer/Wine licenses under this section,
as if fully set forth herein.
7-830 Requirements Exclusive to On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor
7-831 License Required, General Requirement
No Person except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent authorized
under State license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or keep for sale in
the City any intoxicating liquor without a license to do so as provided in this
Code.
A. On Sale Licenses. Except for Brew pub and Brewer taproom licenses
outlined below, “On Sale” licenses shall be issued only to hotels, clubs
and restaurants in conformance with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A, which statute shall also govern the number of On Sale
licenses that can be issued.
B. Special Club Licenses. Special club licenses shall be issued in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A.404 and 340A.101,
subdivision 7.
C. Special Licenses for Sunday Sales. A special license authorizing the
“On-Sale” of intoxicating liquor on Sundays may be issued to any entity
holding an On-Sale license issued under Article 7-831 (A) of this Code in
accord with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A.504,
Subd. 3.
D. Brew pub, “On-Sale” Licenses. A brew pub, with the approval of the
Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety, that meets
the criteria established in Minnesota Statute 340A.24 as it may be
amended from time to time, may be licensed for the “on-sale” of
intoxicating malt liquor or 3.2 malt liquor produced on the licensed
premises, subject to the following special conditions:
1. Sales under this license at “on-sale” may not exceed 3,500 barrels
per year.
2. A licensee may hold both an “on-sale” brew pub license and an
“off-sale” brew pub license. If a brew pub licensed under this Article
also possesses an “off-sale” license under Article 7-720(C), the
brew pub’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed
3,500 barrels per year, provided that “off sales” may not total more
than 500 barrels.
E. Brewer Taproom, “On-Sale” Licenses. A brewer, with the approval of
the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety, who
holds a brewer’s license under Minnesota Statute 340A.301, subd. 6(c),
(i), or (j) as it may be amended from time to time, may be licensed for the
“on-sale” of intoxicating malt liquor or 3.2 malt liquor produced on the
licensed premises, subject to the following special conditions:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
37
1. Malt liquor sold under the brewer taproom license may only be
consumed on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery location
owned by the brewer.
2. A brewer may have only one taproom license and may not have an
ownership interest in a brew pub licensed under Minnesota Statute
340A.301, subd. 6(d).
3. A brewer taproom license may not be issued to a brewer that brews
more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually.
4. Within ten days of issuing a brewer taproom license, the City Clerk
will inform the Commissioner of Public Safety of the licensee’s
name, address, trade name and the effective date and expiration
date of the license. The City Clerk will inform the Commissioner of
Public Safety of a license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or
revocation during the license period.
7-832 Application for License
Every application for a license to sell liquor shall state the name of the
applicant, age, representations as to character, with such references as the
Council may require, citizenship, the type of license applied for, the business
in connection with which the proposed licensee will operate and its location,
whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the
applicant has been in that business at that place, and such other information
as the Council may require from time to time. In addition to containing such
information, the application shall be in the form prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commissioner and shall be verified and filed with the City Clerk. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.
7-833 Conditions of License, In General
Every license is subject to the conditions in the following sub-articles and all
other provisions of this Code and of any other applicable code, state law or
regulation.
7-834 Licensee’s Responsibility
Every Licensee is responsible for the conduct of his place of business and
the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of an employee on the
licensed premises authorized to sell intoxicating liquor there is deemed the
act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties
provided by this Code and the law equally with the employee.
7-835 Inspections
Every licensee and every holder of a permit under Minnesota Statutes,
Section 340.49 shall allow any peace officer, health officer, or properly
designated officer or employee of the City to enter, inspect, and search the
premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
7-836 Hours of Operation
7-836.1 Repealed
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
38
7-836.2 Hours of operation may be as permitted by state law, as amended
from time to time, specifically including a 2:00 am closing time for
on-sale liquor sales if proper permits are first obtained.
7-837 Federal Stamps
No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor dealer’s special tax stamp
or federal gambling stamp.
7-838 Restriction on Consumption
No person shall offer, mix or prepare liquor for sale to any person in any
location other than one licensed or permitted under a provision of this Article 7
of the Ham Lake City Code. No person shall purchase or consume liquor
purchased from a person or entity not in possession of a valid permit or license
issued under Article 7 of the Ham Lake City Code.
7-839 Consumption in Public Places
No person shall consume liquor or store non- intoxicating malt liquor on or in
any public building, park or land except as provided in Article 7-810.2.
7-840 Suspension and Revocation
The Council may revoke any liquor license for violation of any statute or code
relating to the sale of liquor or may suspend the license for a period not
exceeding 60 days if revocation is not mandatory. The licensee shall be granted
a hearing upon at least 10 days notice before revocation or suspension is
ordered except where mandatory revocation is provided by law. No license for
the sale of intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor, whether on sale or
off sale, shall be issued or renewed unless, as a part of the liquor license
application procedure, the applicant shall furnish to the City of Ham Lake
evidence that all real estate taxes and installments of any special assessments
due therewith upon the parcel on which is situated the activity which is licensed,
shall be current and paid in full as of the date for which the license is to
commence. This provision shall apply regardless of whether or not the applicant
is an owner or a tenant of the real estate in question.
7-850 Compliance with Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act
If requested by the holder of a Beer, Wine or on-sale liquor license, the premises
covered by the license may include outdoor enclosed areas reserved for
smokers (“Smoking Enclosures”) provided that the areas are in compliance with
the terms of this ordinance and the terms of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144
and amendments thereto. The extension of the license to such premises permits
servers to enter the Smoking Enclosures to serve authorized beverages to
customers, subject to the rights of the employees under Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 144.417, Subd. 2 (d). The following conditions shall apply to the
construction and maintenance of Smoking Enclosures.
7-851 Definitions
(a) “Ceiling” is the inside lining of a roof that is affixed to joists or rafters.
If a roof has no such inside lining, the bottom components of the roof shall
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
39
be considered a ceiling except in areas of cantilever, bridge or other
areas having an unobstructed space between the underside of the roof
and ground or floor level.
(b) “Indoor Area” shall have the definition given in Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 144.413, subd. 1a.
(c) “Main Licensed Area” means the perimeter of the Indoor portion of
the premises that were originally licensed by the City and used by the
licensee as a serving area, hallways, restrooms, kitchens, closets, storage
rooms, as determined in the sole discretion of the City’s building official.
(d) “Roof” means the top covering of a structure, and includes shingles,
tiles, joists, rafters and material underlaying the shingles and tiles and to
which shingles or tiles are affixed.
(e) “Smoking” shall have the definition given in Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 144.413, subd. 4.
(f) “Smoking Enclosure” means an area outside of the Main Licensed
Area that is to be used by persons who are engaged in smoking, but
which is not Indoors, but which may be connected by roofing material or
structural components to the Main Licensed Area.
7-852 Building Materials
Smoking enclosures shall be constructed either of wood frame construction or
constructed of the same type of structural building materials as are in place for
the main licensed area. Outside walls and roofs shall bear the same outside
appearance, both as to texture and color, as the wall materials and roofs of the
Main Licensed Area. No tents, awnings or other fabric-type enclosures shall be
permitted to be used as a Smoking Enclosure. Mesh screen meeting the
standards set forth in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144.413, subd. 1a may be
used to meet the Indoor Area definition as found therein, and may be used on
outside walls of the Smoking Enclosure.
7-853 Size and Height
The area of the perimeter of the Smoking Enclosure may not exceed ten percent
of the area of the Main Licensed Area. Height of the structure encompassing the
Smoking Enclosure shall not exceed the height of the building housing the Main
Licensed Area.
7-854 Doorway Proximity
No Smoking Enclosure shall be situated so as to require that patrons entering or
leaving the Main Licensed Area must pass through the Smoking Enclosure. This
provision is satisfied if there is at least on alternative entrance/exit for the Main
Licensed Area meeting applicable building codes.
7-855 Compliance with Fire and Building Codes
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
40
All Smoking Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with
all local and state fire and building codes. Notwithstanding fire codes, no heaters
shall be permitted to be used in connection with any Smoking Enclosure if:
(a) the heater generates heat through the use of an open flame capable of
being touched or disturbed by patrons; or
(b) the heating system uses a ventilation system shared with a ventilation
system used in the Main Licensed Area.
7-856 Seating and Parking
Smoking Enclosures may not be placed on areas being used as a portion of the
parking lot for the Main Licensed Area unless the number of existing parking lot
stalls exceeds the amount required for the establishment. Furniture may be
placed in Smoking Enclosures provided that proper aisles and occupancy limits
are maintained at all times.
7-857 Separation and Roof Connections
(a) Unconnected Enclosures If the roof of a Smoking Enclosure is not
physically connected to the structure that houses the Main Licensed Area, there
shall be at least twelve inches of clearance between the structure that houses
the Main Licensed Area and the Smoking Enclosure, including any eaves, soffits
or fascia. In addition, unless there is an open passageway at least 48 inches in
width allowing egress from the Smoking Enclosure to an area uncovered by any
structure, the Smoking Enclosure shall contain an exit door meeting applicable
building codes.
(b) Connected Enclosures If the roof of a Smoking Enclosure is physically
connected to the structure that houses the Main Licensed Area, there shall be at
least 48 inches of separation between the structure that houses the Main
Licensed Area and any portion of any wall comprising the Smoking Enclosure.
The area under the roof that lies within this separation area shall be deemed a
covered walkway, and shall not be considered a part of the Smoking Enclosure,
nor shall it be considered an Indoor Area unless it meets the definition of a
ceiling.
(c) Window Separation Notwithstanding the foregoing, no portion of any
Smoking Enclosure may be located closer than 15 feet from any window located
in the structure housing the Main Licensed Area, unless the window is incapable
of being opened.
7-858 Permit and Site Plan Approval
All Smoking Enclosures shall require the prior issuance of a building permit from
the City’s building official. Prior to issuance, the applicant shall submit a site plan
in accord with the City’s site plan review policies, for review by the Planning
Commission and approval by the City Council. Approval of a site plan for a
Smoking Enclosure shall be deemed to also be approval of the usage of the
Smoking Enclosure as a part of the licensed premises upon which beverages
may be served.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
41
7-900 Motor Vehicle Sales Lots
7-901 License Required
A license shall be required for any person operating a motor vehicle sales lot.
Application for such license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on such
form as the Clerk may from time to time designate and shall include such
information as my be required by the Clerk including the following:
A. The correct legal description of the premises.
B. The name and address of the applicant and owner of the land.
C. The number of motor vehicles intended to be displayed thereon.
D. Such other information as may be required by the City Council.
7-902 Prohibited Conduct
It shall be unlawful within the City of Ham Lake for any person to conduct the
business of a motor vehicle sales lot unless he meets the requirements of
this Ordinance and other applicable provisions of the City Code except that
the owner or lessee of any premises may offer to show one motor vehicle for
sale on those premises as long as the business of a motor vehicle sales lot is
not engaged in on those premises.
7-903 Definitions
Whenever used in this ordinance unless a different meaning appears from
the context, the following definitions shall be applied.
A. Motor Vehicle Sales Lot
Premises outside a building whereon one or more motor vehicles
are offered for sale.
B. Motor Vehicle
The word motor vehicle shall include passenger cars, snowmobiles,
trucks, motor scooters, motor cycles, trailers, and all other
equipment customarily moved on and touching the streets and
highways.
7-904 Fee. An annual license fee shall be charged.
7-905 Additional Requirements
The following requirements shall be followed:
A. There shall be sufficient space provided so that the total space will
accommodate each motor vehicle parked, stored, or displayed as
determined by the City Council.
B. The parking, storing, and display area shall be paved, according to
the recommendations of the City Engineer.
C. Lighting shall be such as not to disturb the users of adjoining land.
D. Any signs constructed shall conform to the requirements of the City
Code.
E. All motor vehicles be currently capable of obtaining applicable
licenses, and all motor vehicles shall be completely assembled
motor vehicles as customarily delivered from the factory.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
42
F. No junk cars, parts stockpiling or storage of dismantled cars shall
be permitted.
G. Such other requirements as the City Council may impose.
7-906 Insurance
No license shall be issued hereunder unless there is in full force and effect a
liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of Minnesota covering all vehicles to be driven by
prospective customers and others members of the public with limits of one
hundred thousand ($100,000) dollars for bodily injury to any one person.
Three hundred thousand ($300,000) dollars for each accident and fifty
thousand ($50,000) dollars property damage.
7-1000 Licensing of Non-Regulated Aircraft
7-1000.1 Definition of Non-Regulated Aircraft
Non-regulated aircraft shall refer to any propelled device which is used for
manned flight through private or public airspace, where the aircraft and pilot
are not subject to licensing, inspection or other direct jurisdiction of the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Minnesota Department of
Transportation (MnDOT), or the Twin Cities Area Metropolitan Airports
Commission (MAC), or which do not require the labeling of an identification
number prominently displayed on such aircraft and issued by or utilized by
FAA, MnDOT, or MAC. This definition shall include those devices commonly
known as ultra light aircraft.
7-1000.2 Number Display
Each NRA which is parked, stored, kept, takes off, or lands within the
corporate limits of the City of Ham Lake shall bear an identification number
as assigned by the Air Safety Foundation of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots
Association (AOPA) or a number assigned by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
7-1000.3 Activities and Number Display
No person shall fly an NRA within 1000 feet of any inhabited dwelling, or over
any platted subdivision or dense concentration of inhabited buildings. No
person shall take off or land an NRA within 200 feet or any inhabited dwelling
without written permission of the owner. Emergency landings shall also be
excepted from this provision. All NRAs shall display the numbers required by
Section 7-1000.2, on the underside of a wing in block letters not less than 12
inches in height.
7-1000.4 Registrant Responsibility
In the case of any violation of this ordinance, both the operator and the
individual registered as the owner of the NRA shall be responsible for the
criminal liability imposed by this Code. The owner, by permitting storage of
the NRA, gives consent to all subsequent operators of the NRA to any
activities conducted by the operator, and agrees to be responsible for all acts
of any subsequent operator. In the case of failure to display numbers, the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
43
operator and all persons found to be in physical possession of the NRA shall
share criminal liability for violations.
7-1000.5 Severability
In any portion of this Ordinance be found to be in contravention of any State
of Federal constitutional, statutory or regulatory provision by any court or
tribunal or competent jurisdiction, such a finding shall affect only the portion
so found, and the remainder of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect.
7-1000.6 Violation
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by the
penalties for misdemeanors as provided by Minnesota Statutes.
7-1100 Transient Merchant, Peddler, Canvasser, and Solicitor
7-1110 Definitions.
1) A “canvasser” or “solicitor” is any person traveling from place to
place and/or house to house who takes orders for the future
delivery of merchandise or for services to be performed in the
future, whether or not such person exposes a sample or collects
advance payments on such sales; provided, however, that such
definition shall also include any person who occupies any
temporary structure, vehicle or other place for the primary purpose
of exhibiting samples or taking orders for future delivery.
2) A “peddler” is any person traveling from place to place and/or
house to house who carries his merchandise with him, offering and
exposing the same for sale, and making deliveries to purchasers,
or any person who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell
or offer merchandise for sale from a vehicle or conveyance.
3) A “transient merchant” is any person whose business in the City
is temporary or seasonal and consists of selling and delivering
merchandise within the City, and who in furtherance of such
purpose uses or occupies any structure, vehicle, or other place for
the exhibition and sale of such merchandise, either privately or at
public auction; provided, however, that a transient merchant shall
not be construed to mean any person who while occupying such
temporary location, exhibits only samples for the purpose of
securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged
shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
ordinance merely by reason of temporarily associating with or
conducting such transient business in connection with a local
businessman.
7-1120 License Required.
A license shall be required for any canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, or
solicitor to operate in the City. The license period will be for six (6) months.
7-1130 Exclusions.
No person shall be required to obtain a license in the following instances:
1) Occupations licensed and/or bonded pursuant to State Law.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
44
2) A solicitor or canvasser doing business by appointment.
3) A solicitor or canvasser taking orders for the future door-to-door
delivery of newspapers.
4) Salespersons selling goods to retail or wholesale stores or to
professional or industrial establishments.
5) The conduct of “garage sales” or “rummage sales”.
6) No license shall be required for vendors as a preliminary step to the
establishment of a regular route service for the sale and delivery of
such commodities or the providing of such services to regular
customers.
7) School children selling items for fundraisers.
8) Persons selling any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised
on any farm or garden occupied or tended by that person.
7-1140 Religious & Charitable Organizations
Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit or have
solicited in its name money, donations of money or property or financial
assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or
merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than
members of such organizations upon the streets, in office or business
buildings, by house to house canvass or in public places for a charitable,
religious, patriotic, philanthropic or otherwise non- profit purpose shall be
exempt from Section 7-1150 of this ordinance, provided a sworn application
in writing on a form furnished by the City is filed which shall include the
following information; Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons representing
organizations exempt from the provisions of Article 7-1150 hereof are
required to comply with the provisions of Article 7-1160 hereof.
1) Name and purpose of the cause for which the license is sought.
2) Names and addresses of the officers and/or directors of the
organization.
3) The period during which the solicitation is to be carried on.
4) Whether or not any commission, fee, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with such solicitation.
Upon the foregoing being satisfied, such organization, association or
corporation shall furnish all its members, agents, or representatives
conducting the solicitation credentials in writing stating the name of the
organization, name of the agent, and the purpose of the solicitation. Such
credentials shall be kept on the person of the members, agents or
representatives during the actual solicitation and be presented to anyone
requesting to see same.
An organization shall qualify for exemption if and only if:
a. it has been incorporated as a non-profit corporation under the laws
of any state, or
b. it has been granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
45
Proof of qualification under one of the above two criteria shall be provided
with the application for exemption.
7-1150 Application.
In addition to such information as the City Clerk may require, the application
shall also include:
1) Name and description of the applicant.
2) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
3) A brief written description of the nature of the business, other
goods to be sold, and the applicant’s method of operation.
4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
5) The length of time which the applicant intends to do business in the
City, with the approximate dates.
6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced,
where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which
picture shall be two (2”) inches showing the head and shoulders of
the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant or the person
managing the business has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, involving
activities licensed under this ordinance, the nature of the offense
and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore.
9) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same together with
license number or other means of identification.
10) A statement of the nature, character, and quality of the goods,
wares, or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant,
the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares, and
merchandise, whether the same are proposed to be sold from
stock in possession or by sample, at auction, by direct sale, or by
taking orders for future delivery.
11) A brief statement of the nature, character, and content of the
advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract
customers (samples may be requested).
12) Credentials from the person, for which the applicant proposes to do
business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
13) Transient merchants shall include the addresses of all places
where the business is to be located along with written consent of
the owners or occupants.
14) A detailed description of the warranty as to fitness for the intended
purpose of the goods to be sold, as such warranty is intended by
the Uniform Commercial Code, together with a detailed description
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
46
of the means by which persons seeking to enforce such warranty
may do so, including name, addresses and agents for service of
process of all businesses in the chain of products liability.
7-1160 Prohibited Practices
No person under this ordinance shall:
1) Sell or solicit before the hour of 9:00 A.M. or after 9:00 P.M., unless
a previous appointment has been made.
2) Enter of conduct business upon any premises where a sign or
plaque is conspicuously posted stating in effect that no peddlers or
solicitors are allowed. Such signs shall have letters a minimum of
one-half (1/2”) inch high.
3) Occupy for the purpose of advertising and/or conducting business
any area within a sight triangle, at any road intersection.
4) Occupy as a transient merchant, solicitor or peddler, any public
right-of-way or other public property for the purpose of advertising
and/or conducting business unless approved by the City Council in
conjunction with a special event scheduled in a city park.
5) Occupy as a transient merchant any property not located in
commercial or industrial zoning which location shall comply with all
requirements of Article 9 including but not limited to parking and
setback requirements.
6) To come upon any parcel of land zoned for any residential purpose
for the purpose of conducting canvassing or solicitor activity, if the
resident of the parcel has elected to have their name and address
placed upon the public List of Prohibited Contacts as defined in
Article 7-1180 hereof.
7-1170 License Fees
The license fee shall be in accordance with the City fee schedule
adopted by the City Council.
7-1180 List of Prohibited Contacts
Any person in any area of the City zoned for residential purposes may
request of the City Administrator that their name and address be
placed upon a list, to be known as the List of Prohibited Contacts.
This list shall be maintained by the City Administrator, and a copy
thereof shall be furnished to any solicitor or canvasser at the time of
application for a permit or exempt status. The applicant, and all
persons who will be conducting canvassing or soliciting activities shall
be required to sign a receipt acknowledging having been informed of
the List of Prohibited Contacts, which receipt shall be in the following
form:
Acknowledgment of Prohibited Contacts:
The undersigned acknowledges having been informed that the
undersigned is prohibited by municipal ordinance and by State
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
47
trespassing laws from coming upon any of the properties listed on the
hereto attached List of Prohibited Contacts, and the undersigned has
received a copy of the list.
7-1200 Lawful Gambling
7-1210 Regulations Supplemental to Statutory Control
The regulations found in this Article 7-1200 shall be supplemental to any
regulations found in Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 349, and any State Agency regulations adopted pursuant to said
statute. Any and all portions of said statute and regulations not inconsistent
with this Article are adopted by reference.
7-1220 Places Eligible for License
Lawful Gambling licenses shall be permitted only in bars or “sit-down”
restaurants. A bar is any facility which maintains an on-sale liquor or nonintoxicating
malt liquor license. A “sit-down” restaurant is a restaurant that
regularly employs wait-persons as food servers at tableside, as opposed to a
“fast-food” restaurant having the majority of orders placed at a service
counter and drive-up window. The reason for this distinction is to prohibit
Lawful Gambling devices from locations which have a large number of
customers under 18 years of age, often unaccompanied by adults.
7-1230 Conditions
The conduct of Lawful Gambling under license issued by the Board shall be
subject to the following conditions in the City of Ham Lake:
a. A copy of any lease agreement between a non-profit organization
and a gambling location owner or operator shall be filed with the
City Administrator together with the Gambling license application;
b. The City Council may refuse to issue a Lawful Gambling license for
a location in which gambling violations have previously occurred,
and the Council may refuse to issue a Lawful Gambling license to a
non-profit organization which has previously violated terms of this
Ordinance and/or Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349;
c. The maximum number of separate gambling locations that any one
license organization shall be permitted to operate within the City is
3.
7-1240 Investigation
Every organization which files an application for issuance or renewal of a
Lawful Gambling License shall deliver the application to the City
Administrator. The City Administrator shall investigate each application and
report any findings and recommendations to the City Council.
7-1250 Filings of Records; inspection; Access to Records.
a. Every organization licensed to conduct Lawful Gambling in the City
of Ham Lake shall file with the City Administrator copies of all
records and reports required to be filed with the Board pursuant to
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
48
Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349 and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder. The records and reports shall be filed in
the office of the City Administrator on or before the day they are
required to be filed with the Board;
b. Every gambling event in the City of Ham Lake conducted by an
organization under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349 shall be open
to inspection by law enforcement officers;
c. The City Administrator or agents at the direction of the City
Administrator, may inspect at any reasonable time, without notice
or search warrant, all records of licensed organization, including
gambling account and other bank records required by the Board to
be maintained and preserved.
7-1260 Fee
The City will charge all new applications the maximum investigation fee
permitted by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349 in order to cover costs
incurred investigating the application. Any unused portion of this fee will be
refunded to the applicant. This fee does not apply to applications for renewal
of licenses.
7-1270 Organizations Eligible for License
Lawful gambling licenses shall be permitted only for organizations whose
primary spending of profits earned from lawful gambling activities are directed
to activities or donated to organizations existing within a Trade Area
encompassing the Anoka County, Minnesota communities of Ham Lake, Oak
Grove, East Bethel, Linwood Township, Columbus Township, Lino Lakes,
Blaine, Coon Rapids and Andover.
7-1280 Charitable Gaming
A. Contribution Required.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349.213,
all organizations licensed or registered by the Minnesota Gambling
Control Board shall be required to contribute ten per cent of their net
profits derived from lawful gambling conducted at premises within the
City’s corporate limits to a fund administered and regulated by the City
without cost to such fund, for disbursement by the City for (i) charitable
contributions as defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349.12,
subdivision 7(a), or (ii) disbursements for police, fire and other emergency
or public safety-related services, equipment and training.
B. Annual Report
By March 15 of each year, the City Administrator shall file with the Gaming
Control Board the report required by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349.213,
Subd. 1 (a) on forms to be prescribed the Gaming Control Board.
C. Computations
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
49
In computing net profit, the organization shall use generally accepted
accounting principles, and any organization that is specifically allowed by
statute or State Regulations to expend lawful gambling proceeds for
certain operating expenses of the host establishment in which the
organization conducts its lawful gambling operation may deduct such
expenses actually paid in computing its net profit.
D. Due Date
Organizations have the option of payment of the amounts required under
this article on a monthly or annual basis. If payment is made monthly,
payment is due by the 20th of the following month, accompanied by a copy
of the monthly report that is filed at that time with the Minnesota Gambling
Control Board. If the organization chooses to pay annually, payment is
due within sixty days after the close of the fiscal year for the organization.
Organizations paying annually must still provide the City with a copy of
each monthly report that is filed with the Minnesota Gambling Control
Board.
E. Repealer
Any and all previous ordinances, resolutions or other policies previously
adopted by the City regarding contributions by organizations involved in
lawful gambling in the City are superseded and replaced by this
ordinance, or, in the case of prior ordinances, are repealed.
7-1300 Short-Term Rentals
7-1301 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to ensure that the short-term rental of dwelling
units in the City’s Residential Districts is conducted, operated, and
maintained so as not to become a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood
or an influence that fosters blight and deterioration. The City recognizes the
potential exists for short-term rentals to become a significant business
operation in Minnesota. Regulating rental of private homes for temporary
occupancy is necessary to protect the essential character of residential
neighborhoods and the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
7-1302 Scope
This section applies to the short-term rental of all dwelling units located in the
City’s Residential Districts.
7-1303 Definitions
The following words and terms when used in this sections shall have the
following meanings:
“Bedroom” means a habitable room within a single-family dwelling which is
used, or intended to be used, primarily for the purpose of sleeping, but shall
not include any kitchen, dining room, or living room.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
50
“Dwelling Unit” means one or more rooms physically arranged so as to
create a single housekeeping unit for occupancy by one family with separate
toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping.
“Occupant” means any person who occupies all or part of a dwelling unit.
“Owner” means a person having legal or equitable interest in the dwelling
unit or its premises.
“Licensed Premises” means the lot or parcel of land on which a dwelling
unit licensed as a short-term rental is located.
“Residential District” means any land use district described in Articles 9-
210.1, 9-210.3, 9-210.4 and 9-210.5 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
“Short-term rental” means the rental or lease of a dwelling unit in whole or
in part for 30 days or less.
“Short-term rental license” means the license issued by the City for the
rental or lease of a dwelling unit in whole or in part for 30 days or less.
“Tenant” means any person who is occupying a dwelling unit under any
agreement, lease, or contract, whether oral or written, which requires the
payment of money, or any other form of compensation, as rent for the use of
the dwelling unit.
7-1304 License required
No owner shall undertake or allow the short-term rental of any dwelling unit to
a tenant or tenants unless properly licensed as provided in this section.
7-1305 Application
An owner desiring to undertake or allow the short-term rental of a dwelling
unit in one of the City’s Residential Districts shall apply to the City for a shortterm
rental license. The application shall be submitted by the owner on a
form provided by the City and include all required information.
7-1306 License Fee
Each application shall be accompanied by payment in full of the required
license fee, which shall be determined from time to time by the City Council
and set forth in the City fee schedule.
7-1307 Inspection Required
As a pre-requisite to the issuance of a short-term rental license, the premises
must be inspected by a City building official. The City Code Enforcement
Official, Building Official, Fire Official, or other designated City official must be
allowed by the applicant to enter, examine, and survey all proposed dwelling
units. The inspection shall confirm that the proposed dwelling unit meets all
building and zoning requirements of the City Code and the laws of the State
of Minnesota, specifically including, but not limited to, safety standards for
smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors, hand rails, guard rails, and
electrical permitting requirements for hot tubs and large appliances.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
51
7-1308 Issuance of Short-term Rental License
If City staff, after consultation with the City building official who conducted an
inspection, determines that an applicant has met the requirements for
issuance of a short-term rental license, the applicant shall be issued a
license.
If City staff determines that an applicant has not met the requirements for
issuance of a short-term rental license, City staff shall forward the application
to the City Administrator with the reasons outlining the recommendations for
denial. The City Administrator may either direct that the short-term rental
license be issued or deny the application and notify the applicant of the
reasons for denial of the application.
7-1309 Expiration of License
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all short-term rental licenses
shall expire annually on December 31st of each year unless suspended or
revoked earlier.
7-1310 Renewal of License
Applications for renewal of an existing short-term rental license shall be made
at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the current short-term rental license.
All such applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the City and
shall be accompanied by the required license fee.
7-1311 License Not Transferable
No short-term license shall be transferable to another person or to another
dwelling unit. Every person holding a short-term rental license shall give
notice in writing to the Code Enforcement Official or City Administrator within
five business days after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of
the legal control of any dwelling unit.
7-1312 Denial of Short-term Rental License
A short-term rental application may be denied if the applicant has had a prior
short-term rental license revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date
of application, fails to provide any information required on the city license
application, or provides false or misleading information.
7-1320 Responsibility of Owners
No owner shall undertake or allow the short-term rental of a dwelling unit in a
Residential District that does not comply with all applicable City ordinances,
the laws of the State of Minnesota and this section. The owner shall keep on
file with the City the name, address, and telephone number of a contact
person, either the owner or owner’s agent, who shall be responsible for
responding to questions or concerns regarding operation of the short-term
rental. This contact person shall be available to accept telephone calls 24
hours a day during all times that the dwelling unit is being rented to respond
immediately to complaints and contacts relating to the dwelling unit.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
52
It shall be the owner’s responsibility to ensure that all tenants, occupants, and
guests comply with the following:
7-1321 Maximum Overnight Occupancy
The number of overnight occupants allowed for a short-term rental shall be
limited to a maximum of six (6) tenants or occupants. This maximum number
of tenants or occupants is in addition to and does not include any permanent,
full-time residents of the licensed premises. Children under three years of age
are not to be counted toward the overnight occupancy limit. The total number
of overnight occupants shall additionally be limited so as to be consistent with
the septic tank capacity standards outlined in state law and City Code. City
building officials shall have final discretion in determining whether the
proposed number of overnight occupants can adequately be accommodated
by the number of bedrooms and the septic system existing on the licensed
premises.
7-1322 Maintenance Standards
Every dwelling unit used for short-term rental shall conform to all building and
zoning requirements of the City Code, conditional use permits issued by the
City, and the laws of the State of Minnesota.
7-1323 Occupants
The owner or owner’s agent shall maintain a list of all current occupants of
each dwelling unit. The owner or owner’s agent shall make the list available
to City staff and/or law enforcement upon request.
7-1324 Parking
The licensed premises shall contain off-street parking spaces sufficient to
accommodate all vehicles utilized by any tenant of the short term rental. Such
off-street parking must comply with all parking regulations outlined in State
statutes and City Code. In no case shall on-street parking of any tenant
vehicle be allowed.
7-1325 Noise
The tenants, guests, or occupants of a licensed premises shall not produce
excessive noise likely to disturb occupants of adjacent properties. The
following noises shall be considered excessive noise between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m: (1) any party or gathering audible from a public right
of way or from any adjacent property; or (2) any electronic, mechanical,
musical, or audio sound audible from a public right of way or from any
adjacent property. Any instance of excessive noise may be considered a
disorderly use, as outlined below.
7-1326 Disorderly Use
Disorderly conduct or use is prohibited on all licensed premises. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner to ensure that all tenants occupying the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
53
licensed premises and their guests conduct themselves in such a manner as
not to cause the licensed premises to be disorderly or to create unreasonable
noise or disturbances. For purposes of this Section, disorderly use includes
but is not limited to any violation of state statutes or city ordinances relating to
the sale or possession of controlled substances, unlawful gambling,
prostitution, unlawful sale of alcohol, underage consumption of alcohol,
criminal damage to property, unlawful possession or use of a weapon,
criminal assault, criminal disorderly conduct which disturbs or alarms the
occupants of the premises or surrounding premises, and any public
nuisances affecting the health, peace, or safety of members of the public.
7-1327 Determination of Disorderly Use
A determination that the licensed premises has been used in a disorderly
manner as described in this section shall be made by a City Code
Enforcement Official or the City Administrator upon evidence to support such
a determination, including reports from responding law enforcement
agencies. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be brought to
support a determination of disorderly use, nor shall the dismissal or acquittal
on a criminal charge prevent the City from taking an adverse license action
under this section.
Upon determination by a City Code Enforcement Official or the City
Administrator that a licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, as
described in this section, either a City Code Enforcement Official or the City
Administrator shall notify the owner or owner’s agent by certified mail of the
violation and direct the owner or owner’s agent to take appropriate action to
prevent further violations.
If a second instance of disorderly use of the license premises occurs within
one year of an incident for which written notice was given pursuant to this
section, a City Code Enforcement Official or the City Administrator shall notify
the owner or owner’s agent by certified mail of the second violation and shall
also require the owner or owner’s agent to submit within fifteen (15) days a
written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, by the owner or
owner’s agent to prevent further disorderly use of the licensed premises.
If a third instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurs within one
year after the second of any two previous instances of disorderly use for
which written notice was sent pursuant to this section, the short-term rental
license may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed. An action to revoke,
suspend, or not renew a license under this section shall be initiated by the
Code Enforcement Official or City Administrator in the manner described
below.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 7
54
7-1330 License Suspension or Revocation
Every short-term rental license issued under this section is subject to
suspension or revocation by the City Administrator for any violation of this
section or any other ordinance of the City or law of the State of Minnesota.
The Code Enforcement Official may recommend suspension or revocation of
a short-term rental license to the City Administrator. The City Administrator
shall review the recommendation and the reasons supporting the
recommendation and may suspend or revoke the license. The City
Administrator shall provide written notice by certified mail to the owner or
owner’s agent of the suspension or revocation. The written notice shall inform
the owner or owner’s agent of the right to appeal the decision to the City
Council.
Any owner whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal the decision
to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk
within ten (10) days after the date of issuance of the written suspension or
revocation notice, a written statement requesting a hearing before the City
Council and setting forth the basis for the appeal. A hearing shall be held
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. Notice of the hearing shall be
given by the City Clerk in writing, setting forth the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner or owner’s agent at least
five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
7-1331 Effect of Suspension or Revocation
If a short-term rental license is suspended or revoked, it shall be unlawful for
anyone to allow any new short-term rental occupancies of the dwelling unit
until such time as a valid short-term rental license is restored by the City. No
person who has had a license revoked under this section shall be issued a
short-term rental license for one year from the date of revocation.
7-1340 Posting
The owner of a licensed premise must post notice of the tenants’ obligations
outlined in this section. This notice must be posted in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance of every short-term rental dwelling unit and must notify
the tenants that any violation of this ordinance is a misdemeanor.
7-1350 Penalty
Any person who undertakes or allows any violation of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subsequently prosecuted in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota law.
Updated through Ordinance 19-02
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
1
ARTICLE 8 - FIRE DEPARTMENT
8-100 Volunteer Fire Department Established
8-200 Joint Powers and Cooperative Agreements
8-300 Regulations
8-400 Offices, Mandatory Resolution Changes
8-500 Relief Association
8-600 Reporting
8-700 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code
8-800 Open Burning
8-810 Definitions
A. Open Fire
B. Campfire
C. Wildfire
D. Cooking Fire
E. Heating Devices
F. Prescribed Burns
8-820 Open Burning Prohibited
8-830 Exemptions
8-840 Permits
8-850 Certain Provisions of State Law More Restrictive
8-860 What May be Burned
8-870 Hazardous Conditions
8-880 Adoption by Reference of Statutory Requirements, Enforcement and
Prohibitions
8-890 Additional Provision Relating to Permits
A. Length of Permit
B. Extension of Permit
C. Revocation of Permit
8-1000 Fire Sprinkling Systems
8-1010 Definition
8-1020 Permit Required
8-1030 Permit Fee
8-1040 Inspection & Plan Review
8-1041 Plans
8-1042 Inspection of completed work
8-1050 Annual Inspection
8-1051 Required Systems
8-1052 Non-Required Systems
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
2
8-1060 Installers and Inspectors
8-1100 Smoke Detectors
8-1120 Installations of Smoke Detectors
8-1130 Placement of Smoke Detectors
8-1140 Equipment
8-1150 Permitted Smoke Detectors
8-1160 Maintenance of Smoke Detectors
8-1170 Permits Required
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
3
Article 8 - Fire Department
8-100 Volunteer Fire Department Established
There is hereby established a Volunteer Fire Department, to consist of a
number of members to be established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council. Until a resolution setting a different number shall be adopted,
the department shall be composed of not less than 15 and not more than 50
members.
8-200 Joint Powers and Cooperative Agreements
Upon approval by resolution of the City Council, the department may from
time to time enter into cooperative agreements with fire departments of other
jurisdictions.
8-300 Regulations
The organization, membership eligibility, meeting procedures, disciplinary
action, rules for personal conduct, apparatus and governance of the
department shall be as established in written regulations to be approved by
the City Council. No changes in the written regulations shall be permitted
unless approved by the City Council. The City Administrator shall keep a
complete copy of the most recent regulations available at all times for
inspection or copying by any member of the public or firefighter.
8-400 Offices, Mandatory Resolution Changes
Notwithstanding the Regulations of the department, the City Council shall
have the authority to remove any officer, including the Chief, at any time.
Further, the City Council may, by resolution require the amendment of the
Regulations of the department, including the right to require total repeal
thereof.
8-500 Relief Association
The members and officers of the Volunteer Fire Department may organize a
Firefighters Relief Association, subject to compliance with all state and
federal regulations pertaining thereto, and further subject to the condition that
all bylaws, eligibility rules and benefit funding be at all times subject to the
review and control of the City Council.
8-600 Reporting
The department shall keep a record of all calls responded to, and shall make
a monthly written report to the City Council setting forth the details of each
call, the number of members responding, and such other information as may
be pertinent.
8-700 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code
There is hereby adopted by reference by the City of Ham Lake, Anoka
County, Minnesota, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
4
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain
code known as the Uniform Fire Code recommended by the Western Fire
Chiefs Association and the International Conference of Building Officials in its
most recent adopted version thereof and the whole thereof, and as same
may be, in the future, amended, of which code not less than one (1) copy has
been and is now filed in the office of the Clerk of the City of Ham Lake, and
the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and from the date on which this code shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Ham Lake.
8-800 Open Burning
8-810 Definitions
A. Open Fire. “Open fire” or “open burning” means fire burning in
matter, whether concentrated or dispersed, which is not contained
within a fully enclosed firebox, structure or vehicle and from which
the products of combustion are emitted directly to the open
atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney.
B. Campfire. “Campfire” means a fire set for cooking, warming, or
ceremonial purposes, which is not more than three feet in diameter
by three feet high, and has had the ground five feet from the base
of the fire cleared of all combustible material.
C. Wildfire. “Wildfire” means a fire requiring suppression action,
burning any forest, brush, grassland cropland, or any other
vegetative material.
D. Cooking Fire. A fire contained in a charcoal grill, camp stove or
other device designed for the purpose of cooking.
E. Heating Devices. Furnaces or other devices which burn fuel oil,
coal, natural gas, propane, wood, or used petroleum products, and
which conform to all local, state and federal environmental and
safety regulations, intended to provide heat.
F. Prescribed Burns. “Prescribed Burns” are deliberately set but
controlled fires within a predetermined area, which fires are
intended to incinerate decayed, dying, dormant, marginally active
of otherwise unwanted vegetation for the purpose of regenerating
the area for future enhanced vegetative growth.
8-820 Open Burning Prohibited
From and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as herein
otherwise provided, open burning shall be prohibited within the City of Ham
Lake.
8-830 Exemptions
Open burning of the types, and subject to the conditions as hereinafter stated
shall be exempt from the prohibition of Article 8-820.
A. CAMPFIRES or COOKING FIRES, except during periods of time in
which the City Council has, by resolution, imposed a total outside
burning ban due to excessively dry conditions. Any such
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
5
resolutions shall be written form, and shall be effective when
posted in not less than five conspicuous locations, including City
Hall and the City Sign. Any such resolutions shall be effective until
rescinded by City Council resolution, at which time the posted
notices shall be removed.
B. Fires under managed supervision, for which a written burning
permit has first been obtained from the Fire Chief or designate.
C. Fires of the following character:
1. Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public
and industrial firefighting personnel.
2. Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be
abated by another practicable means.
3. Fires purposely set for forest and game management
purposes.
4. The burning by City Staff of trees, brush, grass and other
vegetative matter in the maintenance of municipal property.
5. Prescribed Burns as defined in Article 8-810 (F) above,
subject to the obtaining of and observance of a Permit as
provided in Article 8-900 below.
D. Fires contained within HEATING DEVICES.
1. In any structure containing two or more vertically stacked
residential units, no person shall kindle, maintain or cause
any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, or
on any ground floor patio immediately adjacent to or within
15 feet of any unit.
2. No person shall store any fuel, barbecue, torch or other
similar heating or lighting chemicals or devices in either of
the above places.
E. Exemption to conduct fires under this Section does not excuse a
person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may
result therefrom nor does it exempt any person from regulations
promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any
other governmental unit exercising jurisdiction in matters of
pollution or fire hazard regulation.
8-840 Permit
The Ham Lake Fire Chief, or a person designated by the Ham Lake Fire
Chief, shall be responsible to issue burning permits. Applications and permit
forms shall be prepared by the Fire Chief. Fees for fire permits shall be as
set from time to time by resolution of the City Council, but where a particular
fire will, in the discretion and judgment of the Fire Chief, require supervision
by Fire Department personnel, a surcharge may be added to defray the City’s
actual expense of such supervision. No permit for a fire issued by any
person or agency other than the Fire Chief shall be valid.
8-850 Certain Provisions of State Law More Restrictive
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
6
The following provisions of State law regarding certain types of fires and
practices are specifically intended by the City to be regulated by City Code,
more restrictive than permitted by statute:
A. A permit is required for fires started when ground is snow-covered,
notwithstanding Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.16, Subd. 2(a);
B. The use of burners as noted in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.16,
Subd. 2 (d), is prohibited.
8-860 What May Be Burned
Except for Prescribed burns, the only materials which may be burned in any
fire (except in HEATING DEVICES), whether or not a permit is required is
wood. “Wood” means dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs,
“presto logs”, charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. “Wood”
does not include wood that is green, leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil
soaked or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be
used for recreation fires when cut into three
8-870 Hazardous Conditions
To prevent the potential spread of wildfires, the Fire Chief shall be authorized
to report to the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources (the “Commissioner”) any conditions in the City in which roadside
firebreaks as contemplated by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.05 may be
desirable; the existence of fire hazards from dead or downed timber, as
contemplated by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.06; the existence of
slashings and debris, as contemplated by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.14;
further, insofar as any of the above statutes authorize the Commissioner to
designate a member or members of the Ham Lake Fire Department to act as
the agent of the Commissioner in carrying out any remedial activities in
connection with the above statutes, the Fire Chief shall be authorized to carry
out such activity, PROVIDED, that if such activity requires the expenditure of
funds which have not been budgeted for such purposes, approval by the City
Council shall first be obtained.
8-880 Adoption by Reference of Statutory Requirements
Enforcement and Prohibitions Except as herein before specifically addressed
or modified, the following provisions of state law are hereby adopted by
reference:
A. Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.14, Subd. 4, 5, 6, 8, and 10;
B. Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.15, Subd. 2;
C. Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.17, Subd. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10;
D. Minnesota Statutes Chapter 88.195, Subd. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
8-890 Additional Provision Relating to Permits
A. Length of Permit. A permit, once issued, shall be for such period
of time as is stated on the permit, not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
B. Extension of Permit. The Fire Chief may grant up to one
extension of a permit, each for a time span equal to the duration of
the initial permit, without requiring an additional permit fee.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
7
C. Revocation of Permit. A permit may be revoked at any time in the
discretion of the Fire Chief, by written notice to the permit holder. A
burning ban imposed by any resolution of the City Council, or by
any other authorized individual or agency, shall immediately and
automatically revoke all outstanding fire permits.
8-900 Prescribed Burns
8-910 Permits
Permits for Prescribed Burns may be issued in the manner provided in
Article 8-840, subject to the furnishing of the following information:
A. A drawing of the area of the proposed Prescribed Burn, at a
scale of not less than one inch = 100 feet, displaying the perimeter
of the Prescribed Burn, and also displaying the area within 500 feet
of the Prescribed Burn, including the location and relative distances
of all structures, vegetation types or commonly used areas of
storage for personal property, including motor vehicles;
B. A description of the type of vegetation to be incinerated;
C. A listing of the burner’s qualifications to set, control and
extinguish a Prescribed Burn;
D. A description of the type of firefighting equipment and tools that
will be on site during the Prescribed Burn, and the qualifications of
the operators;
E. A description of the time of day for the burn, and the length of
time needed to complete the burn;
F. A description of the post-burn measures intended to be
employed to monitor, detect, prevent and/or extinguish any
rekindling of the fire;
The Fire Chief shall determine whether or not to issue a Permit, and if the
Permit is denied, the Fire Chief shall notify the applicant in writing of the
specific reasons for denial. The Fire Chief may specifically deny a permit
based on the lack of qualifications of the person seeking the permit to
ignite, control and completely extinguish a Prescribed Burn.
A Permit may be revoked at any time by the Fire Chief for good cause,
particularly for threats to public safety, which revocation shall be a
summary revocation, subject to the right of the applicant to re-apply.
The Fire Chief can attach conditions to any Permit, including, without
limitation, confining the fire to a specific window of time, requiring monitors
with extinguishment equipment to be on site for a specific period of time,
setting spatial limitations and distances on the activities, or mandating
such other safety measures as are deemed appropriate for a given set of
conditions.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
8
8-920 Places Ineligible for Permits or Commencement of Burning
No Prescribed Burn shall take place during any period of time in which
wind speed is expected to be greater than 10 miles per hour, or within
1000 feet of any stand outside of the Prescribed Burn Perimeter of
grassland, brush, swamp, forest, thicket or other vegetation that is
conducive to being ignited by sparks, flames, cinders or the heat from the
Prescribed Burn. The decision as to the latter conditions shall be solely in
the discretion of the Fire Chief, taking into account recent rain and
moisture conditions.
8-930 Permit Costs
The cost of Permits shall be graduated, based upon the size of the
proposed fire, the amount of staff time review needed, and any particular
dangers that might be present requiring Fire Department personnel to
either be present or on standby. The Fire Chief will prepare and maintain
a schedule of fees to be ratified by Ordinance on an annual basis.
8-940 Fire Call Costs
The landowner shall be liable per se to the City for any municipal costs
that must be expended for fighting any fire outside of the perimeter of a
Prescribed Burn that was caused by a Prescribed Burn, regardless of any
intervening factors. Each application for Permit for a Prescribed Burn
shall contain language to this effect, to be signed by the landowner.
8-950 Notification on Ignition and Extinguishment
Immediately prior to igniting a Prescribed Burn, the person in charge of
the Prescribed Burn shall notify the Fire Chief by telephone of the time of
day of actual ignition, and immediately upon extinguishment, the person in
charge of the Prescribed Burn shall notify the Fire Chief by telephone of
the extinguishment of the fire.
8-960 Designee of Fire Chief
Where the term “Fire Chief” is used in this Article, it includes any designee
of the Fire Chief.
8-1000 Fire Sprinkling Systems
8-1010 Definition
A Fire Sprinkling System is a network of pipes, charged with pressurized
water, installed in a building or structure, and containing sensing devices
which are intended to activate the release of water in the event of a fire in the
building or structure. This definition includes existing systems, new systems,
additions to existing systems, and repairs to existing systems.
8-1020 Permit Required
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
9
No Fire Sprinkling System shall be installed, repaired or altered in any
building or structure unless a permit has first been obtained from the State
Fire Marshal.
8-1030 Permit Fee
A fee shall be required for all such permits, the amount of which shall be
established from time to time by the City Council.
8-1040 Inspection and Plan Review
8-1041 Plans
Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall submit detailed plans for
the system, including such data as may be required by the State Fire
Marshal. The Building Official may request additional plan review by Fire
Department Staff as a part of overall plan review, including the use of Fire
Department Staff for inspection assistance.
8-1042 Inspection of Completed Work
A. New Construction. For new construction, inspection of the
completed Fire Sprinkling System shall be a part of the Building
Official’s final building inspection. No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued unless the Building Official is satisfied that the Fire
Sprinkling System has been properly installed.
B. Fire Sprinkling Systems Placed in Existing Building. For newly
installed Fire Sprinkling Systems in existing buildings, the applicant
shall notify the City’s Building Official when installation is complete.
The Building Official shall make a final inspection, and if approved,
shall give written notice of approval to the applicant. Until such
written notice is received, no representation shall be made to any
building occupant, tenant, insurance company or other third party
that the building contains an approved Fire Sprinkling System.
8-1050 Annual Inspection
At least once each calendar year, every Fire Sprinkling System located within
the City, regardless of when installed, shall be inspected and tested. A
written set of inspection and testing requirements, uniform for all systems,
shall be developed and furnished by the Fire Chief. It shall be the
responsibility of the building owners to arrange for annual inspection and
testing, and to furnish test results to the City’s Fire Chief or designate. The
Fire Chief shall maintain an inventory list of all Fire Sprinkling Systems which
are located within the City, and shall monitor the annual inspection/testing,
reporting any delinquent property owner to the City’s Building Official. Upon
notice that a given property owner has failed to provide proof of annual
inspection/testing, the Building Official shall mail notice of the delinquency to
the property owner, giving 30 days in which to cure the delinquency. Failure
to so cure shall be a violation of this Code.
8-1051 Required Systems
For any system which fails in a building in which a Fire Sprinkling System
was required at the time of building construction, or for other reasons,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
10
repairs to the system shall be made within 10 days after notice to repair is
mailed by the City’s Building Official. Until repairs are complete, the
building owner shall post the notice required in Article 8-1052. If repairs
have not been completed within the required time, then no further usage
of the building shall be permitted until and unless repairs are completed.
8-1052 Non-Required Systems
If any system in a building which did not require a Fire Sprinkling System
at the time of construction, or which otherwise does not require a Fire
Sprinkling System, repairs shall be optional with the property owner, but
the owner shall immediately place and maintain the following notice in a
conspicuous place near each building entrance. The notice shall be
provided by the City, at a cost equal to the City’s cost:
NOTICE
THIS BUILDING CONTAINS A NON-FUNCTIONING FIRE SPRINKLING
SYSTEM. IN THE CASE OF FIRE, DO NOT RELY ON THE EXISTENCE
OF SPRINKLER HEADS FOR YOUR PERSONAL SAFETY.
8-1060 Installers and Inspectors
All persons or companies doing installation, testing or inspection work on
any Fire Sprinkling Systems in the City shall be licensed by the Minnesota
State Fire Marshall, and shall have registered to do business with the City.
Registration shall be by notification to the Fire Chief, who shall maintain a
list of approved installers/inspectors, and who shall be responsible to
verify the credentials of all person or companies desiring to register with
the City.
8-1100 Smoke Detectors
8-1110 Definitions
8-1110.1 Administrative Authority. “Administrative Authority: means
the City Building Inspector.
8-1110.2 Alarm Signal. “Alarm Signal” means an audible signal
indicating a fire condition.
8-1110.3 Dwelling Unit. “Dwelling Unit” means any building or
portion thereof which contains living facilities, including
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
8-1110.4 Smoke Detector. “Smoke Detector” means a device that
detects visible or invisible products of combustion and
sounds an audible alarm.
8-1120 Installations of Smoke Detectors
It is the responsibility of the owner of every existing occupied residential
dwelling unit to install smoke detectors in each living unit. These smoke
detectors must be either the ionization or photoelectric type capable of
sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion and providing an approved
alarm signal to the sleeping areas.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
11
1. Smoke detectors must be installed outside of each separate
sleeping area and in the immediate proximity of the bedrooms and
must be on each additional level of the dwelling unit including
basements and excluding unfinished crawl spaces and unfinished
attics.
2. For family units with split levels which are defined as adjacent
levels with less than one full story between levels, a smoke
detector is required outside of each separate sleeping area and in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms, and on every other floor
level without an intervening door.
3. Where smoke detectors are installed as part of an approved fire
protection system, the requirements for single station smoke
detectors may be set aside. An approved system is defined as a
combination of devices that meet the requirements of this chapter
and is installed in accordance with national Fire Protection
Association Standard 720E and 74.
8-1130 Placement of Smoke Detectors
Care shall be exercised to insure that the installation will not interfere with the
operating characteristics of the detector. When actuated, the detector shall
provide an alarm signal in the dwelling unit loud enough to be heard in the
sleeping areas and/or bedrooms. In dwelling units, smoke detectors shall be
mounted on the ceiling or wall of a corridor or area giving access to rooms
used for sleeping purposes. Ceiling mounted smoke detectors shall be
located as close to the center of the ceiling as possible, but not within six
inches of a wall. As an alternate, smoke detectors may be mounted on a wall
within 12 inches of the ceiling, but not closer than six inches from the
intersection of the wall and ceiling.
8-1140 Equipment
Any device, combinations of devices or equipment required by this Section
are to be listed and installed in conformance with the Building Code and this
Section and approved by the Administrative Authority for the purpose for
which they are intended. This list may be subsequently amended by the
Administrative Authority as necessary. Such approval is permanent, unless
the Administrative Authority subsequently finds that the equipment is
hazardous, unreliable, or otherwise detrimental to public health or safety. In
which case the Administrative Authority may suspend or revoke approval and
may in any such case determine whether replacement of existing installation
is required.
8-1150 Permitted Smoke Detectors
1. In existing dwellings battery operated smoke detectors will be
permitted.
2. Smoke detectors for the deaf and/or hearing impaired.
a. Where a living unit is occupied by a deaf and/or hearing
impaired person, a smoke detector must provide an approved
signal.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 8
12
8-1160 Maintenance of Smoke Detectors
1. In single family dwellings, owner occupied, the occupants are
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the detector(s).
2. Change in occupancy. After January 6, 1992, at every change of
occupancy of a dwelling unit connected with a sale of the unit, it is
the duty of the grantor, i.e., the seller before occupancy to provide
all smoke detectors as required by this section. These detectors
must be in proper working condition and in the proper location.
8-1170 Permits Required
No smoke detector is to be directly connected to the electrical system of the
structure unless an electrical permit is first obtained from the State.
Installation of battery operated smoke detectors complying with this code
need not be subjected to the permit and fee described above.
Updated through Ordinance 13-11
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
1
ARTICLE 9 – COMPREHENSIVE ZONING
Article Content
9-100 General Provisions
9-110 Division into Zoning Districts
9-120 Zoning Map
9-130 Violations
9-140 Certificates of Occupancy
9-150 Changes in Usage or Occupancy, Accessory Uses
9-150.1 Non-Conforming Uses
9-150.2 New Occupancy
9-150.3 Accessory Uses
9-150.4 Historical Cemetery Uses
9-150.5 Non-Conforming Uses Created by Public Purpose Land Acquisition
9-160 Procedural and Administrative Matters
9-160.1 Zoning Officer
9-160.2 Planning Commission
9-160.3 Time Lines
9-160.4 Costs of Review
9-160.5 Site Plan Requirements
9-160.6 Enactment Date
9-160.7 Advisory Signage
9-200 Zoning Categories and General Usage Conditions
9-210 Residential Districts
9-210.1 Single Family Residential (R-1)
a) Permitted Uses
b) Conditional Uses
c) Temporary Conditional Uses
9-210.2 Residential – Manufactured Mobile Home (R-M)
a) Required Features
b) Permitted Uses
c) Conditional/Temporary Conditional Uses
9-210.3 Rural Single Family Residential (R-A)
9-210.31 Permitted Uses
9-210.32 Conditional Uses
9-210.33 Temporary Conditional Uses
9-210.4 Affordable Housing District (R-AH)
a) Permitted Uses
b) Conditional/Temporary Conditional Uses
9-210.5 Planned Unit Development (PUD)
a) Development Agreement
b) Permitted, Conditional, Temp Conditional Uses
c) Townhomes
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
2
Article Content
d) Density and Lot Requirements
e) Private Roads
f) Phasing and Amendments
9-210.6 Shoreland Residential – General (RS-1)
9-210.7 Shoreland Residential – Recreational (RS-2)
9-210.8 (Reserved for Sewered Residential Projects)
9-210.9 Multiple Family Residential (R-2)
a. Backup ISTS Space
b. Yard Area and Livability
9-220 Mercantile Districts
9-220.1 Standards Common to All Mercantile Districts
a) Paving
b) Drainage
c) Landscaping
d) Setbacks for Paved Areas
e) Buffering
f) Refuse Containers
g) Parking Lots and Lighting
h) Off-Street Loading
i) Signage
j) Special Considerations
k) Outside Storage
1) Definitions
aa) Outside Storage
bb) Inventory
cc) Vehicle Inventory
dd) Aesthetically Screened Outside Storage
ee) Limited Outdoor Displays
ff) Improvement Stores
gg) 24-Hour Convenience Stores
hh) Approved Party Lines
ii) Pool Stores
jj) Screened Outside Storage
2) Permitted Outside Storage
aa) Vehicle Inventory
bb) Aesthetically Screened Outside Storage
cc) Limited Outdoor Displays
dd) Improvement Stores
ee) Approved Property Lines
ff) Pool Stores
gg) Screend Outside Storage
i) Revocation
3) Office/Warehouses
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
3
Article Content
9-220.2 Commercial Development I (CD-1)
a) Standards for Site and Building Construction
b) Permitted Uses
c) Conditional/Temporary Conditional Uses
d) Temporary Conditional Uses Only
9-220.3 Commercial Development II (CD-2)
a) Standards for Site and Building Construction
b) Permitted Uses
c) Conditional/Temporary Conditional Uses
9-220.4 Commercial Development III (CD-3)
a) Permitted Uses
b) Conditional Uses
9-220.5 Commercial Development IV (CD-4)
a) Permitted Uses
b) Conditional Uses
9-220.6 Industrial Park (I-P)
a) Physical Requirements
i. Building Materials
ii. Screening
iii. Paving
iv. Landscaping
b) Usage Limitations
i. Outside Storage
ii. Semi-Trailers, Large Trucks & Truck-Tractors
iii. Noise
iv. Lighting
v. Fumes and Odor
c). Permitted Uses
d). Conditional Use
9-220.7 Light Industrial (I-1)
a) Permitted Uses
b) Conditional/Temporary Conditional Uses
9-220.8 Commercial Development V (CD-5)
a) Permitted Uses
b) Conditional Uses
c) Building, Outside Storage, Screening and Fencing Standards
d) Maintenance Standards
e) Application Procedure
f) Conceptual Approval
g) Public Input
h) Action Following Public Hearing
i) Preliminary Plat Approval
j) Final Approval of Subdivision and Rezoning
k) Deadlines for Filing and Completion; Security
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
4
Article Content
9-220.9 Traditional Use Overlay Districts (TOD)
9-220.91 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses and Temporary Conditional
Uses
9-220.92 Exemption from Certain Building Standards
9-220.93 Exemption from Certain Site Standards
9-220.94 Designation of Specific Parcels
9-230 Government Facilities Districts (GF)
9-240 Revocation of Permit of Certificate of Occupancy
9-240.1 Criminal Violations
a) Conviction/illegal purchases/possession controlled substance
b) Sexual misconduct
c) Possession of stolen property
d) Assault
e) Sale/distribution/possession controlled substance
f) Fraud
9-240.2 Environmental Violations
9-240.3 Civil Judgments
9-300 Special Zoning Matters
9-310 Conditional Use Permits
9-310.1 General Guidelines for Issuance
9-310.2 Procedure for Issuance
9-310.3 Renewal and Revocation
9-310.31 Duration
9-310.32 Administrative Renewal
9-310.33 Renewal by City Council Action
9-310.34 Revocation
9-320 Temporary Conditional Use Permits
9-330 Conditions for Certain Types of Cond. Use Permits
9-330.1 Motor Vehicle Salvage Yards
9-330.2 Drive-in Movie Theatres
9-330.3 Sexually Oriented Businesses
9-330.4 Farm Wineries
9-330.5 Therapeutic Massage
9-330.51 Massage Therapist
9-330.52 Minimum Conditions for Certain Permits
9-330.6 Legal Fireworks
A. License Required
B. Zoning Districts
C. Sales Locations
D. Sales from Temporary Structures
E. Severability
F. Renewal Licenses
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
5
Article Content
9-330.7 Temporary Commercial Structures
9-330.8 Seasonal Temporary Conditional Uses
9-330.9 Raising of Pigeons
9-340 Restrictions for Specific Activities
9-340.1 Aviation
9-340.2 Manufactured Mobile Homes
9-340.3 Recreational Vehicles (“RV’s)
9-350 Home Occupation Permits
9-350.1 Criteria
a) Incidental Usage
b) Indoors
c) Parking
d) Employees
e) Traffic
f) Nuisance and Compliance
9-350.2 Annual Review
9-350.3 Special Home Occupation Permits
9-360 Variances
9-370 Accessory Buildings and Farm Buildings
9-370.1 Size Limitations
9-370.2 Building Materials
9-370.3 Height Restriction
9-370.4 Setbacks and Building Codes
9-370.6 Submittal Requirements
9-370.7 Usage
9-370.8 Farm Buildings
9-390 Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings
9-400 Establishment of Commercial/Industrial Planned Unit
Development District (CPOD)
9-410 Parcels Requiring a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Submission
9-420 PUD Procedural Requirements
9-421 Platting Required
9-422 Site Plan
9-423 Preliminary Review
9-424 Public Hearing
9-425 Decision
9-430 Development Agreement
PART II. Redevelopment or Remodeling of Existing Lands or Structures
9-440 Replatting or Redevelopment
PART III. Initial Designation of Overlay Lands
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
6
Article Content
9-500 Transition Zones in CD-1 and CD-2 Districts
9-510 Preamble
9-520 Transition Zones
9-530 Conditional Use Permits
9-540 Development Agreements and Approval Discretion
9-550 Intervening Partial Development
Appendix I: Alphabetical Listing of Defined Terms
Appendix II: Alphabetical Listing of Topics
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
7
ARTICLE 9 – COMPREHENSIVE ZONING
9-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS The following provisions govern
comprehensive zoning within the City of Ham Lake, and to the extent that any
such regulations are permitted to be enforced beyond the corporate limits of the
City of Ham Lake, then the following provisions shall extend to those areas as
well. Where words or phrases are shown in italic print, it is intended that such
words or phrases be interpreted by a specific definition which will occur within the
text of this Code. The intent of this Article 9 is to generally establish usage
regulations; other portions of the City Code shall also establish specific aspects
of usage, such as setbacks, building standards, and the like.
9-110 Division into Zoning Districts
All land within the City shall be classified into specific zoning categories,
which are more fully defined and described in Article 9-200. A land use
within a given zoning category shall be a permitted use if the specific land
use is listed under the table of permitted uses for that zoning category, or
if the land use meets the narrative description of the desired permitted
uses as found in the textual description of the zoning category, in the sole
discretion of the City Council. A land use within a given zoning category
shall be allowed as a conditional use if the specific land use is listed under
the table of conditional uses for that zoning category, or if the land use
meets the narrative description of the allowed conditional uses as found in
the textual description of the zoning category, in the sole discretion of the
City Council. A land use within a given zoning category shall be allowed
as a temporary conditional use if the specific land use is listed under the
table of temporary conditional uses for that zoning category, or if the land
use meets the narrative description of the allowed temporary conditional
uses as found in the textual description of the zoning category, in the sole
discretion of the City Council. Shoreland Zoning Districts are not a part of
this Article 9, but are found and governed in Article 12, Book II, Non-
Codified Ordinances.
9-120 Zoning Map
The City Council has, as a part of the adoption of this code, adopted an
official Zoning Map, upon which are drawn the boundary lines identifying
the various zoning districts. The Zoning Map shall be available for public
inspection and purchase in reduced form. Boundary lines shall follow
property lines. The zoning officer shall maintain the Zoning Map as
needed.
9-130 Violations
It shall be unlawful to conduct or maintain any land use which is not a
permitted use for a given zoning district, unless a Conditional Use Permit
has first been obtained authorizing the particular usage. It shall be
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
8
unlawful to maintain any land use or condition on any parcel of land which
is not in conformance with other regulatory provisions of this code,
including any specific conditions of a given Certificate of Occupancy. If a
given usage is covered by a Conditional Use Permit, it shall be unlawful to
conduct or maintain any land use or condition which is not in conformance
with the provisions of the Conditional Use Permit. All such violations shall
be misdemeanors, as defined by Minnesota Statutes.
9-140 Certificates of Occupancy
A Certificate of Occupancy is a certificate issued by the Ham Lake
Building Official which allows a particular parcel to commence being used
for a particular purpose, after having met all requirements of City Codes
governing such usages. All Certificates of Occupancy which were in
existence as of the Enactment Date, shall be recognized as valid and
current. Excepting certain agricultural buildings and land uses which
cannot be required to obtain building permits or Certificates of Occupancy
by virtue of superseding Minnesota statutes, all land uses shall require the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy prior to their commencement.
Excepting non-material changes as described in Article 9-150.2, the City
Council shall review and act upon all Certificates of Occupancy requested
in areas zoned CD-1, CD-2, CD-3, CD-4, I – 1, I-P, and in any mercantile
portion of a PUD, after review by the Planning Commission, and may
attach conditions to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
9-150 Changes in Usage or Occupancy and Accessory Uses
9-150.1 Non Conforming Uses A non-conforming use is a land
use which, by virtue of its having been in existence at the time of a
code change, is not currently compliant with any provision of the
City Code. A non-conforming use may continue to exist, but,
except in the limited conditions described below, may not be altered
(except to effect repairs restoring the pre-existing condition) or
expanded unless to a conforming use. If a non-conforming use is
abandoned or not used because of unrepaired damage for any
period of twelve consecutive months, it shall no longer be permitted
to exist in a non-conforming status.
A residential dwelling (and ancillary features on the lot) located in a
zoning district that does not include residential uses as a permitted
or conditional use may be structurally altered to expand the
residential use, provided that:
a. No such alteration would tend to preclude the construction of
future commercial service roads that are likely to be
constructed over the parcel in the future; and
b. The livability requirements of this code relating to ISTS and
other space will continue to be met on the upland portion of
the lot, and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
9
c. The expansion requires no variances from setback
regulations; and
d. The alteration is not intended to nor will it promote usage of
the structure for multiple-family housing.
Notwithstanding the foregoing language, a parcel containing a structure
originally constructed as a single family dwelling in areas zoned CD-1,
CD-2, CD-3 or CD-4 that converts to a non-residential use may return to
use as a single-family dwelling if the non-residential use terminates. This
exception to the normal non-conforming use limitations applies only to
structures that were in existence as of January 1, 2014.
Self-storage facilities located in areas zoned CD-1 may be expanded in
accord with the provisions of Article 9-220.2 (c) of this Code.
9-150.2 New Occupancy Other than Residential Land Uses, if the
occupancy of any parcel of land changes under conditions in which
the new occupant will or is likely to conduct activities which will
generate a significant change in the parking, drainage, water
usage, traffic, signage size, structural components or vegetation of
a given parcel, the new occupant shall be required to obtain a new
Certificate of Occupancy prior to commencing activity. The Zoning
Officer shall determine whether or not a new Certificate of
Occupancy is required for any given land use.
9-150.3 Accessory Uses An Accessory Use is any usage in
conjunction with a permitted use, conditional use or temporary
conditional use which is essential but subservient to the main
usage, and customarily and typically found in and about such uses,
such as utility lines, enclosed trash facilities and containers, lawn
mowers, snow blowers and signage. Except as where specifically
regulated by this code, all accessory uses are deemed to be a part
of the permitted use, conditional use or temporary conditional use.
9-150.4 Historical Cemetery Uses Notwithstanding language to
the contrary in this Code, existing cemeteries in the City as of
January 1, 2007 shall not be deemed non-conforming uses and
may be expanded on property that adjoins or abuts the existing
cemetery property by Conditional Use Permit, regardless of what
Zoning classification is in effect for the existing cemetery and the
proposed area for expansion. Subsequent expansions shall also
be eligible for Conditional Use Permits.
9-150.5 Non-Conforming Uses Created by Public Purpose Land
Acquisition Notwithstanding the language of Article 9-150.1, if the
usage of any parcel in any zoning district would be rendered a nonconforming
use as a result of the acquisition of land for public
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
10
purposes, whether by eminent domain or voluntary purchase, and
whether by a body politic or a public utility possessing the right of
eminent domain, the following special conditions shall apply:
a. If the acquisition of fee title or right of way easements places a
new property line at a distance that is less than the minimum
required setback line for any structure or other use of the parcel,
replacement structures or infrastructure may nonetheless be placed
on the parcel in the same location as the previously existing
structures or infrastructure were located, unless to do so would
create a threat to public safety as a result of blockage of sight lines
or prevention of adequate space for snow storage.
b. If, in the situation described in Article 9-150.5 (a) above is
present, and the property owner desires to move previously existing
structures or infrastructure to other locations on the parcel
(including moving to contiguous parcels also owned by the owner),
the situation shall be deemed a physical hardship justifying the
granting of variances to other setback lines to enable the
reconstruction to take place.
c. If the land use formerly existing on the parcel (including
contiguous parcels owned by the same owner) is no longer allowed
as a permitted or conditional use in the particular zoning district as
a result of intervening zoning code changes since the inception of
the land use, but would have been “grandfathered” had it not been
for the removal of elements of the prior usage as a result of the
public use acquisition, the land shall nonetheless be permitted to
retain its “grandfather” rights, and may be re-established in its
previous form, to continue as previously constituted and operated.
d. The City Council may also approve reasonable variances to
other Code sections in the situations described above, or in
situations not described above, but which are caused directly or
indirectly by governmental action in acquiring land or easements for
public purposes.
9-160 Procedural and Administrative Matters
9-160.1 Zoning Officer The Zoning Officer shall be a person or
persons designated by the City Council to perform the duties
enumerated herein. The Zoning Officer shall receive all
applications to the City for zoning-related review or approvals,
make written recommendations or comments to municipal
commissions and/or to the City Council, and issue Certificates of
Occupancy. A decision of the Zoning Officer which denies the
issuance of any request shall be reviewable by the City Council
upon written request by the applicant.
9-160.2 Planning Commission The Planning Commission shall
be a commission of seven members appointed for staggered terms
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
11
of three years each by the City Council, and shall perform the
functions of a Board of Adjustment as that term is defined by
Minnesota Statutes. The Planning Commission shall review and
make recommendations to the City Council on all subdivision and
zoning matters, and shall perform such other duties as from time to
time requested by the City Council or as outlined in this code.
9-160.3 Time Lines The provisions of any statutory review time
deadlines or time lines shall be observed by the City in considering
any zoning related matter. However, after final approval of any
zoning request by the City Council, or after the issuance of any
municipal permit or Certificate of Occupancy to any applicant, the
issuance of the permit or Certificate shall be deemed null and void,
and of no force or effect, unless the applicant shall have
implemented the activity for which the permit or Certificate was
issued, or from the date of final approval by the City Council, within
one year of the date of issuance or approval.
9-160.4 Costs of Review All costs incurred by the City in
reviewing, inspecting and processing any zoning matter request
shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council, and shall be reimbursed to the City by the applicant. An
advance deposit may be required by the City, either on a case-bycase
basis, or according to a schedule to be established by the
Zoning Officer. Prior to accepting a zoning matter for review and
action, it shall be a requirement that each applicant execute an
agreement to reimburse the City’s costs, on forms to be established
by the City Administrator.
9-160.5 Site Plan Requirements All zoning related requests in
commercially or industrially zoned areas shall be accompanied by a
site plan meeting requirements to be established from time to time
by resolution of the City Council, and reviewed by a Site Plan
Review Committee. The Site Plan Requirements shall be available
for public inspection and copying. The Zoning Officer, the Planning
Commission or the City Council may require additional data or
elements to be submitted with the Site Plan as each case dictates.
9-160.6 Enactment Date The enactment date is the effective date
of the ordinance adopting this code, July 21, 2002.
9-160.7 Advisory Signage Within a reasonable amount of time
after receiving an application for any zoning change, new
conditional use permit, new temporary conditional use permit,
excavation permit, or, at the direction of the City Council for any
other action, the City shall post at least one sign for each roadway
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
12
which abuts the parcels involved, in a location clearly visible from
each such roadway, reading as follows:
NOTICE
THIS LAND IS THE SUBJECT OF A CURRENTLY PENDING
LAND USE APPLICATION. FURTHER INFORMATION CAN BE
OBTAINED BY CONTACTING THE ZONING OFFICER
AT HAM LAKE CITY HALL.
TEL. 763-434-9555
The signs shall be furnished by the City, but shall be maintained in
place by the applicant, and shall continue to be in place until the
City has taken final action on the particular request. The City
Council shall, by resolution, establish a fee for the usage of the
signs and a fee as a deposit for the undamaged return of the signs.
City staff shall be the sole determiner of the number and locations
of the signs for each request.
9-200 ZONING CATEGORIES AND GENERAL USAGE
CONDITIONS
9-210 Residential Districts
The residential land uses described in Articles 9-210.1, 9-
210.3, 9-210.4 and 9-210.5 are intended to be applicable to
developments which utilize individual sewage treatment
systems (ISTS). Residential Land Uses are any land uses
intended for occupancy in human dwelling units, and
included in Article 9-210.
9-210.1 Single Family Residential (R-1) R-1 districts are
intended for residential dwellings occupied by a single
housekeeping unit. Definition of “SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING
UNIT” - means one or more persons, not necessarily related
by blood, occupying a portion of a dwelling unit which contains
all of the following elements intended for the exclusive use of
that particular person or group of persons: bathroom, kitchen
or cooking facilities and sleeping quarters. All dwellings and
ancillary features shall be constructed in accord with codes
adopted by the State of Minnesota, County of Anoka, and City
of Ham Lake. A dwelling unit is a properly and legally
constructed structure in which humans are intended to reside.
A garage is a structure which, when constructed (as labeled or
indicated on the building permit application), was intended to
store passenger-sized motor vehicles, regardless of the
present usage of the structure.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
13
a) Permitted Uses
• Single Family Dwellings, except Manufacture Mobile
Homes
• Structures ancillary to the dwelling – including Non-
Commercial
o Radio Towers less than forty-five feet (45’) in
height.
• Public Parks
• Schools
• Full-size (9 hole +) golf courses
• Publicly Owned Buildings
• Underground Utilities
• Above Ground Transmission Lines and poles existing
prior to the Enactment Date
• Private Dog Kennels meeting requirements of Article
5-150
• Home Occupations under Article 9-350
• Accessory Buildings under Article 9-370
• Licensed Day Care Facilities in Dwellings Occupied
as Residences
• Beauty Shops having no employees and one station,
and possessing Home Occupation Permits issued
under 9-350
• Dog grooming businesses having no employees, and
possessing Home Occupation Permits issued under
Article 9-350
b) Conditional Uses
• Public Utility Structures
• Firewood Sales
• Boarding Houses or Duplexes capable of meeting the
provisions of Article 10-300 (Livability) as to each
housekeeping unit
c) Temporary Conditional Uses
• Therapeutic Massage Facilities
• Raising Chickens
• Raising of Pigeons under Article 9-330.9
9-210.2 Residential – Manufactured Mobile Home (R-M) R-M
districts are intended for privately owned residential communities
consisting of manufactured mobile homes, each of which is
intended for occupancy by a single housekeeping unit, which
communities are commonly known as “mobile home parks”.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
14
a) Required Features
o Streets Paved and curbed according to same
standards as R-1 subdivisions
o Central Water System (No individual private Wells)
o Central Sewer System, Privately owned and
maintained
o Density of not less than one-half acre per dwelling
unit
o Minimum size of Manufactured Home to be 600
square feet
o Structure Setbacks according to same standards as
R-1 Subdivisions
o Private Park on suitable soils, of a size equal to at
least 10% of total development area
o Paved Driveways to all dwelling units
o Concrete sidewalk along all curbs, to City
specifications
o Landscaping acceptable to City
o Full impoundment of stormwater runoff
o Concrete Block Storm Shelter to State Specifications
o No on-street parking
o Underground utilities
o Provision of Screened and fenced Tenant outside
storage area of a size equal to or greater than 150
square feet per dwelling unit
o
b) Permitted Uses
o Maintenance Buildings (to be used for mobile home
park equipment)
o Manufactured Homes
o Underground Utilities
o A single office structure for park management, of not
more than 1500 square feet
o Storm Shelter
o Park
o Outside Tenant Storage Area
c) Conditional Uses and Temporary Conditional Uses
o None
9-210.3 Rural Single Family Residential (R-A) R-A districts are
intended for residential dwellings occupied by a single housekeeping unit,
located in unplatted areas.
9-210.31 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted uses
in the R-A Districts:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
15
a) All permitted uses in the R-1 District
b) Sod Farming
c) Horticulture
d) Sales of Produce grown on the site
e) Maintaining Horses, Donkeys or Mules pursuant to Article
5-200 of the Ham Lake City Code;
9-210.32 Conditional Uses: The following shall apply to
Conditional Uses in the R-A Districts.
a) General Requirements for Conditional Uses
i) Road Frontage: The lot upon which the conditional
use is proposed must contain at least 200 feet of
frontage on a public road; and
ii) Setback: The building and/or perimeter area of the
land upon which activity for which the conditional use
permit is proposed is set back at least fifty (50) feet
from all lot lines, and
iii) Screening: If deemed appropriate by the City
Council after review and recommendation of the
Planning Commission, an adequate screening barrier
of a type and composition acceptable to the City shall
be provided.
iv) Small Lots: Notwithstanding the following, for R-A
lots of three acres or less in size, as measured from
the centerline of adjacent roadways, the only
Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses and Temporary
Conditional Uses allowed shall be those in the R-1
zoning district.
b) Listing of Conditional Uses: The following Conditional
Uses shall apply in the R-A Districts:
i) All Conditional Uses in the R-1 District
ii) Public Dog Kennels meeting the requirements of
Article 5-163
iii) The raising of cattle Livestock or Poultry in limited
numbers
iv) Cemeteries
v) Excavation or mining pursuant to permits issued
under Article 11-600 of the Ham Lake City Code, but
only within Mining Overlay Districts as defined therein
vi) Farm Wineries under Article 9-330.4 of the Ham
Lake City Code
vii) Other Small Businesses which:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
16
aa) Generate no noise which would violate the
standards for residential land uses as found in
the regulations of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, as expressed therein, which
regulations are hereby adopted by reference
insofar as they pertain to permitted decibel
levels adjacent to or near residential
properties, and
bb) Generate no odors, fumes, vibrations or
light beyond the property lines, and
cc) Are largely screened from outside view,
and
dd) Accommodate all parking on-site, and
ee) Do not generate unreasonable customer
traffic, and
ff) Do not engage in on-site retail sales
9-210.33 Temporary Conditional Uses: The following
Temporary Conditional Uses shall apply in the R-A
districts:
i) All Temporary Conditional Uses in the R-1
District.
ii) Seasonal Temporary Conditional Uses by
Permit under Article 9-330.8.
9-210.4 Affordable Housing District (R-AH) R-AH Districts are
areas intended for the creation of multiple-family apartment
buildings targeted for occupancy by persons aged 55 or older or
having low or moderate income, as those terms are from time to
time defined by the City Council in concert with the commonly
established guidelines of various governmental social service
agencies.
a) Permitted Uses
o Multiple family apartment buildings or cottages and
ancillary facilities
o Recreational facilities for the exclusive use of tenants
o Underground Utilities
o Storage Buildings or Garages for the exclusive use of
tenants
o A single business office for building or complex
management, of not more than 1500 square feet
b) Conditional Uses and Temporary Conditional Uses
o None
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
17
9-210.5 Planned Unit Development (PUD) A PUD district is a
development which involves single family housing of the variety
found in the R-1 District, combined with a second active land use of
a non-residential nature, or a development which involves a single
active land use of a residential nature which differs from the
housing types commonly found in the R-1 district, such as
townhomes or facilities found in the R-AH districts. The following
features shall be present in PUD developments:
a) Development Agreement Every PUD shall require the
negotiation and execution of a written development
agreement, for recording with the plat of the PUD.
b) Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses, and Temporary
Conditional Uses The development agreement shall state
the permitted uses, conditional uses and temporary
conditional uses which shall be allowed in the PUD. For
non-residential uses, the development agreement shall
characterize these uses by reference to a particular zoning
category found elsewhere in this code, and while the general
zoning category of the property shall be “PUD”, the nonresidential
usage shall be subject to the same requirements
and conditions as are found for the zoning category which is
chosen to characterize that particular non-residential usage.
c) Townhomes Townhomes are single family dwellings
which have at least one common wall with another single
family dwelling, and are permitted uses in the PUD district up
to a maximum of four units in a given row of townhomes.
d) Density and Lot Requirements Residential Density in a
PUD shall not exceed one dwelling unit per acre. Physical
standards for lots, streets and other aspects of development,
including setbacks, shall generally be identical to those
standards for the same character of land use in the
individualized zoning districts; however, zero lot lines may be
used for townhomes, and minor alterations in other physical
standards shall be permitted to encourage cluster housing or
other planning techniques, without the need to categorize
such alterations as variances.
e) Private Roads Private roads may be used in the PUD
districts, provided that there is a mechanism approved by the
city for maintenance, snowplowing and access for
emergency vehicles, school buses, mail vehicles,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
18
governmental inspectors, utility companies, rubbish removal
and other common services.
f) Phasing and Amendments A PUD may be developed in
phases in accord with applicable statutory authority, but all
phasing shall be detailed in the development agreement.
Amendments to a PUD which do not materially affect land
uses or persons outside the PUD may be processed by
Planning Commission review and City Council action, but all
other amendments shall require a public hearing to be
conducted in the same manner as for the original PUD plat.
9-210.6 Shoreland Residential – General Development (RS-1)
This district includes lands near bodies of water which meet the
definition of General Development Districts in Article 12 of this
Code (uncodified Shoreland Zoning Ordinance). Except as may be
limited by Article 12, Permitted and Conditional Uses in these
districts shall be identical to the Permitted and Conditional Uses in
areas zoned R-1.
9-210.7 Shoreland Residential – Recreational Development
(RS-2) This district includes lands near bodies of water which meet
the definition of General Recreational Districts in Article 12 of this
Code (uncodified Shoreland Zoning Ordinance). Except as may be
limited by Article 12, Permitted and Conditional Uses in these
districts shall be identical to the Permitted and Conditional Uses in
areas zoned R-1.
9-210.8 (Reserved for Sewered Residential Projects)
9-210.9 Multiple Family Residential (R-2) R-2 districts are
intended for duplexes, triplexes, four-plexes or (by conditional use
permit) larger multiple-family dwellings such as apartment
buildings. Such dwellings may be served by ISTS meeting the
standards of this code and state and county rules or regulations,
and the lots upon which such dwellings are located shall contain
the following features:
a. Backup ISTS Space – sufficient suitable soil to enable
the installation of a second ISTS to replace the ISTS
approved for the initial construction, to the same
specifications of the initial ISTS.
b. Yard Area and Livability - the Yard Area and Livability
requirements for any lot shall be the same square footages
as are found in Article 10-302 or single-family dwellings, but
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
19
multiplied by the number of units in the multiple family
dwelling.
Multiple family dwellings already existing in the City as of
January 1, 2009 shall not be required to meet the foregoing
yard and ISTS provisions, but shall be considered nonconforming
uses and subject to prohibitions on expansion or
alteration to the degree to which they do not meet current
codes regarding ISTS, yard areas and livability.
Permitted Uses
o Duplexes
o Triplexes
o Four-plexes
o Multiple Family Residential Buildings having more
than four dwelling units
o Underground Utilities
o Above Ground Transmission Lines and poles existing
prior to January 1, 2009.
o Home Occupations permitted under Article 9-350,
provide that the home occupation does not involve the
use of employees who are not residents of the
dwelling, does not involve the storage of inventory on
the site, does not involve deliveries of goods used in
the business to the site or shipped from the site, does
not involve customers coming to the site, and does
not involve the presence of machinery or equipment
other than a personal computer, copy machine, fax
machine and/or small personal printer.
Conditional Uses
o Public Utility Structures
o Accessory Buildings
9-220 Mercantile Districts The land uses described in Article 9-220 are
intended to be applicable to developments which utilize individual sewage
treatment systems (ISTS), and to developments which use approved
combined sewage treatment systems. All building permits and Certificates
of Occupancy in the Mercantile Districts shall require the review and
approval of the City Council, after review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission, excepting building permits and/or certificates of
occupancy being issued for an alteration to an existing structure under
circumstances in which the land use will be unchanged, and in which the
alteration will not materially affect parking requirements, stormwater
runoff, traffic, sewage treatment needs or aesthetics.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
20
9-220.1 Standards Common to All Mercantile Districts The
following standards shall apply to all of the mercantile districts as
listed in Article 9-220.
a) Paving All parking lots, drives and surfaces upon which
the public shall have access shall be paved according to
specifications to be established by the city’s engineer;
b) Drainage Surface water drainage and ponding needs
shall be implemented in the manner directed by the city’s
engineer;
c) Landscaping Landscaping shall be implemented in the
manner provided in Article 11-1800;
d) Setbacks for Paved Areas There shall be a ten foot
setback between any lot line and the back of curb of any
parking lot or driveway, and a six foot setback between the
back of curb of any parking lot and any building;
e) Buffering When any mercantile land use is located
adjacent to a residential area, it shall be screened by opaque
fencing, vegetation, or both;
f) Refuse Containers Refuse containers shall be stored in
locations which are completely screened from outside view;
hazardous materials shall be stored and disposed of in the
manner provided by law;
g) Parking Lots and Lighting Off-street parking shall be
provided for all patrons and employees. The Zoning Officer
shall maintain a schedule of parking requirements, to be
ratified from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to
serve as the general guideline for the establishment of
parking requirements, subject to modification by the City
Council where merited. Security lighting shall be permitted,
and may be required on review of site plans, but shall be
directed away from adjacent properties. No light or
combination of lights that cast light upon a Residential Land
Use shall exceed 4 foot candle meter reading as measured
at the residential property line. All measurements shall be
made after dark at the property line or edge of roadway.
h) Off-Street Loading All deliveries and bulk pickups of
merchandise, inventory and supplies shall be made to
loading facilities preferably located in the rear of the building,
which loading facilities shall be sufficient to enable the
prompt and safe transfer of goods.
i) Signage All signage shall conform to the provisions of
Article 11-300.
j) Special Considerations Notwithstanding the limitations
as to building styles, construction types and exterior
treatments, the City Council, after Planning Commission
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
21
review, may depart from strict adherence to the standards
found in Article 9-220, where special conditions merit such
departure, and where certain standards are met. Such
special conditions and standards may include, without
limitation, the following items.
i) The departure is not being requested for purely
economic reasons;
ii) The nature of the business is such that it requires
a specific type of building construction in order to
improve the business function, such as requirements
for sunlight, specialty equipment, interior lighting or
the like;
iii) The business is a permitted or conditional use in
the zoning district;
iv) The applicant proposes the usage of special
aesthetic treatments which provide a superior exterior
view, such as landscaping, vegetation screening,
berming, or the like;
v) The property contains unusual topography, mature
vegetation or other features which can be preserved
or enhanced to produce an overall superior
appearance;
vi) The property contains unusual accessibility
problems to or from adjacent roadways;
vii) The applicant offers to implement more stringent
design limitations in certain site plan features than
would normally be required, in exchange for being
permitted less stringent design limitations in other site
plan features.
k) Outside Storage Outside storage and activities for
areas zoned CD-3, CD-4, Industrial Park (I-P) and Light
Industrial (I-1) shall be as specifically detailed in the Code
Sections dealing with those land uses (Articles 9-220.6 and
9-220.7). For areas zoned CD-1 and CD-2, the following
provisions shall apply to outside storage, excepting
Fireworks sales and storage, which are governed by the
provisions of Article 9-330.6. Unless specifically permitted
by this Article 220.1(k), no Outside Storage shall be
allowed in any area zoned CD-1 or CD-2.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
22
1) Definitions
aa) Outside Storage – personal property (not fixtures) that
are located within the Approved Property Lines of any parcel
bearing a CD zoning classification, but which are found
outside of an enclosed, roofed building (including temporary
structures). Outside Storage does not include Refuse
Containers, customer vehicles, employee vehicles parked
while the employee is on duty, delivery vehicles while in the
process of delivery or pickup, construction materials or
vehicles being used in an active construction project on the
parcel, legal signs or banners, or legal temporary structures.
Except where specifically excepted, Outside Storage does
include inventory of the business occupying the parcel.
bb) Inventory - goods, except Vehicle Inventory, that are
offered for sale in the ordinary course of business of any
business occupying the parcel. For auto repair shops,
inventory shall also be deemed to mean passenger vehicles
or pickup trucks awaiting repair services.
cc) Vehicle Inventory – Automobiles, Trucks, Trailers,
Mobile Homes, Recreational Vehicles, Campers, Camper
Tops, Truck Toppers, Boats or other wheeled conveyances
that are offered for retail sale at a legal business location
whose primary business is the retail sale of one or more of
the above items. Rental equipment that may be offered for
sale is not Vehicle Inventory. Vehicle Inventory that bears
obvious signs that the vehicle is not presently capable of
being legally operated or conveyed on a public road is not
Vehicle Inventory, including, but not limited to vehicles
lacking wheels or inflated tires, operable drive train
components, broken windows or lights, required current
vehicle registration, missing body parts, such as fenders,
doors, hood lids, trunk lids, bumpers, lights or trim.
dd) Aesthetically Screened Outside Storage - Inventory or
Vehicle Inventory behind an opaque barrier constructed of
masonry or brick, attached to and matching or
complementary to the main building, and of sufficient height
and design so as to give the appearance that the barrier is a
part of the main building. No object shall be stored inside of
such a barrier if the object protrudes above the height of the
barrier. Any gates through the barrier shall be opaque and
of aesthetic design.
ee) Limited Outdoor Displays - Temporary displays of
merchandise which are normally sold or displayed from
within an enclosed retail store locations, but which are
temporarily placed not more than ten feet from an outside
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
23
wall of the main retail sales building during business hours,
and then returned to inside storage during non-business
hours.”
ff) Improvement Stores – Businesses that have as their
primary source of revenue the retail sale of plants, seeds,
landscaping supplies, produce, or yard statuary.
gg) 24-Hour Convenience Stores – Businesses that sell
gasoline at retail, and, from the same store location, also sell
groceries, auto supplies, sundries, over-the-counter
medications and personal products, sundries and other
items for human consumption, and which remain open for
business at all times of every day.
hh) Approved Property Lines – Are the outside perimeter
of the real estate parcel or parcels which were shown on the
site plan used for the initial municipal approval of a certificate
of occupancy or conditional use permit for a particular
operation.
ii) Pool Stores – retail stores that engage in the retail sales
of above ground or below ground recreational swimming
pools that contain electric filtration devices providing water
circulation and filtration in the pool, and under conditions
where an inventory of above ground or in ground swimming
pools is maintained, connected by water and electricity to a
source originating in a permanent retail building located on
the same parcel. A Pool Store shall not be considered a
retail store for the purposes of determining permitted uses
under Article 9-220.2 (b) or 9-220.3(b).
jj) Screened Outside Storage – is Inventory or Vehicle
Inventory behind an opaque barrier constructed of wood,
metal, plastic, masonry, brick or earthen berm, or which is
behind an opaque barrier composed of existing buildings or
other structures on the property, or which is behind a semiopaque
barrier of vegetation that substantially conceals the
storage from outside view.
2) Permitted Outside Storage
aa) Vehicle Inventory is permitted Outside Storage on any
CD-1 or CD-2 parcel in connection with a business that is
legally permitted to sell Vehicle Inventory. If specifically
permitted by the conditions of any Conditional Use Permit or
Temporary Conditional Use Permit for any such parcel,
vehicles that do not meet the definition of Vehicle Inventory
may also be permitted Outside Storage.
bb) Aesthetically Screened Outside Storage is permitted
outside storage if used as a condition of approval of any site
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
24
plan, Conditional Use Permit or Temporary Conditional Use
Permit on any CD-1 or CD-2 parcel in connection with the
new construction of a main commercial building on the
parcel.
cc) Limited Outdoor Displays are permitted Outside Storage
in both the CD-1 and CD-2 districts. If the business is a 24-
Hour Convenience Store, the Limited Outdoor Display need
not be moved indoors, but the business shall at all times
maintain a clear pedestrian path on sidewalks that is at least
36 inches in width.
(dd) Inventory is permitted Outside Storage for Improvement
Stores and Manufactured/Prefabricated Structure Sales but
must be separately identified on the initial site plan submitted
with the initial request for certificate of occupancy or
conditional use permit, and must be stored only in
conformance with that site plan. Bins or containers housing
the Inventory shall also be permitted Outside Storage for
Improvement Stores and Manufactured/Prefabricated
Structure Sales as shall be other items necessarily incident
to the storage, maintenance or protection of the Inventory.
ee) No Outside Storage shall be permitted for any business
unless the storage is within the Approved Property Lines.
ff) Pool Stores may display above ground or below ground
swimming pools as Permitted Outside Storage only on
property under conditional use permit, subject to conditions
to be established by the City Council, which must include, at
a minimum, the following:
1) Pool water must be maintained in a sanitary
condition;
2) Below ground pools must be surrounded by codecompliant
fencing;
3) Above ground pools must be constructed in a
code-compliant method relative to either fencing or
sufficient elevation to prevent accidental entry into the
pool;
4) Adequate security fencing around the storage
display area must be installed to discourage afterhours
entry into the pool storage area;
5) Reasonable screening from outside view shall be
installed;
6) All sources of water and electricity shall be
connected to the pools in a code-compliant manner;
7) Only pools that are intended for use with circulating
filters shall be permitted outside; no “kiddy pools”,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
25
wading pools or inflatable pools shall be permitted to
be displayed outside.
8) Winter storage of outside pools shall be done in a
manner that covers the pool surface and prevents the
accidental entry into the pool;
gg) Screened Outside Storage is permitted outside storage
if used as a condition of approval of any site plan,
Conditional Use Permit or Temporary Conditional Use
Permit on any CD-1 or CD-2 parcel involving pre-existing
main buildings or structures that:
1) Historically utilized outside storage in connection
with business operating on the property, and which
uses were never abandoned;
2) Do not involve replacement or major remodeling of
the existing structures, but utilizes the existing
structures for the business to be operated;
Approval of Screened Outside Storage is discretionary with
the City Council.
i) Revocation All permits and certificates of occupancy
issued in the mercantile districts are subject to revocation
under the provisions of Article 9-240.
3) Office/Warehouses Office/Warehouse is a term given to a structure
that is designed to have office space in front, behind which is situated an
open bay or bays, with the office and bay space to be occupied by a single
business. The office space and the bay space may also include area for
retail sales. The bay space may also be used for manufacturing, other
industrial activity, or warehousing. Building Permits may be issued for
Office/Warehouses in any Mercantile District as found in Article 9-220.
However, specific uses within each Office/Warehouse are subject to the
Permitted Use, Conditional Use and Temporary Conditional Use
restrictions for the given zoning district in which the Office/Warehouse is
constructed. The issuance of a building permit for an Office/Warehouse
does not confer upon the property owner the right to use any portion of the
structure in a manner inconsistent with the use restrictions for the zoning
district in which the structure is located. All new tenants or occupants of
any Office/Warehouse must observe the same conditions for site plan or
other approval, as would any other occupant. Further, if the zoning district
in which the Office/Warehouse is to be constructed contains restrictions
on building materials or design, those restrictions must be followed.
9-220.2 Commercial Development 1 (CD-1)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
26
The CD-1 zone is intended to apply to certain commercial uses on
lands abutting the city’s only major thoroughfare, Trunk Highway
65. In that these lands have high visibility to the traveling public, it
is considered important to the preservation of land values in
general, as well as important to the continuing ability of the city to
generate the establishment of quality commercial development and
the concomitant tax and employment base, that structures in the
CD-1 zones observe specific construction and aesthetic standards,
which are listed below. No usage shall be permitted in the CD-1
zone which does not observe the standards found in Article 9-220.2
(a) below.
a) Standards for Site and Building Construction
i) Except for structures housing public utility feature, no metal or
pole-type building shall be permitted;
ii) Exterior wall surfaces shall be of brick, decorative masonry,
stone, precast panel, architectural concrete, glass, stucco or wood
framed with horizontal lap siding;
iii) No galvanized surfaces shall be permitted, either on roofs or
siding;
iv) All roofs shall be colored and shall incorporate a minimum 18-
inch soffit on the eave edge of the roof;
v) All roofs shall have a minimum 12-inch overhang on the gable
ends;
vi) All roofs have a 9.5 inch fascia;
vii) Standing metal seam roofing shall be permitted (Minimum 24
gauge, non-galvanized);
b) Permitted Uses (Including uses that are ancillary to the
main use)
• Clubs and Lodges
• Medical Facilities
o Assisted Living Facilities
o Chiropractic
o Clinics of all medical disciplines
o Dental
o Diagnostic Facilities
o Hospitals
o Laboratories
o Nursing Homes
o Treatment Rooms and Centers
o Veterinary Clinics
• Hotels, Motels and Lodging Houses under Article 11-1100
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
27
• Offices and Office Buildings
• Park and Ride Lots
• Post Offices
• Public Utilities (metal or pole type construction allowed)
• Recreational Facilities (indoor unless noted)
o Batting Cages
o Billiard Parlors
o Bowling Alleys
o Dance/Gymnastic Studios
o Health Clubs
o Martial Arts Studios
o Miniature Golf Courses (outdoor)
o Paintball or Laser Tag Facilities
o Parks (outdoor/publicly owned)
o Roller Skating Facilities
o Shooting Range
o Skateboard Facilities
o Virtual Golf Facilities
• Restaurants, including liquor service
• Retail Facilities - engaged in the sale of goods (Excluding
Motor Vehicle/ Boat/RV/Camper Sales), from freestanding
one-store locations, shopping centers, strip malls or
enclosed malls, including, but not limited to:
o Antique Stores
o Appliance Stores
o Automobile Parts Stores (new parts only)
o Bakeries
o Bicycle Stores
o “Big Box” Stores (subject to Article 9-400)
o Book Stores
o Butcher Shops/Meat Markets
o Camera Stores
o Candy Stores
o Carpet Stores
o Clothing Stores
o Coin Stores
o Convenience Stores
o Cosmetic Stores
o Discount Stores
o E-Cig Stores
o Electrical, HVAC and Plumbing Equipment Stores
o Electronics Stores
o Fireworks (under Article 9-330.6)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
28
o Floral Stores
o Furniture Stores
o Gift Shop
o Grocery Stores
o Hardware Stores
o Health Stores
o Hobby/Game Stores
o Housewares Stores
o Improvement Stores (Lawn & Garden) as defined in
Article 9-220.1 (k)(1)(ff)
o Jewelry Stores
o Liquor Stores
o Luggage Stores
o Music Stores
o Office Supply Stores
o Optical Supply Stores
o Paint/Wallpaper Stores
o Pet Stores
o Petroleum product sales (excluding vehicle repair)
o Pharmacies
o Shoe Stores
o Sporting Goods Stores
o Souvenir Stores
o Thrift Stores
o Tobacco Stores
o Video Stores
• Schools and Colleges
• Service Businesses
o Appliance Repair Shops
o Barber Shops
o Beauty Shops
o Car Washes
o Day Cares (licensed)
o Dry Cleaners
o Electronics Repair Shops
o Financial Institutions
o Funeral Homes
o Government Buildings
o Insurance Agencies
o Law Offices
o Locksmiths
o Manicure/Pedicure/Nail Care shops
o Pet Grooming Shops
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
29
o Photography Studios
o Print Shops
o Shoe Repair Shops
o Specialty Retail Shops
o Tailor Shops
o Tanning Facilities
o Travel Agencies
• Small Engine Sales and Repair
o Air Compressors
o Chain Saws
o Garden Tractors
o Lawn Mowers
o Leaf Blowers
o Other Motorized Gardening Equipment
o Power Rakes
o Power Washers
o Rototillers
o Shop Vacs
o Snowblowers
o Woodchippers
o Woodsplitters
• Theatres
• Worship Centers and ancillary features owned by the entity
that owns the Worship Center, including classrooms,
recreational features, residences for staff, offices and
kitchen/dining.
c) Conditional Uses
• Automobile Repair Shops (Passenger Vehicles, Pickup
Trucks, ATVs, Snowmobiles, Motorcycles, Jet-skis, Boats
and other Marine Equipment)
• Equipment Rental Businesses
• Light Manufacturing, defined as follows:
The fabrication or processing of goods for sale to retailers,
wholesalers, other manufacturers or at retail that takes place
entire within an enclosed building and that meets the
following criteria:
a) The business does not generate any noise, odor or
vibration detectable from adjoining properties, other
than that which occurs in the normal course of
business during shipping and receiving activities;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
30
b) There is no outside storage of any item except
Aesthetically Screened Outside Storage as defined in
Article 9-220(k)(1)(dd) of this Code.
c) No outside cranes or booms are located on the site;
d) Retail sales of the business products can occur on the
premises if the commodities are the commodities
manufactured on site.
• Manufactured/Prefabricated Structure Sales (including,
without limitation, housing units, gazebos, storage sheds,
playhouses, screened porches, and shelters) together with
incidental furnishings such as lawn chairs and picnic tables
• New Vehicle Sales (must have indoor showroom) limited to
the following:
o Note: Where the word “vehicle” is used, the term is
hereby defined to exclude mobile homes, busses,
semi-tractors, semi-trailers over 30 feet in length, and
heavy construction equipment, such as bulldozers,
backhoes, road graders, earth moving equipment,
cranes and excavators.
o ATV’s (all-terrain vehicles)
o Automobiles
o Boats
o Campers
o Golf Carts
o Motorcycles, Motorbikes and Scooters
o Recreational Vehicles
o Snowmobiles
o Commercial Trucks
o Pickup Trucks
o Trailers less than 30 feet in length
• Office Warehouses
• Pool Stores under Article 9-220.1 (k)
• Residential Treatment Centers
• Sexually Oriented Business under Article 9-330.3
• Self-Storage Facilities, limited to properties on which selfstorage
facilities were in existence as of January 1, 2014.
“Properties” as used herein is intended to include
“Expansion Parcels”, which are tax parcels that were on said
date contiguous to and in common ownership or control with
the parcel on which self-storage facilities were in use on said
date and which were lacking a permanent structure/usage
and/or providing a parking area or driveway serving the
parcel on which the self-storage units were located.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
31
Expansion Parcels do not include parcels that are separated
by public roads from the parcel on which the self-storage
units were located on said date. It is the intent of this
language that the self-storage use be permitted to expand
onto the Expansion Parcels if a Conditional Use Permit for
such expansion is approved. Notwithstanding these
provisions, all self-storage uses shall be considered nonconforming
uses and if abandoned or damaged and
unrepaired, are subject to the same criteria for termination of
allowed usage status as for other non-conforming uses as
provided in Article 9-150.1 of this Code.
• Temporary Commercial Structures under Article 9-330.7
• Therapeutic Massage under Article 9-330.5
• Transportation Facilities
• Used Vehicle Sales limited as follows
o Collector Cars
o Motor Homes and Recreational Vehicle Trailer Sales*
*(A “Trailer”, for the purposes of this code, shall
mean a conveyance which is primarily
designed to be towed behind a motor vehicle
on public highways for usage in camping at
bona fide campgrounds or RV parks. The
conveyance commonly known in the industry
as a “Park Model” is not to be considered a
Trailer.)
o Facilities that meet the following criteria:
o The lot on which the use is proposed is presently and
lawfully used by a business whose primary business
is in the automotive industry such as automobile
specialty shop, auto repair or recreational vehicle
sales lot; and
o The sales are limited to passenger cars and pickup
trucks; and
o The primary business activity in the automotive
industry that qualified the lot to be used for Used
Vehicle Sales must continue to be the primary
business activity on the lot; Used Vehicle Sales shall
be an incidental use only, and shall not replace the
primary business activity; or
o The used vehicle inventory is part of the overall
inventory of a New Vehicle Sales operation, limited to
vehicles that have been taken in trade by the owner
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
32
d) Temporary Conditional Uses Only
Certain modular housing sales lots may be allowed as Temporary
Conditional Uses in the CD-1 areas under the following limited
conditions:
i) The permit shall be for no longer than five years;
ii) No housing units shall be permitted which are mobile homes,
which were at one time mobile homes, or which could become
mobile homes with the addition of wheels installed in a preengineered
or pre-planned receptacle. It is the intention of this
usage that the only housing units permitted for display in such
areas are single family dwellings of wood frame construction,
designed for placement on a permanent foundation in a typical
single family residential neighborhood, and not designed for or
commonly found in mobile home parks.
iii) A single housing unit may be used as a sales office.
iv) Marketing of housing units shall be only to consumerhomeowners,
and not to retailers or wholesalers;
v) All units shall be placed on concrete blocks, at least two courses
in height, giving the appearance of a full basement.
vi) All units shall be completely finished on the exterior to give the
appearance that the unit is inhabited as a part of a quality single
family neighborhood. Units may be assembled from preconstructed
component parts on site, but may not be constructed
from scratch on the site. Assembly of any display unit shall be
complete (weather permitting) within 14 days after commencement
of assembly. Each display unit shall obtain a building permit from
the City prior to commencement of assembly. A display unit, once
in place, shall not be replaced for at least 24 months.
vii) All surfaces upon which the public is expected to drive, park or
walk shall be paved with bituminous or concrete material according
to specifications to be established by the City’s engineer.
viii) All display units shall have an attached garage for two cars or
more.
ix) A Site Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council,
after review and comment by the Planning Commission, which plan
shall limit the number of units to be displayed, provide a
landscaping plan, show the locations of all drives, walkways and
parking areas, and provide photographic samples of the styles of
units to be displayed.
x) The City Council may attach such other conditions to the
Temporary Conditional Use Permit as are deemed appropriate or
necessary to protect public safety, health or welfare, or to protect
nearby property values.
9-220.3 Commercial Development II (CD-2)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
33
The CD-2 Districts are located adjacent to the CD-1 Districts, and
constitute a second tier of commercial activities along the T.H. 65
corridor. These districts also have importance in presenting a
visually pleasing image to the traveling public, but are less visible
from the T.H. 65 roadway than the CD-1 districts.
a) Standards for Site and Building Construction
i) Metal or pole-type buildings shall be permitted if surfaces meet
the requirements of (b) below, and , provided that no galvanized
surface may appear, all roofs shall be colored and incorporate a
minimum 18 inch soffit on eave edges, 12 overhang on gable ends,
and 9.5 inch fascia.
ii) Modern metal paneling may be used for roof and exterior wall
surfaces, provided that on the wall sides facing T.H.65, no more
than 25% of the surface area may be modern metal paneling, with
the remaining portion of these surfaces being brick, decorative
masonry, stone, precast panel, architectural concrete, glass, stucco
or wood framed with horizontal lap siding; For other wall surfaces,
there shall be a wainscot at least 42 inches in height which is
composed of brick, decorative masonry, stone, precast panel,
architectural concrete, glass, stucco or wood framed with horizontal
lap siding;
b) Permitted Uses (Including uses that are ancillary to the main
use)
• All Permitted Uses in the CD-1 District
• Broadcasting Studios
• Building Supply Yards/Lumber Yards
• Enclosed Storage and Warehousing
• Landscaping Businesses
• Manufacturing involving no non-enclosed storage
• Public Utilities (metal or pole type construction allowed)
• Research laboratories
• Used Vehicle Sales - limited to the following:
o ATV’s (all-terrain vehicles)
o Automobiles
o Boats
o Campers
o Golf Carts
o Motorcycles, Motorbikes and Scooters
o Recreational Vehicles
o Snowmobiles
o Commercial Trucks
o Pickup Trucks
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
34
o Trailers less than 30 feet in length
• Utility Companies
c) Conditional Uses
• All conditional uses or temporary conditional uses in the CD-
1 District
• Flea Markets under Article 11-1500
• Kennels
• Pawn Shops under Article 11-1300
• Truck Terminals
• Self-storage facilities, but not including the limitations and
conditions imposed for such facilities as found in Article 9-
220.2 (c).
9-220.4 Commercial Development III (CD-3)
The CD-3 zones are areas of the City that are located outside of
the TH 65 Corridor, which are suitable for certain institutional
actives; neighborhood retail, or which operate under historic
permits, and which involve no outside storage of supplies,
equipment or inventory excepting motor vehicles used in the
business (unless specifically allowed by historic permit) and except
as stated below:
a) Permitted Uses (Including uses that are ancillary to the main
use)
• Campgrounds (may include outside storage of firewood,
equipment, picnic tables and other items common to a
campground environment)
• Churches, including ancillary structures such as classrooms,
offices, recreational facilities, parsonages or other dwellings
for occupancy by church staff
• Convenience Stores including outdoor displays and
inventory
• Financial Institutions
• Governmental, Business and Professional Offices
• Land Uses Specifically Authorized by Development
• Agreements in effect in whole or in part prior to January 1,
2000
• Licensed Day Care Centers
• Medical Clinics, including general medicine, specialty
medicine, dental, optical and chiropractic
• Off Sale Liquor Stores
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
35
• Personal Services, including Beauty Shops and Barber
Shops
• Petroleum Products Sales including outdoor displays and
inventory
• Plant Nurseries, Garden Centers and Produce Markets
(including limited outdoor display)
• Veterinary Clinics
b) Conditional Uses
• None
9-220.5 Commercial Development IV (CD-4)
The CD-4 zones are areas of the City that are located outside of
the TH 65 Corridor, which are suitable for certain light industrial or
construction trades, and which involve no outside storage of
supplies, equipment or inventory excepting motor vehicles used in
the business.
a) Permitted Uses (Including uses that are ancillary to the main
use)
• Electrical, HVAC, Plumbing, Septic Contracting Businesses
• Indoor Storage
• Light Assembly
• Light Manufacturing or Re-Manufacturing
• Office/Warehouse
• Personal Services, including Beauty Shops and Barber
Shops
• Small Retail Sales Facilities
b) Conditional Uses
• None
9-220.6 Industrial Park (I-P) This zoning category shall apply to
mercantile parcels which are intended for manufacturing,
warehousing, machining, tooling, fabricating, assembly, processing,
equipment storage, storage of raw materials or supplies, and the
like, as opposed to mercantile parcels used primarily for office or
retail activities. Limited office space activity may occur in an
Industrial Park, but only as incidental to the main industrial usage of
a given parcel.
a) Physical Requirements
i) Building Materials All building construction shall
be of masonry or of products made from concrete or
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
36
materials related to concrete. No metal buildings
shall be allowed in any I-P District.
ii) Screening Any I-P area developed after the
effective date of this ordinance which is adjacent to
land which is now or which is intended to become a
residential land use shall be completely fenced by
attractive, opaque fencing of sufficient height to
completely screen all future activities within I-P area.
Opaque fencing shall be deemed to mean only solid
wood or solid metal components. Fence height shall
be as determined upon site plan review by the
Planning Commission, which may also require
different screening material, including earthen
berming.
iii) Paving All drives, parking lots or sidewalks which
will be utilized by the general public or by employees
of the business shall be paved in accord with
standards established by the City’s engineer.
Equipment storage areas may be surfaced with Class
V or other material if the area so surfaced is not to be
open to the general public.
iv) Landscaping Article 11-1800 of this code shall
apply to landscaping in I-P areas.
b) Usage Limitations All uses in the I-P areas shall be subject to
the same review procedures as are found in Article 9-220 for
Mercantile Areas. The following specific usage limitations shall
apply to the I-P areas:
i) Outside Storage All outside storage shall be fenced for
security purposes. Trash containers or accumulations of
waste or debris of any kind shall be completely screened
from view from outside the lot. All waste and debris shall be
properly and promptly disposed of, storage of such material
being allowed only for the time interval reasonably
necessary to arrange for regular disposal service. During
hours in which the business activity within the main building
is not being conducted, all storage areas shall be gated and
locked. Machinery and vehicles stored on the premises shall
be secured so as not to be readily operable or moveable
during non-business hours. No unregistered motor vehicles
or inoperable vehicle or machinery shall remain on the
premises.
ii) Semi-Trailers, Large Trucks and Truck-Tractors
Semi-trailers may be stored within the fenced area of an I-P
lot, provided that each semi-trailer shall be fully licensed and
road-worthy. The use of dilapidated, inoperable or otherwise
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
37
non-functioning semi-trailers for warehousing or other
purposes shall be prohibited. Large trucks and truck-tractors
may likewise be stored within the fenced area, but shall
likewise be fully and currently licensed and operable. Each
semi-trailer shall have a parking stall with minimum
dimensions of 12 feet by 125 feet.
iii) Noise Noise generated from lots in the I-P areas that
are audible in Residential Land Uses shall not exceed
standards as established by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.
iv) Lighting No light or combination of lights that cast light
upon a Residential Land Use shall exceed 4 foot candle
meter reading as measured at the residential property line.
All measurements shall be made after dark at the property
line or edge of roadway.
v) Fumes and Odor Fumes and odors generated from lots
in the I-P districts shall not exceed published standards as
established by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, herein adopted by reference.
(c) Permitted Uses
• Assembly Businesses
• Cabinetry Assembly/Manufacturing Shops
• Construction Companies
• Electrical Companies
• Equipment Rental Businesses (large industrial
equipment)
• Equipment Repair or Service Businesses
• Fabricating Companies
• Government Storage/Repair Centers
• Machine Shops
• Manufacturing Plants (Excepting Bituminous or
Concrete)
• Motor Vehicle Sales - limited to the following:
• ATV’s (all-terrain vehicles)
• Automobiles
• Boats
• Campers
• Golf Carts
• Motorcycles, Motorbikes and Scooters
• Recreational Vehicles
• Snowmobiles
• Commercial Trucks
• Pickup Trucks
• Trailers less than 30 feet in length
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
38
• Plumbing and HVAC Companies
• Public Utilities (metal or pole type construction
allowed)
• Textile Companies
• Tooling Companies
• Utility Companies
• Warehouses
(d) Conditional Uses
• Bituminous or Ready-Mix Concrete Plants
• Chemical/Paint Companies
• Uses which are normally permitted but which involve
some retail sales
• Heavy Equipment Sales
• Trucking Companies
• Transfer Stations for Demolition Debris under the
following conditions:
1) The Transfer Station is fully licensed/permitted by
appropriate county, state and federal agencies having
jurisdiction over its activities;
2) The term “Demolition Debris” refers only to
concrete, stone, asphalt, wood, plastic, metal or
composites. No shingles, putrescible items or
hazardous materials shall be intentionally processed
at the Transfer Station. Any putrescible items or
hazardous materials found to be on the premise shall
be handled and disposed of properly and legally.
3) The location of the actual site within the I-P area is
in a sufficiently remote and screened portion of the
area so as to eliminate disturbance of nearby existing
or possible future residential neighborhoods through
noise, light, vibration, odor, fumes, unsightliness or
dust.
4) The activities at the Transfer Station shall be
limited to the reception of Demolition Debris on roll-off
containers or dump trucks, all contents of which are to
be placed on the floor of a completely enclosed
building, where the materials will be sorted and reshipped
to recyclers or landfills, in a manner
consistent with all applicable regulations and codes.
No outside storage of demolition debris will be
permitted.
9-220.7 Light Industrial (I-1) I-1 zones are areas which are used
for limited manufacturing purposes, involving frequent truck traffic
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
39
for pickup and delivery of products and materials, and which require
a significant portion of the manufacturing process to occur outside
of enclosed buildings.
a) Permitted Uses
• Ready Mix Concrete Plants
• Priestesses Concrete Plants
• Monument Companies
b) Conditional Uses or Temporary Conditional Uses
• None
9-220.8 Commercial Development V (CD-5)
The CD-5 Zones are areas of the City that were designated a
Multiple Use Options areas in Chapter 4, paragraph 4.7 of the 2005
Ham Lake Comprehensive Plan which are specifically designated
by action of the Ham Lake City Council for rezoning to the CD-5
classification, and may also include other lands that are zoned R-A
but which are found to either be located in close proximity to the
intersections of minor or major arterials, or which abut other land
that has been rezoned to the CD-5 classification. Because CD-5
lands will often be found near existing residential areas, or areas
expected to develop into residential land uses, building
construction, screening and landscaping are to be of upscale
quality, and ongoing grounds maintenance given high priority.
a) Permitted Uses
• Medical/Dental Clinics or Facilities
• Governmental, business and professional offices
• Parks
• Financial institutions
• Veterinary clinics
• Uses ancillary or incident to the above
b) Conditional Uses
The following uses shall be allowed by Conditional Use Permit
or Temporary Conditional Use Permit only, after fulfillment of the
requirements hereafter outlined.
• Office Warehouses meeting the requirements outlined in
Article 9-220.1 and this Article of the Ham Lake City Code
• All Permitted Uses found in areas zoned CD-1 and CD-2 not
permitted above, except Fireworks Sales
• Non-profit clubs, lodges or halls
• Institutional Uses (Governmental, Educational and Religious)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
40
• Commercial Recreational Facilities
• Construction Companies
• Enclosed Storage and Warehousing
• Broadcasting Studios and Facilities
• Office Buildings
• Movie Theaters
• Convenience stores
c) Building, Outside Storage, Screening and Fencing
Standards
All buildings constructed in the CD-5 districts shall meet the same
standards as for buildings in the CD-1 zoning districts, as found in
Article 9-220.2(a) of this Code. Outside storage shall meet the
same standards as for uses in the CD-1 zoning districts, as found in
Article 9-220.1(k) of this Code, in particular as regards screening
attached to main buildings. Perimeter fencing shall be opaque and
of such quality and appearance as is dictated by the conditions of
approval of the Conditional Use Permit, but perimeter fencing may
be up to eight feet in height, not counting the height of any beam
upon which a perimeter fence may be constructed.
d) Maintenance Standards
The development agreement for each project approved in a CD-5
zone shall include a maintenance covenant guaranteeing the
ongoing maintenance of all buildings, fences, screens, landscaping,
paving, curbing or other property improvements. The maintenance
covenant shall be assured by an ongoing cash security deposit,
Letter of Credit or by an Assessment Agreement permitting the City
to complete any unperformed maintenance and to assess the cost
thereof against the appropriate property.
e) Application Procedure
The initial application for a change to CD-5 zoning shall include the
following, which is to be prepared by a registered land surveyor,
registered civil engineer or registered architect:
i) If the area is to be subdivided, a sketch plan for
platting meeting the requirements of Article 10 of the
City Code shall be provided;
ii) A site plan for each parcel proposed for development
that includes:
aa) The maximum perimeter of the footprint for every
building to be constructed;
bb) The locations of all parking and drive areas;
cc) The locations of all ISTS and wells;
dd) The locations of all outside storage areas;
ee) The locations of all fencing and screening;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
41
ff) The location of all landscaped or open areas and
ponding.
iii) For each proposed parcel, a narrative that states the
range of specific land uses to which each parcel may
be devoted. If Office-Warehouses are proposed, the
range of potential land uses shall be given for each
bay in each Office-Warehouse.
iv) An identification of any variances that will be
requested in the project.
f) Conceptual Approval
Following receipt of all of the items required in the application
process, the proposal shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission, and then given conceptual approval, conditional
approval or rejection by the City Council. Conceptual approval
shall confer no “substantial reliance” or other developmental rights
on the applicant, and is intended only as a measure of the initial
reaction of the appointed and elected officials of the City to the
proposed concept. However, in that the eventual rezoning of the
property from R-A to CD-5 would require 4 or more affirmative
votes of the City Council, Conceptual Approval shall also require 4
or more affirmative votes of the Ham Lake City Council.
g) Public Input
Following Conceptual Approval, the applicant shall submit the
following more detailed project plans:
i) Professionally prepared renderings of the outside plan
view of all sides of each parcel proposed by the
Developer, noting screening heights. These drawings
should accurately portray the future view to the
property from all adjoining roads and parcels, and
should accurately portray the portions of all areas
screened from view;
ii) A detailed landscaping plan showing the location, size
and species of all plantings;
iii) A colored site plan detailing the locations of all
structures, roads, drives, parking stalls, turn lanes or
other infrastructure improvements, open areas and
ponding.
iv) A traffic study prepared by a registered professional
engineer showing the peak traffic consequences of
the project, assuming the most traffic-intensive land
uses from the range of land uses reported, and
assessing the effect of such traffic on adjacent roads,
neighborhoods, and intersections.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
42
iv) For any land uses proposed that are likely to store or
frequently have on site any diesel engine vehicles
(except non-business passenger vehicles and pickup
trucks), self-propelled construction equipment, other
noise-generating motors or devices, or which have
loading dock facilities for semi-tractor/trailer deliveries
or pickups, a noise study prepared by a qualified
acoustical expert predicting the estimated noise levels
to be experienced by adjoining properties (except
roadways) for a distance of 500 feet from each parcel
proposed.
v) A lighting plan showing the location and illumination
pattern of all proposed lighting on each parcel;
Upon submission of all of the above, the City Council shall order
the conducting of a public hearing on the proposal. In its order for
hearing, the City Council shall designate who shall conduct the
public hearing (City Council, Planning Commission or both) and
what degree and coverage of notice to give to nearby properties,
but not to be less notice than is required by law. The City Council
may require more than one public hearing, or may recess any
public hearing for continuation.
h) Action Following Public Hearing
The public hearing, once conducted, shall be deemed to be the
public hearing required by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462.357
(subd. 3) for Zoning Changes and to be the public hearing required
by Article 10-204 of this Code at the Preliminary Plat stage of any
subdivision. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 10-204, for
plats submitted in areas proposed for rezoning to the CD-5
classification, some or all of the items normally required for
submission before the public hearing (as detailed in Article 10-204
(A) and (B) may, in the discretion of the City’s engineer, be
submitted following the public hearing. Following the public
hearing, the City Council (after review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission if appropriate) shall adopt a resolution either
rejecting the rezoning or conditionally approving the rezoning, but
such approval always conditioned on the successful completion of
any remaining subdivision work and execution of an approved
development agreement. If the City Council determines to reject the
proposed rezoning, the rejection shall be deemed to also be a
rejection of the proposed subdivision, if any.
i) Preliminary Plat Approval
If a subdivision is involved, then following the public hearing, and
assuming a conditional approval of the rezoning request, the
applicant shall submit the remaining items as required in Article 10-
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
43
204 of the City Code for Preliminary Plat Approval. The City
Council, shall act on the Preliminary Plat Approval after Planning
Commission review and recommendation.
j) Final Approval of Subdivision and Rezoning
Following conditional rezoning approval and preliminary plat
approval, the City’s attorney shall prepare a written development
agreement embodying all of the terms and conditions of all previous
approvals, and all of the other requirements of this code. Upon
approval of the agreement by the City Council, the City Council
shall grant final plat and rezoning approval, subject to the execution
of the development agreement, including the posting of all required
security and municipal fees or deposits, within thirty days after City
Council approval. If the applicant fails to execute an approved
development agreement within 30 days of City Council approval,
then the City Council shall move to reject both the zoning request
and the subdivision request.
k) Deadlines for Filing and Completion; Security
The following timelines shall apply to the development of properties
developed in the CD-5 districts. The Development Agreement may
provide for the posting of reasonable security to guarantee the
proper and timely completion of all improvements.
1. Projects involving subdivision:
aa) The plat must be filed within ninety days of the date of
final approval.
bb) All infrastructure improvements in the subdivision must
be completed within one year of the date of filing of the plat,
except the second lift of bituminous paving, which shall be
completed within a time frame established by the City’s
engineer.
cc) Office-warehouses may not be constructed as separate
bays, and all bays of a given office-warehouse must be
constructed together, in one construction season.
dd) The applicant shall observe an absorption rate of not
less than one building unit each six months until all lots in
the subdivision have been sold and improved with a building.
The City shall grant reasonable extensions to this absorption
rate where market conditions warrant.
2. Where no subdivision of land is involved, the applicant shall
apply for a building permit for all structures proposed in the
project within 90 days after final approval, and all site
improvements, including completion of all buildings, shall be
complete within one year of the date of issuance of the
building permit.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
44
9-220.9 Traditional Use Overlay Districts (TOD) TOD districts are
areas that carry a CD-1 or CD-2 zoning category, but which have been
specially designated for the exceptions stated in this section by reason of
having historically carried on a specific land use or land uses that have
involved a significant investment in infrastructure and/or buildings.
Properties included in the following designation as qualifying for TOD
treatment (see Article 9-220.94) were properties in the CD-1 and CD-2
zoning districts which carried an estimated value for improvements to real
estate that were at least 50% of total market value on Anoka County
property tax records for the year of enactment of this Article (2010), or, if
contiguous parcels were owned by the same party and the aggregate of
the two parcels met the above criteria, then both parcels were included for
TOD treatment. If the owner of any property in a CD-1 or CD-2 zoning
district that is not included in the initial designation for TOD treatment
wishes to have their property included, a condition of approval will be that
the owner demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Ham Lake City Council
that the value of improvements on the parcel is at least 50% of the total
market value expressed on County Tax records for the year in which
application is made.
9-220.91 Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses and Temporary
Conditional Uses
The uses detailed in Article 9-220.3 (b) and (c) shall apply to TOD
districts, regardless of whether the underlying zoning in such districts is
CD-1 or CD-2.
9-220.92 Exemption from Certain Building Standards
The owner of a parcel carrying the TOD designation shall not be required,
as a condition of approval of any site plan or building permit, to upgrade
existing facilities to meet building standards found in Articles 9-220.2(a) or
9-220.3 (a). New structures constructed on such parcels, such as
expansions of existing buildings, may also be exempted from such
standards on approval of the City Council if the adherence to the exterior
appearance standards required by the foregoing code sections would not
significantly improve the overall aesthetic appearance of the property.
9-220.93 Exemption from Certain Site Standards
The provisions of Article 9-220.1 (c), (e) and (h) shall not apply to Parcels
carrying the TOD designation.
9-220.94 Designation of Specific Parcels
Parcels carrying the TOD overlay designation shall be identified by PID
number, and shall include the following:
17-32-23-21-0009
17-32-23-21-0013
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
45
17-32-23-21-0005
17-32-23-12-0006
17-32-23-12-0007
17-32-23-12-0008
20-32-23-42-0004
20-32-23-13-0011
9-230 Government Facilities Districts (GF) Lands which are owned in
fee by a body politic, including the City of Ham Lake, and which are used
for the carrying on of governmental services, or services provided by
government, or which are leased by a body politic to a public or private
entity for activities or uses which tend to carry out a publicly needed or
useful purpose. The permitted uses in this district include any use found
by resolution of the City Council to be in furtherance of a public need or
public purpose, but shall include Radio Transmission Towers under Article
11-1600.
A. Temporary Conditional Uses
• Seasonal Temporary Conditional Uses by Permit under
Article 9-330.8
9-240 Revocation of Permit or Certificate of Occupancy A permit or a
Certificate of Occupancy may be revoked for any mercantile
establishment, for the following reasons. Prior to invoking any such
revocation, the City Council shall establish a hearing procedure which
affords reasonable due process of law to the holder of the permit or
certificate.
9-240.1 Criminal Violations. The occupant has committed any
criminal violation of law at a gross misdemeanor or felony level
which is directly related to the business being conducted on the
premises; such violations shall include, but are not limited to:
a) Conviction by any licensed on-sale or off- sale liquor
operator of sales of liquor to minors; illegal purchases
of liquor from unlicensed distributors; sale or
possession on the premises of any controlled
substances by any employee or agent of the
establishment;
b) Violation of any felony level statute pertaining to
sexual misconduct by any individual, with the consent
or knowledge of the owner, on any premises licensed
for on-sale consumption of liquor;
c) Conviction of a gross misdemeanor or felony level by
any pawn-shop owner or employee of possession of
stolen property; receiving stolen property; theft or
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
46
related crimes, criminal damage to property; or
conspiracy to commit any of the above;
d) Conviction of the crime of assault at a felony level of
any employee or agent of the business against any
patron, where the assault was committed in the scope
of the violator’s employment;
e) Conviction, at a felony level, of any agent of employee
of any business, of any crime involving the sale,
distribution or possession of controlled substances,
where such sale, distribution or possession was
carried out in direct connection with the business
being conducted on the premises;
f) Conviction of any agent or employee of the occupant,
at a gross misdemeanor or felony level, of any
criminal violation of laws pertaining to consumer
fraud, unfair trade practices, theft by swindle or trick,
false advertising, or other consumer protection
statute.
9-240.2 Environmental Violations. The occupant has introduced
any hazardous waste into the soil on or near the premises, under
circumstances in which the occupant has been found civilly liable
under any State or Federal environmental law for clean-up or cleanup
costs, or for which the occupant has been convicted of any
felony-level offense for such introduction.
9-240.3 Civil Judgments. The occupant has three or more
unsatisfied civil judgments arising out of civil lawsuits claiming fraud
or other intentional torts directly related to the business being
conducted on the premises.
9-300 SPECIAL ZONING MATTERS
9-310 Conditional Use Permits
A Conditional Use Permit is a permit issued after approval by the City
Council, which allows a particular parcel to be used for a purpose other
than a permitted use in a given zoning category. Additional provisions for
certain types of Conditional Use Permits are found in Article 9- 330 of this
code. The following specific terms and conditions shall apply to
Conditional Use Permits:
9-310.1 General Guidelines for Issuance No Conditional Use
Permit shall be issued unless the usage meets the criteria outlined
in Article 9-110. In addition, a Conditional Use Permit may be
denied if the City Council finds:
i) that the proposed usage is visually or otherwise
incompatible with adjoining pre-existing land uses; or
ii) that the proposed usage would create unsafe traffic
conditions; or
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
47
iii) that the proposed usage would result in noise, light
glare, vibrations, fumes or other environmental
conditions that would disturb adjoining pre-existing
land uses; or
iv) that the proposed usage would otherwise be harmful
to public health, safety or welfare.
9-310.2 Procedure for Issuance Application for a Conditional
Use Permit shall be made on forms prescribed by the Zoning
Officer, and shall be accompanied by such fees as the City Council
may from time to time require. The Zoning Officer may request
such additional information or data from the applicant as the Zoning
Officer deems appropriate, prior to scheduling a public hearing.
Once all submissions are complete, the Zoning Officer shall publish
notice in the manner provided by statute of a public hearing to be
held before the Planning Commission, which shall make
recommendations to the City Council after reviewing the application
and conducting the public hearing. The public hearing may be
continued or recessed in the discretion of the Planning
Commission. The City Council may attach such conditions to the
issuance of Conditional Use Permit as it deems appropriate. If the
application is denied, notice of the reasons for denial, including
specific findings of fact, shall be given in the manner provided by
law.
9-310.3 Renewal and Revocation
9-310.31 Duration A Conditional Use Permit shall be
issued for a period of one year.
9-310.32 Administrative Renewal A Conditional Use
Permit may be renewed by administrative action under the
following conditions:
a) City Staff shall keep a record of the expiration dates
of all Conditional Use Permits, and shall conduct an
annual inspection of the premises housing the
Conditional Use Permit to verify ongoing compliance
with the conditions of the Permit.
b) If the annual inspection discloses no ongoing
violations of the conditions of the Permit, the City
Administrator shall approve the renewal, and make a
notation in the Permit file as to such approval.
Subject to the provisions of Article 9-310.33, the City
Administrator may also approve a renewal where the
annual inspection reveals an ongoing violation of the
conditions of the Permit, if the violation is promptly
cured by the Permit holder.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
48
c) No renewal fee shall be charged for renewal by
administrative action.
9-310.33 Renewal by City Council Action Renewal of a
Conditional Use Permit by approval of the City Council, after
Planning Commission review, shall be required in the
following instances:
a) If the Permit holder requests a material change in the
conditions of the Permit; or
b) If the City staff has documented more than two
violations of the conditions of a Conditional Use
Permit within any given calendar year; or
c) If the City staff has documented a violation that
constituted an immediate threat to public health or
safety, requiring the imposition of additional
conditions to the permit to lessen the likelihood of a
repeat of the violation.
d) The holder of a Permit requiring renewal by City
Council action shall be required to reimburse the City
for any expense incurred in renewing the permit.
9-310.34 Revocation The City Council may, by resolution,
revoke a Conditional Use Permit if, after conducting a review
which affords reasonable due process of law to the permit
holder, the City Council finds:
a) That the conditions of the permit have been
repeatedly violated in the preceding twelve months,
and that there is a substantial likelihood that repeated
violations will continue to occur; or
b) That there is an ongoing violation of the permit that
has not been cured; or
c) That there are one or more conditions present at the
location covered by the Permit that presents an
ongoing threat to public health or safety.
9-320 Temporary Conditional Use Permits
A Temporary Conditional Use Permit is identical to a Conditional Use
Permit, and subject to all of the conditions and procedures outlined in
Article 9-310, with the following exceptions:
i) The Temporary Conditional Use Permit shall be issued for a
finite duration, after which the permit expires and the land
usage no longer authorized. There is no renewal of a
Temporary Conditional Use Permit.
ii) The City Council may, in its discretion, require annual review
of a Temporary Conditional Use Permit, and may, in the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
49
initial issuance of the permit, reserve the right to establish
additional conditions upon each annual review.
9-330 Conditions for Certain Types of Conditional Use Permits
The following types of land use shall be allowed by Conditional Use Permit
or Temporary Conditional Use Permit only, in the zoning districts in which
the specific use is so listed, but in addition to the provisions of Article 9-
310, the special provisions of this Article 9-330 shall also apply:
9-330.1 Motor Vehicle Salvage Yards A motor vehicle salvage
yard is a location in which inoperable motor vehicles are stored,
and their parts stripped for retail sales. As of the enactment date,
there are two motor vehicle salvage yards located in the City
(Certified Auto Recyclers and Jellison Auto Parts), which shall
continue to be governed by the provisions of the Ham Lake City
Code in effect prior to the enactment date, but which shall
nonetheless maintain compliance with the rules and regulations of
other jurisdictions having control over their activities, including,
without limitation, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
9-330.2 Theatres A Drive-in Movie Theatre is an outdoor venue in
which patrons watch movies projected on a permanent screen,
while seated in motor vehicles. Without limitation, the following
conditions shall be attached to any conditional use permit issued for
a Drive-in Movie Theatre:
i) All driveways, lanes, and surfaces on which motor vehicles
will travel or be parked shall be paved with bituminous or
concrete surfacing to the same standards as required for
other commercial properties;
ii) The viewing screen shall not be visible from any other
property;
iii) An annual maintenance bond or other security acceptable to
the City shall be maintained to guarantee the integrity of the
paved surfaces;
iv) Headlight glare from entering or exiting vehicles shall not be
visible from any other property excepting the actual points of
entrance/exit from a public road;
vi) The City shall impose additional conditions on a case-bycase
basis.
9-330.3 Sexually Oriented Businesses A sexually oriented
business is a business which derives ten percent or more of its
gross revenue from the sale or display of depictions of full or partial
human nudity, sexual acts or simulated sexual acts, conditions of
sexual excitement or other sexual gratification, including, without
limitation, establishments known by the common names of Adult
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
50
Bookstore, Adult Theatre, Massage Parlor, Rap Parlor, Sauna,
Adult Entertainment Center, Strip Joint, Strip Bar, Gentleman’s
Club, or the like. Nudity is the display of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple,
or the depicting of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state. Without limitation, the following minimum conditions shall be
required of or attached to any new conditional use permit for a
sexually oriented business.
i) Each such business shall be located as the sole
occupant of a freestanding building;
ii) No such location shall be nearer than 1,000 feet from
any other structure, nor nearer than 2,500 feet from
any school or church;
iii) Security cameras shall be installed so as to monitor
all locations within the business at all times;
iv) No such establishment shall be eligible for any type of
liquor, beer, malt liquor or wine license;
v) No private booths or viewing rooms shall be
permitted; excepting a single private business office,
the areas of all rooms shall at all times be visible from
the outside, either through glass windows or through
open construction;
vi) In any setting involving live entertainment, no
obscene acts shall be permitted. Obscene acts are:
a) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation
of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in
the context of a sexual relationship, or the use
of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexuallyoriented
acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism,
sapphism, zooerasty; or
b) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state or
sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or
c) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy,
oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
d) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or
e) Situations involving a person or persons, any
of whom are nude, clad in undergarments, or in
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
51
sexually revealing costumes, and who are
engaged in activities involving the flagellation,
torture, fettering, binding, or other physical
restraining of any such persons; or
f) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a
human being; or
g) Human excretion, urination, menstruation,
vaginal or anal irrigation.
vii) The City shall impose additional conditions on a caseby-
case basis.
9-330.4 Farm Wineries A Farm Winery is a business licensed by
the State of Minnesota under the provision of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A.315 to produce table, sparkling or fortified wines. All
of the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A. 315
pertaining to Farm Wineries are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to this Code, whether or not stated herein.
Conditional Use Permits may be issued to Farm Wineries in the
same manner and under the same procedures as for other
Conditional Use Permits, but subject to the following conditions.
A. Statutory Conditions It shall be a mandatory condition
of any Conditional Use Permit issued for a Farm Winery that
the party holding the permit at all times maintains a Farm
Winery License issued by the State of Minnesota. The
license shall be prominently displayed at a location where
wine is sold on sale or off sale. The licensee shall also
furnish evidence of current licensure and liquor liability
insurance to the City Administrator at least once each year,
at the time the state Farm Winery License is renewed. The
party holding the permit shall also at all times maintain
compliance with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A.315.
B. Social Events Social Events include weddings,
seminars, craft shows, farmers markets, parties and other
organized gatherings of people for a specific purpose, as
opposed to random visits by members of the public. The
following regulations shall apply to all Social Events:
1) If the Social Event will extend after sunset, the
grounds will be adequately illuminated to promote guest
safety.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
52
2) Adequate bathrooms will be provided to serve the
anticipated crowd.
3) No more than 250 guests shall be permitted in
attendance at any one time.
4) Shelter and seating will be provided as needed, and
may be in the form of tents and folding chairs.
5) Parking may be on grass surfaces, but shall be
arranged in orderly rows and lanes.
6) If food other than commercially packaged snacks is
served, all applicable conditions of the State and County
Health Departments shall be observed, regardless of
whether the food is prepared on site or furnished by a
caterer.
7) The rules and regulations of all units of government
pertaining to activities carried on at the Social Event shall
be observed at all times.
C. General On-Sale, Off-Sale and Wine Tasting
All sales of wine by the glass (on-sale) and all wine tasting
outside of a Social Event shall be conducted in a building
used for that purpose. The structure shall observe all fire
codes and building codes, contain at least one indoor
permanent bathroom, and have adequate paved parking to
accommodate the customer base. Sales of wine by bottles
(off-Sale) shall occur in the same structure, and the
premises shall be adequately secured to inhibit burglary or
theft.
D. Reservation of Rights by City
The City may impose additional requirements for any
individual Social Event or for the conditional use permit in
general, and each permit shall also provide that the City may
alter the conditions from time to time as needed.
9-330.5 Therapeutic Massage Therapeutic Massage means the
practice of administering physical therapy through the massaging,
rubbing, kneading or other manipulations of the body, administered
solely for therapeutic purposes. Chiropractic medicine is not
Therapeutic Massage. Massage which results in or is intended to
result in the sexual gratification of the recipient is not Therapeutic
Massage.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
53
9-330.51 Massage Therapist A Massage Therapist is a
person engaging in the practice of Therapeutic Massage and
who meets one or more of the following qualifications:
a) The person has passed the examination given by the
National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage &
Bodywork (NCBTMB) and maintains current certification
by said board; or
b) The person has passed the MBLEx examination given
by the Federation of State Massage Therapy Boards and
maintains current certification by said federation; or
c) The person is a Professional Member (or equivalent)
in good standing in the American Massage Therapy
Association (AMTA); or
d) The person is a Professional Member (or equivalent)
in good standing in the Associated Bodywork and
Massage Professionals (ABMP).
9-330.52 Minimum Conditions for Certain Permits
Without limitation, the following minimum conditions shall be
required of or attached to any Conditional Use Permit or
Temporary Conditional Use Permit issued for Therapeutic
Massage:
a) No person shall engage in Therapeutic Massage who
is not a Massage Therapist;
b) In residential areas, no signage shall be permitted;
c) Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 am to
10:00 pm;
d) The premises shall be available for random inspection
by City agents at all times, without notice;
e) If the holder of a Conditional Use Permit or
Temporary Conditional Use Permit to engage in
Therapeutic Massage, or if any agent, employee,
subcontractor, independent contractor, joint venture,
partner or other associate of the permit holder is convicted
of the crime of prostitution or soliciting a prostitute, such
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
54
conviction shall be grounds for the City to revoke the
permit.
f) The permit holder shall at all times maintain a
complete listing of all persons engaged by the permit
holder as Massage Therapists and shall on request of City
staff furnish evidence that each such person meets the
qualifications to be a Massage Therapist.
9-330.6 Legal Fireworks Legal Fireworks shall refer to that term
as defined in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 624.20. Subject to the
conditions below, the provisions of National Fire Protection
Association (“NFPA”) Standard 1124 (2003 Edition) shall control
the sales of Legal Fireworks in the City. Actual “display” of Legal
Fireworks shall be in conformance with NFPA 1124.
A. License Required
A license must be obtained from the City prior to engaging in
the sale of any Legal Fireworks. Applications shall be made
on forms prepared by the City Administrator, and shall
require the submission of a site plan meeting the same
standards as for other site plans submitted for commercial
building sites. The annual fee for issuance of a permit shall
be the maximum fee permitted by Minnesota Statutes.
Licenses shall be issued on approval of the City Council,
after site plan review by the Planning Commission.
B. Zoning Districts
Legal Fireworks may be sold only in the CD-1 and CD-2
Zoning Districts.
C. Sales Locations
Legal Fireworks may be sold only from permanent structures
meeting the conditions of NFPA 1124 7.4.1 (1), or from
temporary, tent-like structures meeting the conditions of
NFPA 1124 7.4.1 (2).
D. Sales from Temporary Structures
1) Licenses issued for temporary structures shall run
from June 15 through July 6 of each year, and hours of
operation for temporary structures shall be from 9:00 am
to 9:00 pm.
2) No temporary structure shall be located at a distance
closer than fifty feet from any other temporary structure
licensed to sell Legal Fireworks.
3) All inventory at temporary structure facilities shall be
removed from the sales location outside of business
hours, to a safe and secure location outside of any
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
55
residentially zoned district (or to a location outside of the
City of Ham Lake).
4) At no time shall there be present at the location of a
temporary structure more than 1200 pounds of product,
containing no more than 300 pounds of pyrotechnic
composition.
5) Signage for temporary structures shall be a part of the
site plan approval, and shall be erected only during the
license duration period.
6) Temporary structures shall be located on bituminous
or concrete surfaces, and have bituminous or concrete
parking area immediately contiguous to the structure,
connected to the structure by bituminous or concrete
walkway or walkways. The licensee shall provide two
parking stalls and sufficient driveway area for every 100
square feet under cover in the temporary structure, plus
one additional parking stall and sufficient driveway area
for each employee who will be engaged on the same
work shift.
7) Temporary structures using the parking lot of an
existing business shall meet the parking and driveway
requirement without utilizing any of the minimum required
parking and driveway requirement for the existing
business.
E. Severability
A finding by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction that any
portion of this ordinance is unenforceable shall affect only
the portion so found, and the remainder hereof shall remain
in full force and effect.
F. Renewal LicensesA license for renewal of a license for
fireworks sales may be summarily issued by the City
Administrator without Planning Commission or City Council
review if the site for which the license is sought has been
previously issued a license, and the new application does
not present any significant changes in the scope of the
previous license, and under conditions in which activities
under the previous license did not generate any significant
complaints or verified allegations of violations of the
conditions of the previous license.
9-330.7 Temporary Commercial Structures Following review of
a site plan and building code compliance by the city staff, the City’s
Building Official may issue a permit for a Temporary Commercial
Structure (“TCS”) under and subject to the following conditions.
A. Definitions
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
56
1) Temporary Commercial Structures (“TCS”) are
shelters having walls or partial walls and a roof, constructed
of fabric, wood, plastic, glass or metal, or combinations
thereof, which have no permanent foundation and are
intended for temporary usage in connection with
merchandise sales or sponsored activities of a permanent
business. A portable toilet is not a TCS. For the purpose of
this code, the following shall not be considered to be TCS,
and shall not be allowed to be used as a TCS: mobile
homes, travel trailers, motor homes, semi-trailers or any
other conveyance designed for or capable of traveling, by
self-propulsion or trailering on public roadways. This Article
specifically also does not pertain to Legal Fireworks, the sale
and display of which is exclusively governed by Article 9-
330.6.
2) Parent Business is the permanent business located on
the same real estate parcel, or on a real estate parcel
adjoining the real estate parcel upon which the TCS is
proposed to be located.
3) Permit is a permit which may cover up to three separate
events using a TCS.
B. Zoning Districts TCS may be located only in districts
zoned CD-1, CD-2, CD-3 or CD-4.
C. Relationship to Business A TCS may be used only in
connection with a Parent Business located on the same
or a contiguous real estate parcel.
D. Locations A TCS may be located on any area of the
parcel upon which a permanent structure could be legally
constructed, but may not be located over any portion of
an existing individual sewage treatment system or well.
E. Parking and Accessibility The site plan submitted in
connection with the TCS shall demonstrate the following:
1) That there is adequate space for parking on
bituminous or concrete surfaces for all customers and
employees expected in attendance;
2) That the proposed activity will not create any traffic
hazards on nearby roadways due to stacking, congestion
or turning movements;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
57
F. Duration The following timing conditions shall be
applicable to TCS:
1) The TCS may be used for up to six weeks in any given
calendar year. This period may be divided into up to
three separate usages, each of which usage must be
separated by at least thirty days’ duration.
2) No activities involving the general public shall take
place at the TCS during hours in which the Parent
Business is not open for regular business.
G. Physical Features The height, dimensions, structural
components, and any electrical, gas, or plumbing
features for each TCS shall meet the provisions of all
state, county, municipal or federal codes, including,
without limitation, the International Building Code, fire
codes, electrical code and plumbing code. All signage
must meet the City’s sign codes, including temporary
signs.
9-330.8 Seasonal Temporary Conditional Uses
A Seasonal Temporary Conditional Use is an activity of no more
than forty-five days’ duration, involving invitees to a specific
location, which is not being promoted primarily for commercial
exploitation, but which has as its primary function a civic,
recreational, celebratory, educational or charitable purpose. Such
activities include, without limitation, athletic tournaments, harvest
festivals, spring, summer, fall or winter festivals, or the like. A
Seasonal Temporary Conditional Use Permit may be issued after
approval by the City Council, upon review and recommendation of
the Planning Commission. The City Council may establish any
reasonable condition to the issuance of such a permit. The City
Council may require a public hearing to be conducted by the
Planning Commission prior to acting on such a permit, but may also
direct that the permit be annually reviewed and re-approved by City
Staff if no complaints are received regarding the activity.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the provisions of
the foregoing paragraph overlap or come into conflict with other
portions of the Ham Lake City Code regarding certain activities,
including, without limitation, Large Assemblies, Field Parties or the
use of Temporary Commercial Structures, the usage of this Article
9-330.8 is to be deemed entirely discretionary by the City Council,
and the City Council is entitled to decline to use this Article in favor
of more restrictive regulatory provisions found elsewhere in the City
Code.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
58
To be eligible for a Seasonal Temporary Conditional Uses by
Permit the parcel of land on which it is proposed must contain at
least 20 contiguous acres, and be located in an area zoned R-A or
GF.
9-330.9 Raising of Pigeons
A. Definitions
1) “Pigeon” means a member of the family Columbidae,
and consists of birds known as “Racing Pigeons”,
“Fancy Pigeons” and “Sporting Pigeons” as those terms
are commonly known and used in the pigeon raising
community.
2) “Recognized Pigeon Association” means the
International Federation of Raging Pigeon Fanciers, the
American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., the National
Pigeon Club, the American Pigeon Club, the Rare Breeds
Pigeon Club, the American Tippler Society, and the
International Roller Association.
3) “Loft” means a structure especially built for the
housing of pigeons.
B. Conditions
The following conditions shall be observed by every person
granted a conditional use permit to keep, breed and raise
pigeons.
1) Location. All pigeons shall be kept in a Loft
containing at least 50 square feet of floor area. If the Loft
contains more than 120 feet of floor area, the structure
shall be deemed an Accessory Building and subject to
the provision of Article 9-370. A Loft shall not be
considered a Farm Building.
2) Construction Standards. The Loft shall be
constructed as a wood frame building, of sufficient height
and other security measures to discourage invasion by
predatory animals. The property owner shall not be
required to obtain a building permit for the Loft, but plans
for the Loft shall be submitted at the time of application
for Conditional Use Permit. The Loft shall provide
adequate shelter from the elements, and meet any
standards recommended by a Recognized Pigeon
Association.
3) Population Limitations. No more than 32 pigeons
may be kept on any parcel of land. Pigeons that are 28
days old or younger shall not be counted against this
limit.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
59
4) Noise. The permit holder shall take adequate steps
to insure that noise from the pigeons are not audible to
nearby properties.
5) Personal Hobby Use Only. Pigeons kept in any
district but the R-A districts shall be for the personal
hobby use of the permit holder, and the activity shall not
be operated as any kind of a mercantile venture in areas
zoned other than R-A.
6) Sanitation. All animal waste shall be removed and
properly disposed of in a manner that promotes general
health and safety, and all feed shall be stored inside the
Loft, safe from invasion by vermin or disease-promoting
forces. All feeding activities shall be carried on within the
Loft.
7) Confinement. Except when involved in exercise,
competition or training activities under the supervision of
the permit holder, pigeons shall be confined to the Loft,
and shall not be permitted to perch or linger on the
property of others. Pigeons that have been fed within the
previous four hours shall not be released from the Loft.
8) Banding and Registration. All pigeons that are six
months old or older shall be banded and registered with
at Recognized Pigeon Association.
9) Screening. All lofts shall be placed in locations
where they are screened by buildings, fences or
coniferous vegetation from view from adjoining
properties.
C. Annual Inspection. All facilities shall be subject to an
annual inspection by the City. The City may, at the
discretion of its staff, delegate the inspection to a
Recognized Pigeon Association. The permit holder shall
comply with all requirements imposed by any inspection. All
costs of inspection shall be the responsibility of the permit
holder.
D. General Nuisance. The permit holder shall conduct all
activities in connection with the keeping and raising of
pigeons in a manner that avoids the creation of public or
private nuisances, and to this end, and without limitation, the
activities shall be conducted so as to eliminate from outside
the Loft all odor, noise, vibrations, attraction of rodents,
vermin or predatory animals, attractive nuisance, eyesores
or other aesthetic detractions from neighborhood
appearance, traffic or accumulation of debris or waste.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
60
9-340 Restrictions for Specific Activities
The following restrictions shall apply to the activities noted below, in all
zoning districts within the City.
9-340.1 Aviation Aircraft which are required to be registered with
either the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Minnesota
Department of Aeronautics, or for which a pilot’s license of any kind
is required, shall not be permitted to land or to take off except within
the boundaries of an airport or heliport operated under the
ownership and auspices of the Minnesota Department of
Aeronautics or other public body, unless under one of the
exemptions listed below. Military aircraft, ambulance aircraft, or
aircraft operated by any public agency are exempt from this
prohibition. Aircraft for which no registration is required, and for
which no pilot’s license is required, such as ultra-lites, shall not be
operated within 500 feet of any structure. Specific landing and/or
takeoff exemptions also include:
a) landing is permitted in a bona fide emergency;
b) landing and taking off are permitted if in conjunction with a
civic event whether publicly or privately sponsored, under
the following conditions:
i) helicopter rides are being offered free or for a fee by a
licensed pilot in a registered helicopter, in conformance
with the rules and regulations of all agencies having
jurisdiction over the activities of helicopters; and
ii) the event is sponsored by a non-profit corporation
formed specifically for the purpose of sponsoring the
event; and
iii) the event lasts no more than three days in total
length; and
iv) no more than two such events occur within the City in
a given calendar year; once two such events have
occurred involving helicopter takeoffs or landings, no more
helicopter takeoffs and landings are permitted in the City
during the remainder of the calendar year; and
v) takeoffs and landings occur at a location that is
separated by at least 500 feet from any occupied building;
and
vi) at least 60 days prior to any such takeoffs or landings,
the sponsor of the event shall have notified the City
Administrator, in writing, of the intention to sponsor
helicopter rides, including the dates and times of day,
which notification shall include written verification by
representatives of the Federal Aviation Administration and
the Minnesota Department of Aeronautics that the
proposed activity and licensure of actual aircraft and pilot
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
61
to be used is in conformance with their rules and
regulations; and
vii) no takeoffs or landings occur prior to 10:00 am or
after sunset on any given day.
9-340.2 Manufactured Mobile Homes Manufactured Mobile
Homes (as defined by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 327.31, sub. 6)
shall not be permitted to be stored or occupied in any area other
than in an area zoned R-M, except as follows:
i) A Manufactured Mobile Home may be used as an office in a
mobile home sales lot which is legally being operated in an
appropriate zoning district;
ii) A Manufactured Mobile Home may be used as a temporary
dwelling in areas zoned for residential purposes, for a period of
up to 180 days, under circumstances in which a previously
existing dwelling unit on the lot has been destroyed or severely
damaged by casualty;
iii) A Manufactured Mobile Home may be used as a temporary
office in any bona fide construction project, for a period of up to
one year;
iv) Usage of any Manufactured Mobile Home in the manners
described in sub-paragraphs i), ii) and iii) above shall not be
permitted without the advance consent of the City Council,
which may establish additional conditions for such usages.
9-340.3 Recreational Vehicles (“RV”s)
A Recreational Vehicle is either a self-propelled motor vehicle or a
trailer which contains living quarters that include kitchen, bathroom
and bedroom features, and which contain facilities to provide heat,
running water, electricity and waste disposal. RV’s may not be
used for human overnight occupancy except in the following
circumstances:
a. In a bona fide commercial campground;
b. As a guest facility or children’s activity for a time period not
exceeding seven days per year;
c. If the RV contains at least 200 square feet of living area, is at
least 30 feet in length, is fully operational, has a sewage
disposal system capable of tying into an ISTS or being
transported to an approved RV sewage disposal site and
has no visible signs of rust, faded or peeling paint or body
damage, an RV may be used in lieu of a Manufactured
Mobile Home for temporary occupancy under the
circumstances and conditions described in Article 9-340.2 (ii)
and (iv)of the Ham Lake City Code.
9-350 Home Occupation Permits
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
62
A Home Occupation is a for-profit enterprise carried on in a
residential dwelling, under circumstances in which there is no
outward indication of the existence of the enterprise visible or
otherwise detectable from outside the premises, and which
otherwise meets the criteria specified below. A Home Occupation
permit may be issued by the City Council after review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission, and subject to any
conditions imposed by the City Council. A Home Occupation
permit may be revoked by the City Council, after affording due
process of law to the applicant, if the conditions of issuance or any
other ordinance feature are violated.
9-350.1 Criteria The following criteria must be observed for any
usage to qualify for a Home Occupation Permit.
a) Incidental Usage The usage must be clearly
incidental and subservient to the usage of the premises as a
dwelling, and may not occupy a significant portion of the
dwelling unit living space;
b) Indoors All activities must be carried on indoors. No
outside storage, except the parking of motor vehicles, shall
be permitted;
c) Parking No on-street parking shall be generated,
and no more than a total of four passenger motor vehicles
may be parked at the premises in conjunction with the
occupation, including employee and customer parking. All
parking shall be on paved surfaces;
d) Employees No more than one employee who does
not live at the residence shall be permitted;
e) Traffic The activity may not generate any traffic in
excess of that normally generated by a residential dwelling
unit;
f) Nuisance and Compliance The usage shall not
generate any nuisance, and the landowner shall at all times
be compliant with all other municipal codes, and the
regulations of all other jurisdictions;
9-350.2 Annual Review All Home Occupation permits shall be
reviewed annually by the City Staff, and shall automatically be
renewed unless complaints have been received, in which case the
permit shall be re-submitted to the Planning Commission for review
and recommendation to the City Council.
9-350.3 Special Home Occupation Permits A party desiring to
conduct a Home Occupation in a Garage or Accessory Building
under conditions meeting the remaining requirements of Article 9-
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
63
350 may apply for a Special Home Occupation Permit under the
following procedure:
a) The applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to scale
showing the locations and dimensions of all buildings and
driveways on the premises, and identifying the location
where the Home Occupation activity will take place.
b) The applicant shall submit a narrative in sufficient
detail to describe all aspects of the activity to be
conducted and the locations of all such activity.
c) The Planning Commission shall conduct a Public
Hearing on the proposed application, with mailed notice to
all resident whose property lines come within 750 feet of
the property lines of the applicant’s lot, and published
notice at least ten days prior to the hearing.
d) Following the Public Hearing, the Planning
Commission shall make recommendations to the City
Council, including such conditions as are deemed
appropriate.
Notwithstanding any provision in Article 9-350.1 (a) to the contrary,
a Special Home Occupation shall be mainly confined to the Garage
or Accessory Building. A Special Home Occupation Permit shall be
subject to the same provisions for revocation as Home Occupation
Permits. In addition, notwithstanding any provision in Article 9-
350.1 to the contrary, a Special Home Occupation may include
uses that are normally not found in residential dwellings, as long as
there are no obvious outward indicia of the activities being carried
on under the Special Home Occupation Permit, no noise
generated which is audible to nearby properties, no odor or
vibration generated that is detectable to nearby properties, no
outside storage which is visible from nearby properties or public
ways and no customer traffic.
Special Home Occupations may involve up to one commercial
delivery/pickup by outside delivery service van (such as UPS or
Federal Express) or postal vehicle per day. Deliveries of goods
produced at the site may be limited in scope and frequency by the
approval process, including specifying the type of delivery vehicles
that can be used, and including prohibition on commercial logos
being displayed on delivery vehicles.
9-360 Variances
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
64
The City Council upon appeal or upon direct request made under this
Code shall have the power to authorize variances from the requirements
of this Code, and to attach such conditions to the variance as it deems
necessary to assure compliance with the purpose of this Code. A
variance may be permitted if the following requirements are met:
a) The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Code and is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
b) There are practical difficulties in complying with the Code, meaning
that:
i) The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner that is otherwise not permitted by the Code; and
ii) The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner; and
iii) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
Variances may not be granted to permit a land use that is not a permitted,
conditional or temporary conditional use in the particular zoning district.
The provision of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462.357 Subd. 6 (2) relating
to solar energy and temporary two-family dwellings shall also be
observed. Economic conditions alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.
9-370 Accessory Buildings and Farm Buildings
An Accessory Building is any structure located or proposed to be located
in any Residential Land Use in the R-1, R-A and PUD zoning districts,
which is not the dwelling unit, and which is not a garage, which is not a
Farm Building, and which has a floor size of more than 200 square feet. A
building or structure meeting the above definition except for the size, is a
yard shed. A Farm Building is a structure located in an R-A District which
is used for bona fide agricultural purposes, including farm machinery
storage, crop storage or housing livestock, poultry or horses.
A single Accessory Building and a single yard shed may be constructed
on a Residential Land Use lot which is one (1) acre or less in the R-1, R-A
and PUD zoning districts, under the conditions outlined below. It is the
intention of this code that for Residential Land Uses in the R-1 and PUD
districts, for lots which are one (1) acre or less, there shall be a maximum
of four structures allowed on a given lot: a dwelling unit; a garage
(attached or detached with a maximum size of 3000 square feet); an
Accessory Building (freestanding); and a yard shed (under 200 square
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
65
feet). If a garage was originally attached to a dwelling unit, and has since
been converted to become living space in the dwelling unit, then that
portion so used shall no longer be deemed a garage.
Up to two Accessory Buildings and a single yard shed may be constructed
on a Residential Land Use lot which is more than (1) acre and less than
ten (10) acres in the R-1, R-A and PUD zoning districts, under the
conditions outlined below. One Accessory Building may be located in and
meet the “Front Yard Setback” size and location requirements, and one
Accessory Building may be located in and meet the “Side or Rear Yard”
size and location requirements outlined below; or, two Accessory buildings
may be located within the Side or Rear Yard, and subject to the sizes
shown in the table under Article 9-370.1, Size Limitations. It is the
intention of this code that for Residential Land Uses in the R-1 and PUD
districts, for lots which are more than one (1) acre and less than ten (10)
acres, there shall be a maximum of five structures allowed on a given lot:
a dwelling unit; a garage (attached or detached with a maximum size of
3000 square feet); two Accessory Buildings (freestanding); and a yard
shed (under 200 square feet).
Provided, that for lots in the R-1, R-A, and PUD districts which are 10
acres or more in size, deviation from these standards may be permitted in
the discretion of the City Council on a case-by-case basis.
9-370.1 Size Limitations An Accessory Building shall be no more
than one story in height, and the following size limitations shall
apply to Accessory Buildings:
Lot size
Maximum Accessory Building Size*
Front Yard
Setback**
Side or Rear Yard Setback***
One acre or less 676 sq. ft. 1000 sq. ft.
1+ acre to 2.5 acres**** 720 sq. ft. 1500 sq. ft.
2.5+ acres to 5 acres 800 sq. ft. 2400 sq. ft. unless approved by City Council
5+ acres to 10 acres 1200 sq. ft. 3000 sq. ft. unless approved by City Council
10+ acres 5000 sq. ft. unless approved by City Council
* Sizes shown are the maximum allowable square feet at foundation level.
** The “Front Yard Setback” is the area between the front of the dwelling
unit (primary residential structure) and the street right of way. For all lot
sizes, Accessory Buildings constructed in this area must also be
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
66
constructed with the building materials outlined below and be
architecturally compatible with the dwelling unit
*** The “Side or Rear Yard Setback” is the area that lies away from the
road right of way and behind the front yard setback.
**** For lots greater than one acre and up to 2.5 acres, the size limits
shown may be combined to allow one Accessory Building in the Side or
Rear Yard Setback up to 2250 square feet, and with no additional
Accessory Building existing or allowed in the Front Yard Setback.
9-370.2 Building Materials For lots which are 5 acres or less in
size, the outside surface materials of all Accessory Buildings shall,
as closely as practical, match the color, texture and style of the like
surfaces on the dwelling unit. For lots which are more than 5 acres
in size, all Accessory Buildings in the Front Yard Setback shall
match the dwelling unit as outlined above. Pole-type construction
shall be permitted only on lots exceeding 5 acres and only in the
Side or Rear Yard Setback.
9-370.3 Height Restriction For lots which are less than 5 acres in
size, the maximum height of an Accessory Building shall be equal
to the height of the dwelling unit, or 25 feet, whichever is less.
9-370.4 Setbacks and Building Codes The locations and
building standards for Accessory Buildings and yard sheds shall be
as found in setback standards and the building code for other
structures, except that the rear yard setback for Accessory
Buildings shall be ten feet.
9-370.6 Submittal Requirements In addition to building plans,
The Zoning Officer may require the submission of a scaled site
plan, rendering or pictorial representations, and other data deemed
necessary by the Zoning Officer.
9-370.7 Usage Accessory Buildings and yard sheds shall be used
only for purposes related to the residential use of the parcel, and
shall not be used for the conducting of any business or the storage
of any business-related property, such as business equipment,
business inventory or business supplies.
9-370.8 Farm Buildings A Farm Building is a structure located on
land zoned R-A, which is not a dwelling unit. No Farm Building
may be constructed at a distance closer than 100 feet from any lot
line.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
67
9-380 Repealed and deleted May 16, 2016 per Ordinance 16-04.
9-390 Opt-Out of Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings
Requirements
Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593,
subdivision 9, the City of Ham Lake opts-out of the requirements of Minn.
Stat. §462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health
Care Dwellings. This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its
passage and publication.
9-400 Establishment of Commercial/Industrial Planned Unit Development
Overlay District (“CPOD”)
A. Establishment of CPOD District. There is hereby established a
CPOD District. All parcels in the City of Ham Lake that have a zoning
classification of CD-1 or CD-2, and that lie within one mile of the rightof-
way of TH 65 shall be subject to this classification. The present
zoning category of CD-1 or CD-2 shall not change, but the City
Council may, by ordinance, “overlay” certain selected parcels with the
CPOD classification. When so done, such parcels shall remain
subject to all of the requirements of the CD-1 or CD-2 District, but
shall also be subject to the requirements of the CPOD overlay district.
If any of the provisions of the CPOD district conflict with the
provisions of the CD-1 or CD-1 districts, the provisions for the CPOD
district shall supersede the provisions for the CD-1 and CD-2 districts.
B. Preliminary Submission Requirements. The proponent of any
proposed land use with a CPOD shall submit to the City an
application for preliminary review (the “Preliminary Site Plan”)
containing a sketch prepared by a registered land surveyor, engineer
or architect at a scale capable of displaying the entire proposed
development on a sheet that is 36 inches wide by 24 inches high,
displaying the perimeter of the parcel to be developed, along with a
footprint of all structures, driveways, parking areas and other areas of
impervious surface to be created, along with a narrative that
describes the nature of the proposed land uses. If the structures are
to be used for rental to unknown tenants, the general nature of the
businesses anticipated for tenancies shall be described in sufficient
detail to enable the City to apply motor vehicle trip generation
statistics to make a preliminary estimate of traffic to be generated by
the proposal. The site plan shall also display topographic contours at
intervals of four feet or less.
C. Review Deposit and Agreement. The Preliminary Site plan shall be
accompanied by a cash deposit of $5,000.00 to defray municipal
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
68
review costs, and the applicant shall execute the City’s contract
agreeing to reimburse the City for any additional costs in reviewing or
processing the application. Any portion of the deposit or any future
deposit not actually used for municipal review costs shall be refunded
to the applicant at the time of final disposition of the application.
D. “60-Day Rule” and Subdivision Approval Requirements. In that
Minnesota Statutes Chapters 15.99 and 462.358 impose certain
mandatory review deadlines for zoning and subdivision decisions, it
shall be the policy of the City to process requests received under this
portion of the code as rapidly as possible. However, due to the fact
that some requirements of the applicant cannot possibly be known
until after the City Council has made its listing of requirements under
Article 9-423, it is the applicant’s responsibility to anticipate and to
plan for the preparation of some or all of the items (in particular the
EAW, traffic study and noise study) that may be required by the City
Council. Failure of the applicant to submit such items in time to
enable the City to comply with the decisions required under the
aforementioned statutes shall be grounds for the City to deny the
request by reason of untimely submission of needed data.
PART I. Vacant Land Development
The following provisions shall apply exclusively to requests for subdivision,
site plan or building permits sought for lands which at the time of
application, do not contain any existing structures.
9-410 Parcels Requiring a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
Submission
The Preliminary Site Plan shall be reviewed by City Staff and such
consultants as the City Staff shall choose to engage, and a decision made
by staff within 15 business days after submission of the application. Any
proposal that meets one or more of the following criteria shall be required
to submit the proposal as a PUD, under Article 9-420 below.
a) A project that will generate 1,440 or more one-way daily motor vehicle
trips;
b) A project that will create 11,000 square feet or more of impervious
drainage surfaces;
c) A project abutting residentially zoned land;
d) A project abutting any park;
e) A project containing or abutting any parcel of record containing lands
deemed by City staff to contain or likely to contain designated
wetlands;
If a project is found by City staff not to meet any of the above criteria, the
proposal shall be processed and proceed in the same manner as other
proposals in the CD-1 and CD-2 zoning districts. If a project does meet
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
69
any of the above criteria, then the project shall be deemed to require the
creation of permanent divisions of land areas (tracts) reserved for public
road rights of way, drainage features, or buffer areas, and shall therefore
be deemed to be subdivisions of land within the meaning of Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 462.358, in that the project will require the separation of
the main parcel into two or more tracts.
9-420 PUD Procedural Requirements
Once a project has been determined by City Staff to require a PUD
submission, the applicant shall be notified in writing, and shall be required
to proceed under the following provisions.
9-421 Platting Required
The area within the perimeter of the proposed development shall be
submitted as a plat under Article 10 of the City Code. The applicant
shall submit a sketch plan of the plat, showing the locations of all
areas to be designated as separate tracts to house drainage
easements, utility easements, roadway easements and the
residential setback and buffer easement required under any portion
of the Ham Lake City Code.
9-422 Site Plan
At the time of submission of the plat, the applicant shall also submit
a detailed site plan of the proposed development that displays, at a
scale designated by the City’s engineer, the following information:
i. The location of all structures to be constructed;
ii. The locations of all parking areas and drives;
iii. The location of an ISTS;
iv. The location of all loading docks or other delivery areas;
v. The location of all exterior lighting facilities;
vi. A landscaping plan;
vii. The location of all drainage holding ponds and desiltation
ponds;
viii. Proposed provisions for screening where the project
abuts residential property or parks;
ix. The locations of all trash receptacle areas;
x. The locations of all security or other fencing, including
height and materials to be used;
9-423 Preliminary Review
The Site Plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
City Council at the same time that the sketch plan for the plat is
reviewed. After recommendations from the Planning Commission,
the City Council shall adopt a list of requirements, supported by
written findings of fact that address the following:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
70
a) The need for dedication of any public roads, drainage
easements, scenic easements, utility easements or other
public dedications not already shown on the sketch plan;
b) The need for a detailed traffic study to determine the impact
of the proposal on nearby roadways and signalized
intersections;
c) The need for any buffering or screening measures from
nearby residential areas that are in addition to those
proposed by the original Site Plan;
d) The need for any noise studies;
e) The need for the acquisition of any public right of way or
easements of any kind outside of the perimeter of the
proposed development, and as to such needs, whether or
not the acquisition would be considered in furtherance of a
public purpose;
f) The need for an Environmental Assessment Worksheet;
g) The need for any other additional data or detail deemed
necessary for proper final review of the project.
9-424 Public Hearing
At the time that the Public Hearing for Preliminary Plat approval is
conducted, the Planning Commission shall simultaneously hold a
public hearing on the Site Plan. However, no public hearing shall
be scheduled until the City has received all of the information
required under Article 9-423.
9-425 Decision
Within the time required by law, the City Council shall make a
decision on approval or denial of the Site Plan. The approval of the
Site Plan shall be deemed to be an approval of the Preliminary Plat,
although separate additional conditions may be attached to
approval of the Preliminary Plat. Disapproval of the Site Plan shall
be deemed a disapproval of the Preliminary Plat, although separate
conditions may be cited for the disapproval of the Preliminary Plat.
If approved, the conditions of approval shall be stated in the motion
granting the approval.
9-430 Development Agreement
Within 30 days after approval of the Preliminary Plat, the City shall
prepare and submit to the applicant a Development Agreement for the
project. The Development Agreement shall set forth the conditions that
the applicant must meet, as expressed in the approval motion under
Article 9-425. Those conditions may include, without limitation, the
following:
A. Drainage Features
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
71
Construction by the applicant of drainage facilities, including ditches,
pipes, culverts, swales, holding ponds and desiltation ponds on or off
of the site;
B. Traffic Controls
Construction by the applicant of turn lanes on public roads or
highways, and/or contribution to the cost of intersection improvements,
including signalization, at entrances to the site or at nearby
intersections of public roads;
C. Sewer Connectivity
Design of connections to an ISTS that are readily convertible to
reconnection to a public or private common sewer system at such time
as such a system is ever constructed, along with an assessment
agreement in which the applicant and successors in title agree not to
contest special assessments (levied under Minnesota Statutes Chapter
429) in a sum certain, to go toward the cost of any public sewer system
that may be constructed within five years of the date of the
Development Agreement.
D. Reimbursement for Eminent Domain Proceedings
If acquisition of land or easements is found to be in furtherance of a
public purpose, an agreement to contribute a reasonable sum to
reimburse the City for the costs of eminent domain proceedings
necessary to advance such purposes.
E. Buffering and Screening
Construction by the applicant of adequate buffering or screening
devices designed to shield and protect adjacent residentially zoned
properties from noise, light intrusion from the development, and from
visibility to the development.
F. Tree Preservation
A tree preservation plan designed to conserve existing forests or trees
not being removed for the project, and designed to prevent tree
disease.
G. Wetland and Habitat Protection
Construction of physical features or employment of construction
techniques designed to prevent or minimize harm to wildlife habitat or
adverse impacts upon wetlands on or off the site.
H. Groundwater
Construction of ISTS and ponding in a manner that does not threaten
the elevation of groundwater and that does not threaten to contaminate
groundwater.
I. Pedestrian Traffic
Construction of trails or paths to enhance pedestrian access through or
into the proposed site.
J. Accommodation of Future Development
Construction, dedication or reservation of land areas that are needed
to accommodate roads, drainage, utility easements or other features of
anticipated future development of adjacent lands.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
72
K. Aesthetics and Landscaping
Construction designs and landscaping features designed to make the
development preserve property values on adjacent properties.
The Development Agreement may also require the posting of security in the
manner provided by City policy to insure the timely and proper implementation of
any of the foregoing elements.
PART II. Redevelopment or Remodeling of Existing Lands or Structures
9-440 Replatting or Redevelopment
Projects within a CPOD that require replatting of existing platted lands, or
that require building permit issuance on any parcel of land that contain a
pre-existing structure or structures, shall be required to submit an
application containing the information required in Article 9-400 (B), except
for topographic data. Such projects shall not be required to fall under the
PUD submission requirements unless the project will either:
A. Result in a project that will generate 1,440 or more one-way motor
vehicle trips in excess of the trip generation then currently being
generated at the site; or
B. Result in a project that will create 11,000 square feet or more of
impervious drainage surfaces than that which is then currently present
on the site.
PART III. INITIAL DESIGNATION OF OVERLAY LANDS
The following lands are hereby overlaid with the CPOD designation:
The West Half of the Northwest Quarter of Section 4
The Northeast Quarter of Section 5
The Northwest Quarter of Section 5, except that part platted as Rustic Acres, and
except Lots 1-8, Block 1, and Lots 1-4, Block 2, Country Creek
The West Half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 5
The East Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 5
The West Half of the East Half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 5 lying
northerly of Anoka County Highway Plat No. 6 and Soderville Drive
The Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 8
That part of the Northeast Quarter of Section 8 Lying West of Birch View Acres
Plat
9-500 Transition Zones in CD-1 and CD-2 Districts
9-510 Preamble It is recognized that there are numerous large (and/or adjacent
smaller) under-utilized commercial or commercial-eligible parcels in the
Trunk Highway 65 Corridor that have not obtained their highest and best
commercial usages. Some of these parcels were formerly occupied by
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
73
businesses, some are currently occupied by businesses, some are vacant,
and some are or were in agricultural use. Such parcels, if required to
strictly observe the requirements of CD-1 and CD-2 zoning, will remain
vacant and/or under-utilized indefinitely. It is the purpose of this Article 9-
500 to identify such parcels and permit a more liberal usage of Conditional
Use Permit activity thereon, to promote increased commerce, tax base
and employment.
9-520 Transition Zones The following lands are hereby designated Transition
Zones. This is not a separate zoning category, but shall embrace lands
that are or will be zoned CD-1 or CD-2, and provide for Conditional Use
Permits within these zones that differ from the Conditional Use Permit
provisions found elsewhere in the City Code. Any of the following parcels
that are also in the CPOD Overlay Districts created by Article 9-400 of this
Code shall be exempt from the provision of Article 9-400 if a development
plan is proposed under the auspices of this Article 9-500.
North Area
PIN 05-32-23-11-0002
PIN 05-32-23-11-0003
PIN 05-32-23-12-0001
PIN 05-32-23-13-0001
PIN 05-32-23-14-0002
PIN 05-32-23-14-0003
Central Area
PIN 29-32-23-34-0002
PIN 29-32-23-34-0005
PIN 29-32-23-34-0006
PIN 29-32-23-43-0017
South Area
PIN 32-32-23-42-0002
PIN 32-32-23-42-0003
PIN 32-32-23-42-0004
PIN 32-32-23-42-0005
PIN 32-32-23-41-0006
PIN 32-32-23-41-0007
PIN 32-32-23-41-0012
PIN 32-32-23-43-0016
PIN 32-32-23-43-0017
PIN 32-32-23-43-0018
PIN 32-32-23-43-0019
Aberdeen Street ROW North of 134th Avenue NE
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
74
9-530 Conditional Use Permits Conditional Use Permits may be issued in the
Transition Zones for any mercantile venture that meets the following
criteria:
A. Complete Parcel Usage. The proposed usage must involve an active
commercial use for all and not less than all of the parcels in the North
Area, the Central Area or the South Area.
B. Land Use. All Conditional Uses now allowed in the CD-1 or CD-2 districts
shall be Conditional Uses in the Transition Zones. All existing Conditional
Uses, whether or not now permitted as Conditional Uses in the CD-1 or
CD-2 districts shall be allowed Conditional Uses in the Transition Zones.
C. Procedures. All procedural requirements for issuance of a Conditional
Use Permit as found elsewhere in this Code shall be observed, including
Public Hearing.
D. Site Plan and Narrative. All proposed developments in the Transition
Zones must submit a written narrative and a site plan describing their
proposal in detail and drawn to a scale of 1” = 50 feet, showing the
footprints of all buildings, the location of all drives and parking areas, the
location of all outdoor storage or other usage, and the location of all
greenspace, ponding or landscape area.
E. Agency Approvals. All proposed developments in the Transition Zones
must meet or be capable of meeting the requirements of all governmental
or quasi-governmental entities having jurisdiction over the activity.
9-540 Development Agreements and Approval Discretion. All Conditional
Use Permits in the Transition Zones shall be implemented via
development agreements with the City, which may include, without
limitation, the following requirements:
A. Screening. The agreement may impose such screening requirements
as are deemed appropriate;
B. Access Closures. The agreement may require access closures to
adjoining or nearby trunk highways, City or County roads.
C. Easements. The agreement may require the dedication of such road,
drainage, utility or other easements as are deemed appropriate.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
75
D. Access Improvements. The agreement may require that the
developer install or pay for access improvements to the development,
including, without limitation, the signalization of accesses from public
roads.
E. Hours. The agreement may impose operational restrictions in hours, if
deemed appropriate.
F. Noise Control. The agreement may require the installation of noise
abatement structures or practices if deemed appropriate.
G. Environmental Features. The agreement may require the
implementation of environmental best practices or infrastructure as
deemed appropriate, including practices relating to the preservation or
replanting of vegetation.
H. Temporary Permits. The agreement may require an expiration date
for the permit.
I. Security. The agreement may require that the Developer post security
acceptable to the City to guarantee performance of the Developer’s
obligations under the agreement.
J. Phasing. The agreement may provide for the phasing of
implementation of the complete development plan over a given number
of years.
K. Municipal Costs. The agreement may provide for developer
reimbursement of some or all of City costs and expenses in reviewing
the proposal.
L. Studies. The agreement may require the developer to furnish such
engineering, soils, traffic, environmental, hydrologic, noise or other
technical or scientific studies as are deemed appropriate.
M. Platting. The agreement may require platting of the land, or may
impose on the Developer the obligation to meet any of the
requirements for platted commercial land as found in Article 10 of the
City Code.
9-550 Intervening Partial Development. The three geographic areas
described as North Zone, Central Zone and South Zone were identified
because they contain significant quantities of contiguous land area that
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
76
are well suited to a uniform usage. In the event that a conventional land
development proposal is approved by the City for a land use involving a
permitted or conditional use and a permanent structure or structures on
any of the individual parcels within either the North Zone, the Central Zone
or the South Zone, then as of the date that a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued for any such development, the Transition Zone status for the
remainder of the North Zone, Central Zone or South Zone, as the case
may be, shall be terminated.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
77
Appendix 1: Alphabetical Listing of Defined Terms
Term Code Section Page Number
Accessory Building 9-370 64
Accessory Uses 9-150.3 10
Certificate of Occupancy 9-140 8
Conditional Use 9-110 7
Conditional Use Permit 9-310 46
Drive-in Movie Theatre 9-330.2 49
Dwelling Unit 9-210.1 12
Enactment Date 9-160.6 12
Farm Building 9-370.8 66
Farm Wineries 9-330.4 50
Home Occupation 9-350 61
Limited Outdoor Displays 9-220.1(k)1(cc) 22
Manufactured Mobile Home 9-340.2 60
Massage Therapist 9-330.51 52
Motor Vehicle Salvage Yard 9-330.1 48
Non-Conforming Use 9-150.1 8
Nudity 9-330.3 49
Obscene Acts 9-330.3(vi) 50
Permitted Use 9-110 7
Planning Commission 9-160.2 11
Residential Land Uses 9-210 12
Sexually Oriented Business 9-330.3 49
Temporary Conditional Use 9-110 7
Temporary Conditional Use Permit 9-320 48
Therapeutic Massage 9-330.5 52
Zoning Map 9-120 7
Zoning Officer 9-160.1 10
Ham Lake City Code
Article 9
78
Appendix II: Alphabetical List of Topics
Topic Code Section
Accessory Buildings and Farm Buildings 9-370
Accessory Uses 9-150.3
Affordable Housing District (R-AH) 9-210.4
Aviation 9-340.1
CD-1 Districts 9-220.2
CD-2 Districts 9-220.3
CD-3 Districts 9-220.4
CD-4 Districts 9-220.5
Certificates of Occupancy 9-140
Changes in Use or Occupancy 9-150
Conditional Use Permits 9-310
Cost Reimbursement 9-160.4
Drive-in Movie Theatres 9-330.2
Farm Wineries 9-330.4
Government Facilities Districts (GF) 9-230
Home Occupation Permits 9-350
Industrial District, Light (I-1) 9-220.7
Industrial Park Districts (I-P) 9-220.6
Updated through Ordinance 18-03
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
1
ARTICLE 10 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
10-100 Subdivision by means other than traditional platting
10-101 Lot Divisions
10-102 Minor Plats
10-103 Other Requirements
10-200 Subdivision by traditional platting
10-201 Sequence of Platting
10-202 Conditions of Accepting Plat Application
10-203 Sketch Plan
10-204 Preliminary Plat
10-205 Final Plat
10-300 Livability
10-301 Definitions
10-302 Livability Standards
10-400 Administration and General Conditions
10-410 General Conditions
10-420 General Plat Standards
10-430 Physical Standards
10-500 Commercial Condominium Plats
10-510 Provisions of State Law Adopted by Reference
10-520 Condominium Plat Process
10-530 Livability Standards
10-540 Parking Requirements
10-550 General Conditions
10-560 Certificates of Occupancy and Change in Unit Ownership
10-570 Office Condominiums
10-580 Declarations
10-600 Variances
Table 10-1: Lot Standards
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
2
CITY OF HAM LAKE
ARTICLE 10 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
The following regulations apply to the subdivision of lands, whether by the
platting process or by individual lot splits. No lands shall be subdivided
unless in conformance with this code, provided, that upon compliance with
Article 10-600 of this Code, the City Council may grant reasonable
variances to the strict application of this code.
The regulations are intended to cover the sequencing of events, general
procedures and general rules. The City Council shall, by resolution, adopt
specific procedures, submittal requirements and policies from time to time
as deemed necessary. Actions by the City Council which constitute a
denial of an application or request shall be in the form of written findings
of fact stating the reasons for denial.
For the purpose of computing the 120 day review time as contemplated by
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462.358, Subd. 3b, the Sketch Plan phase
shall not be deemed to be a part of the plat application process, and the
120-day review period shall not begin to run until the applicant shall have
submitted all items necessary for the City to be able to make a decision
on Preliminary Plat approval, including all other agency reviews and
comments.
10-100 Subdivision by means other than traditional platting
10-101 Lot Divisions
Land parcels which were not created by platting may be further divided
into no more than a total of three resulting parcels of record, upon review
by the Planning Commission and approval of the City Council, which may
attach conditions to such lot splits, including, without limitation, the
acquisition of drainage, utility and road easements as needed, parkland
dedication, and drainage fund contributions. Platting of such lots shall be
required in the discretion of the City Council. Land parcels which were
created by platting may not be further subdivided, except as follows:
a) The parcel was originally platted as an outlot, and there is
documentation that the purpose of the creation of the outlot was to permit
subsequent replatting; or
b) All new lots meet the frontage, setback and lot size standards that
were in effect for the lots contained in the original plat of the subdivision.
If the original subdivision was a PUD or other subdivision category that did
not have specific lot sizes, frontages or setback requirements at the time
of original platting, then all new lots must be configured and dimensioned
in a manner that is not materially different from the lots contained in the
original subdivision, and the overall density per acre which existed at the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
3
time of original platting may not be exceeded for the area encompassed
by the original plat.i
Notwithstanding the foregoing, lot splits of any type which are intended
merely to adjust existing lot lines, and for combination with adjoining
parcels, and which do not create any new buildable parcels, may be
approved by the City Council.
1 For the legislative history (Findings of Fact) which preceded this Code
section, see the text of original Ordinance Number 2002-27 (effective
1/5/03).
10-102 Minor Plats Where a plat will contain one or two lots, the City
Council may waive any of the requirements of the code and expedite the
plat approval process.
10-103 Other Requirements Lots subdivided under this section shall be
subject to all of the requirements of lots which are subdivided by the
traditional platting process in terms of physical characteristics, park
dedication fees, and the dedication of easements for road, drainage or
utility purposes. When a lot is subdivided without platting, as outlined in
10-101, and the resulting lots are all 10 acres or more in size, those lots
shall not be required to have access onto a paved public road. The
resulting lots from these lot divisions shall still be subject to all of the other
lot standards and requirements outlined in this code. City approval of the
lot subdivision and of any building permits or certificates of occupancy on
the lots may be conditioned upon the property owner entering into a
written agreement with the City that commits the property owner to
dedicate easements and to waive any challenge to the imposition of
special assessments related to future street paving projects on adjacent
roads.
10-200 Subdivision by Traditional Platting
10-201 Sequence of Platting Process The following sequence shall be
observed in the traditional platting process: Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plat,
Final Plat. Each stage shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
acted upon by the City Council. As used in this code, the acronym “ISTS”
refers to “Individual Sewage Treatment System(s)”, both in the singular
and in the plural.
10-202 Conditions Precedent to Accepting Plat Application At the
time of plat application, the applicant shall furnish the following:
a) A signed consent form executed by an owner of the property to
be platted, consenting to the platting and rezoning (if necessary) of
the property, and further consenting to be co-liable with the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
4
developer for the repayment of any municipal expenses incurred in
the plat review process;
b) A cash deposit or Letter of Credit from a State or Federally
Chartered banking institution satisfactory to the City Administrator,
in the amount to be set by Resolution of the City Council, for each
lot or each unit in the case of a condominium plat.
c) A signed City form in which the applicant agrees to accept
continuing responsibility for reimbursement of municipal
expenditures incurred in the plat review process, and further agrees
to deposit such additional funds as are required by the City
Administrator if the initial deposit is exhausted.
Further, if the deposit account shall at any time be exhausted, and the
Developer shall fail to remit funds as required by the City Administrator
within 10 days after the request is made, such delinquency shall be
deemed grounds for the City Council to summarily disapprove of the plat,
at any regular or special meeting, and any subsequent request to plat the
land shall be required to start from the sketch plan stage.
10-203 Sketch Plan A sketch plan shall require no technical data, but
shall be a scaled drawing, prepared by a registered land surveyor,
showing the outer perimeter of the property proposed to be platted,
estimated dimensions, the street configuration, and the lot lines. At the
time of Sketch Plan review, the proponent shall identify the need for any
variances. At the time of application for Sketch Plan Review, the
proponent shall, as a condition to having the matter placed upon the
Planning Commission agenda for review, acknowledge in writing having
received the following notification:
Notice to Developers
The Ham Lake City Code prohibits the use of “non-standard”
ISTS as that term is defined from time to time by the Minnesota
Department of Health. In addition, the City does not accept
performance or surety bonds for financial guarantees, but will
accept only cash deposits or letters of credit issued under strict
guidelines, and only from FDIC-insured banking institutions. The
undersigned has been notified of the City’s regulations on ISTS
and performance security.
For Commercial Condominiums, no occupancy shall be
permitted in any condominium unit unless that particular use is a
permitted use in the zoning district in which the condominium is
located, or which is a conditional use in that district, and has
obtained a conditional use permit.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
5
10-204 Preliminary Plat The Preliminary Plat shall be a final subdivision
design, containing accurate dimensions of all elements. Preliminary Plat
review shall include the conducting of a public hearing by the Planning
Commission, after written notice as provided by statute or policy. Prior to
conducting the public hearing, the following shall have occurred:
A. The City Staff shall have submitted the Preliminary Plat drawing and
other related documents to all other agencies or entities necessary to
review and comment on the plat, and shall either have received replies
from each, or, if thirty days have elapsed since submission, the failure to
have replied shall be deemed to be an approval by the entity;
B. The City’s engineer shall have issued written recommendations
regarding the plat, after review of the technical data required under this
code, including, without limitation, the following:
i) A Lot Usage Map which displays the locations of the ISTS Area,
the proposed location for a well, the Eligible Building Area, and the
Yard Area, as those terms are outlined in Article 10-302.
ii) A table accompanying the Lot Usage Map which describes the
square footage within each of the areas noted in (B(i)) above;
iii) A soils report by a qualified soils analyst which demonstrates
that the Livability standards found in Article 10-302 can be met for
each lot, together with a report by a qualified ISTS designer that
the ISTS Area can support two separate Standard ISTS. At a
minimum, there shall be five soil borings analyzed on each lot.
One boring shall come from the approximate center of the Eligible
Building Area, and four borings shall come from the ISTS area, at
least one coming from the lowest elevation of the ISTS area.
iv) Such other information as may be required by the City’s
engineer. In the event that piezometer readings are intended for
usage in demonstrating the existing water table conditions, the
proponent shall follow the recommendations of the City’s engineer
in creating test holes and in the timing of piezometer readings.
v) A drawing (the “Tree Preservation Plan”) identifying the trees to
be preserved during lot grading and infrastructure construction.
This drawing may be a display of the lots and rights-of-way, with a
delineation thereon of the areas that will not be disturbed by
construction equipment, and within which trees will not be affected
by the severing of root structures outside of the delineated area.
No Tree Preservation Plan shall be required for lots identified at
this stage as lots to be custom-graded by eventual lot purchasers.
After submission of the Tree Preservation Plan, the City may
require modification thereof if the City’s engineer and/or Park and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
6
Tree Commission identify individual trees having the following
characteristics:
1) Tree Sizes (trunk diameter 4.5 feet above grade) greater
than 4 inches; and
2) Are varieties of oak, sugar maple, paper birch,
basswood, black cherry, yellow birch or butternut; and
3) Are not within areas needed for building pads, ISTS
areas or driveways; or
4) Could be preserved by retaining walls, tree wells,
temporary bridging or other techniques.
For lots that are identified by the developer as lots to be
custom-graded by eventual lot purchasers, a Tree Preservation
Plan shall be submitted by the lot owner or builder at the time of
application for building permit. Prior to such time, no tree
removal shall be permitted on any such lot, except in
connection with grading for roads or drainage features of the
overall plat, excluding the perimeter drainage easement
required around each lot.
10-205 Final Plat The Final Plat shall be the mylar version proposed for
recording with the Anoka County Recorder. The final plat shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and acted upon by the City
Council. Prior to release of the final plat for recording, the following shall
have occurred:
A. The City’s engineer shall have issued written recommendations
regarding the plat, after review of the technical data required under this
code, including, without limitation, the following:
i) Complete grading, drainage and road construction plans for the
plat, including specifications for materials, signage, sewers, curb
and gutter, and the like;
ii) A report prepared by a designer licensed by the State of
Minnesota to design ISTS, which includes, for each lot in the plat,
the actual design of one ISTS which meets all requirements for a
standard, non-experimental ISTS sufficient to meet applicable
requirements for a four bedroom home.
iii) Building pad data indicating for each lot the lowest house floor
elevation, lowest garage floor elevation, finished floor elevation and
elevation of adjacent streets;
B. A Development Agreement prepared by the City’s Attorney shall have
been executed, and all required security posted in accordance with the
City’s policies on performance and maintenance security. The
Development Agreement shall contain the following provisions regarding
completion of improvements:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
7
1) A timetable listing a specific date for the completion of
roads, drainage features and lot preparation, and requiring
that any bituminous road paving be done in two separate
lifts, with the second lift taking plan when:
a) one winter season has passed after the first lift has been
completed; and
b) at least 75% of the lots in the subdivision have occupied
homes; but
c) not later than a date certain to be determined by the City
and so stated.
2) A provision that only a single building permit for one model
home may be issued until final completion of grading on all
lots, in accord with the grading plan;
3) A provision that “final completion of grading on all lots: shall
not be deemed to have taken place until and unless the City
is furnished with an as-built grading plan, certified by a
Registered Professional Engineer, demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the City’s engineer that all lot grading was
completed in accord with the original grading plan.
4) A provision that building pad density results and
conformance to the Uniform Building Code are to be
supplied for each lot with the as-built grading plan submittal.
5) A provision that the following information will be required on
all surveys in platted subdivisions:
a) The primary and secondary ISTS area must be
shown per the approved grading plan.
b) Show the location and elevations of the four certified
borings within the 7500 sq. ft. area as per the
approved grading plan.
c) Show the location and elevations of the borings that
the septic designer used to determine their design
d) A boring log referencing the above information and its
depth to mottled or unsuitable soils.
6) A provision that the Tree Preservation Plan required by
Article 10-202 (B) (v) and the tree preservation techniques outlined
in Article 10-430 (A) shall be observed at all times.
C. All required municipal fees and charges have been paid in full;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
8
D. All required Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) action
with regard to any lot has been completed, or is likely to be completed, in
the opinion of the City’s engineer.
E. The City shall have received a reduced version of the final plat on an
8.5” by 11” sheet.
10-300 Livability
All subdivided lots shall meet basic Livability Standards which are
described below. The definitions herein described apply only to Article
10-300 of this code.
10-301 Definitions
A. Mottled Soil -Mottled Soil shall be as defined in Section
7080.0020, subpart 23 of the Minnesota Code of Rules.
B. Livability - The area within a residential lot in all single-family
residential areas in which space is allocated for dwelling
unit, garage, on-site sewage facilities, well and other
structural facilities for human habitation.
C. Lot - All single family lots created after February 1, 1997 except
lots developed under Article 9-1400 of this code.
D. Standard ISTS - An on-site sewage disposal system meeting
all City, County and State codes, of sufficient size to serve a
4-bedroom home.
E. Undisturbed Soil - -Soils that have not been moved, smeared,
compacted, nor manipulated with equipment pursuant to
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Chapter 7080 (Rule
7080). Tilled farmland may be considered undisturbed for
the purposes of the septic system if an agent certified to the
satisfaction of the City Building Official in the area of
Individual Sewage Treatment Systems (ISTS) determines
that the soil structure is undisturbed and meets the
requirements of Rule 7080.
F. Unsuitable Soils – shall be defined in Article 11-450.1(D).
G. Final Dwelling Elevation - the elevation at the point where the
finished lot grade meets a point on the concrete wall of the
basement, at the location closest to the roadway from which
the lot takes access to a public road.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
9
H. Building Pad - The specific perimeter within the Eligible
Building Area where footings for structural foundations are
or will be placed, and the area around said perimeter for a
distance of thirty feet.
10-302 Livability Standards
All residential lots shall contain at least 29,500 square feet of land
which lies above the 100 year flood contour. Of this 29,500 square
feet, the following additional requirements must be present.
A. ISTS Area Each lot must contain at least 7,500 square feet of
contiguous area which is reserved for both the ISTS originally
constructed and a future ISTS. The ISTS Area need not be
contiguous to the Eligible Building Area or the Yard Area, but the
entire ISTS Area must exist at an elevation at least one foot above
Unsuitable Soils, and must contain Undisturbed Soils or soils which
meet the requirements of Rule 7080 of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency for ISTS construction standards. The ISTS Area
may be irregular in shape, provided they do not encroach into
areas reserved by easement or otherwise for roadway, drainage or
utility purposes, and provided that all of the area can be reasonably
used for ISTS construction without the need for variances.
B. Eligible Building Area Each lot shall contain at least 10,000
square feet of contiguous land which lies at an elevation at least
four feet above Unsuitable Soils. The Eligible Building Area may
not be irregular in shape, and should be generally rectangular or
ovoid, with no panhandles, narrow necks or peninsulas. Eligible
Building Areas may not encroach into any areas reserved by
easement or otherwise for roadway, drainage or utility purposes.
Fill may be used to create Eligible Building Area.
C. Yard Area Each lot shall contain at least 12,000 contiguous
square feet which:
i) Lies above the 100 year flood contour, and
ii) Lies at least one foot above soils unsuitable for the
intended usage of the Yard area, and
iii) Is contiguous to the Eligible Building Area for a distance
of at least fifty-percent of the lineal perimeter of the Eligible
Building Area.
Yard Areas may encroach into the dedicated easement area
which lies at a distance of ten feet from the perimeter of the
lot, and may encroach into areas reserved by easement or
otherwise for other public utility purposes, but may not
encroach into any other area reserved by dedication or
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
10
otherwise for road or drainage purposes, and may not
encroach into any areas within the 100 year flood contour or
into designated wetlands. Yard Areas may be irregular in
shape except within thirty feet of the locations where the
Yard Area is contiguous to the Eligible Building Area, at
which locations the Yard Areas shall be a logical extension
or expansion of the generally rectangular or ovoid shape of
the Eligible Building Area. Fill may be used to create Yard
Area.
D. Building Pad Areas The entire Building Pad must lie within the
Eligible Building Area, and shall meet the separation
requirements for the Eligible Building Area.
E. Low Floor Elevations
i) For walkout designs, the low floor elevation shall be at
least one foot above the 100 year flood contour, but,
notwithstanding the 100 year flood contour, not less than
one foot above unsuitable soils, as determined by the
City’s engineer.
ii) For other designs, the low floor elevation shall be at least
one foot above the 100 year flood contour, but,
notwithstanding the 100 year flood contour, not less than
one foot above unsuitable soils, as determined by the
City’s engineer.
F. Exception to Soils Condition If the requirements of Article
10-202(B)(iii) cannot be met in regard to the possible usage of a
Standard System ISTS for any lot or lots in a proposed subdivision,
by reason of the soils having been disturbed or compacted by
activities which pre-dated the subdivision application, and which
conditions were not caused by or at the direction of the subdivider,
or, if said requirements cannot be met after final plat approval
because of unusual mottling conditions which were not ascertained
by the developer after doing due diligence in completing and
analyzing soil borings during the Preliminary Plat process, and in
accord with City requirements for such borings, the City Council
may waive the requirement that the ISTS be constructed on
Undisturbed Soils, and may allow the usage of “Other Systems” as
that term is defined in Article 11-450.1(F) of this Code. Where
“Other” systems are so permitted, it shall be the obligation of the lot
owner to provide actual field designs for each such proposed
system, prepared by a qualified ISTS designer, prior to obtaining a
building permit. The design standards shall be as directed by the
City’s Building Official. Where an “Other” system is allowed, upon
recommendation of the City’s Building Official, the design must
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
11
include the concept of “time-dosing”, meaning a periodic
distribution of effluent which is electronically controlled.
10-400 Administration and General Conditions
If at any time prior to the issuance of all building permits in a given
subdivision, the developer shall be in default of any obligation under any
written development agreement with the City, or shall be in violation of any
portion of this code, the City may unilaterally withhold the issuance of any
new building permits in the subdivision until compliance is met.
10-410 General Conditions
A. Plans and Specifications All plans and specifications shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer, and all surveying work
shall be done by a registered land surveyor. All plans shall be signed by
the engineer or surveyor, as required by law and as required by
professional standards.
B. Duration of Approval The approval of a final plat or the approval of
a lot split shall expire at the end of one year. For good cause, the City
Council may, upon application for re-approval, waive certain submittal and
procedural requirements.
C. Work Prior to Approval All work done in a subdivision by a
developer prior to the time that final plat approval has been given is done
at the developer’s risk, and shall be done in accord with other sections of
the City Code, including, without limitation, requirements pertaining to
excavation permits.
D. Certificate of Survey At the time that a building permit is requested
for any lot, the applicant shall furnish a Certificate of Survey prepared by a
registered land surveyor, which survey shall identify the Eligible Building
Area, the proposed location of the building foundation, driveway and
sidewalks, well location, all easements, the Yard Area, the ISTS areas,
and such other information as may be required by the City’s building
official, showing appropriate dimensions.
E. Notification to Lot Purchasers At the time of issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, the building permit applicant shall furnish
evidence that the end user (occupant) of the dwelling has been notified of
the provisions of Article 10-430(H) and (J) pertaining to turf establishment
and avoidance of ISTS areas.
F. Performance and Maintenance Security All performance and
maintenance security shall be in the form of a cash deposit or a Letter of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
12
Credit issued in accord with the provisions of policy established by
Resolution of the City Council.
G. Compliance With Tree Preservation Plan During the construction
of any structure on any lot for which a Tree Preservation Plan is in place,
pursuant to Article 10-202(B)(v) of the Ham Lake City Code, the Building
Official shall have the right to suspend any building permit, and/or to
decline to issue a certificate of occupancy for the structure upon the
discovery of any violation of the Tree Preservation Plan during the
construction process of the structure, and to continue such sanction in
force until the violation is cured either by action or by the posting of
adequate cash security and agreement to guarantee cure of the violation,
to be established by the Building Official.
At the time that any building permit is requested on any lot for which a
Tree Preservation Plan is in effect, or on any lot for which such a plan is
required, the Building Official shall provide the applicant with a copy of the
Tree Preservation Plan and with educational materials concerning tree
preservation as may be recommended from time to time by the City
Council, upon recommendation from its Park and Tree Commission.
10-420 General Plat Standards
A. Easements
The plat shall dedicate a ten foot drainage and utility easement around
the entire perimeter of each lot. Other easements shall be dedicated as
required by the City Council.
B. Parkland Dedication
i) Statement of Policy.
It is the policy of the City of Ham Lake that one acre of public park or trail
space should be created for every ten acres of residential land developed,
in order to create a sufficient supply of public recreational space to
accommodate the reasonable needs of the public. Given the large
amount of marginal land and wetlands in the City, this acreage goal is
difficult to define in terms of taking a percentage of each plat; each plat is
different in topography and capacity for development. Not all upland is
capable of housing sewage treatment systems, further limiting
development. In addition, parks that serve only a single neighborhood
have proven costly to maintain, and do not provide for an ideal level of
recreational activity in an economic manner. It is for this reason that it is
not generally practical to require a dedication of ten per cent of the upland
in a given plat, but is generally more practical to require a park dedication
fee in lieu of parkland, in order to provide funds for larger parks serving
more citizens. It is therefore the policy of the City to take dedicated
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
13
parkland or trails only where such lands can be a part of a larger network,
larger park system or connected to public waters. In all other cases, park
dedication fees will be used.
ii) Upland Computation
At the time that a wetland delineation is made for a given plat, the
surveyor preparing the plat work shall notify the City of the acreage of
upland in the plat.
iii) Land or Fee
Each residential plat shall either dedicate up to 10% of the upland therein
as a public park or trail, or shall pay a parkland dedication fee, or a
combination of both. The determination of how the parkland dedication
requirement will be met will be made by motion of the City Council, after
recommendation from the Park and Tree Commission, as early in the
platting procedure as is practical. If the determination is to dedicate some
upland but less than 10% of the upland, then the difference between 10%
and the amount dedicated shall be paid via a pro rata fee.
iv) Fee
If a fee is required for all or part of the parkland obligation, the fee will be
based on the average fair market value of the upland as determined by
the City Valuation described in Article 10-420 (B) (iv) (a) below, or by
appraisal at the time the plat is submitted for Preliminary Plat approval
pursuant to Article 10-420(B) (iv) (b) below. The park dedication fee shall
be on a per-lot basis, and will be computed on the premise that a
reasonable fee per lot is ten percent of the fair market value of one acre of
raw land. If the plat contains land that was previously platted and for
which a park dedication fee was charged, the area of such land shall be
subtracted from the computation of the amount of upland. All such fees
will be dedicated to the purposes required by law. Fair market value shall
be determined using one of the following methods:
a) Annual Establishment (the “City Valuation”). The City Council
shall establish a per-acre value in January of each year by the ordinance
which deals with other municipal fees and charges. The City Council may
take into account such data and information as they deem appropriate,
and may establish different values for different categories of land, such as
wooded land, waterfront land or land abutting wetlands or other physical
features. The City may also commission an annual appraisal by a
licensed fee appraiser to assist in the City Valuation, and may devise a
method by which the City is reimbursed for the cost of the City Valuation
from parkland dedication fees collected prior to the next annual valuation.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
14
The City Council may alter the City Valuation at any time during the year
by ordinance. All City Valuations shall remain in effect until altered by
ordinance. Until the next City Valuation, the per acre value of
undeveloped residential land shall be $25,000.00. Therefore, the park
dedication fee until the next valuation shall be $2,500 per lot.
b) Developer Appraisal. At the time of submission of the Preliminary
Plat, the developer may submit an appraisal performed by a licensed fee
appraiser that documents a valuation different than the City Valuation,
subject to the following conditions:
i) The developer shall have obtained the written approval of the
appraiser by the City
Administrator prior to ordering the appraisal; and
ii) The City reserves the right to commission a separate fee appraisal if it
deems the developer appraisal inaccurate. If the City’s subsequent fee
appraisal is higher than the developer’s appraisal, the City appraisal shall
be binding, and the cost of the City appraisal shall be added to the cost of
City platting expenses that must be reimbursed by the developer as a part
of the platting process.
v) Manner of Payment
Parkland fees shall be payable at the time of recording the plat, or, at the
option of the developer, may be collected pro rata per lot with the next
ensuing transfer of title of each lot in the plat. In the event that fees are
collected with such subsequent lot sales, at the time of recording of the
plat the City shall also record a short form development agreement that
establishes a lien against the lot for the park fees. The City’s lien shall be
superior to any other encumbrance, and any pre-existing mortgages must
be subordinated to the City’s lien. No building permits shall be issued for
any lot until the City has received evidence satisfactory to its attorney that
the short form agreement has been duly recorded and enjoys first priority
as a lien. In the event that title to a given lot having a City lien is
transferred without satisfying the lien, no building permits or certificates of
occupancy shall be issued as to such lot until the lien is paid. All such
liens shall bear interest from the date of filing the short form agreement
through the date of payment, at a fixed rate of interest equal to the highest
published prime rate (as published on the date of filing) in the Wall Street
Journal, commonly known as “WSJ Prime”. If WSJ Prime ceases to be
published, the City may substitute another reasonable index.
vi) Wetland as Parks
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
15
In the event that the City requests the dedication of designated wetlands
as parkland, it will be assumed that wetlands carry ten per cent of the
value of upland, such that the amount of wetland necessary to equate to
ten per cent of upland will be ten times the amount of upland that could be
required in the plat. For example, if a plat contains 20 acres of upland,
and 20 acres of wetland, the City could require the dedication of up to two
acres of upland. To equate to this amount would require 20 acres of
wetland. Therefore, if all 20 acres of wetland were dedicated as park, that
would satisfy the park dedication for that plat.
vii) Trails
In subdivisions where the City requires the dedication of trails, the square
footage of the trails that are dedicated may be applied as if it were park
dedication, and credited against the park dedication requirement for that
subdivision.
viii) Waiver and Alteration
Where special circumstances are present in a given subdivision in which a
developer provides services or considerations of special benefit to the
public that are not otherwise required by the City Code, the City Council
may by motion waive or alter all or any part of the Park Dedication and/or
fee requirement for the plat.
C. Drainage Fund Contribution If the City Engineer identifies a
localized drainage problem which is caused or accelerated by a given plat,
a Drainage Fund Contribution on a per-lot basis shall be paid at the time
of final plat execution. The contribution amount shall be set by resolution
of the City Council from time to time, and may be paid as lots are sold by
the establishment of a municipal lien for payment.
D. Title Evidence Before plat execution, the developer shall furnish an
abstract of title or registered property abstract which demonstrates that all
areas to be dedicated to public use will be free and clear of all
encumbrances, excepting other non-exclusive public easements which do
not interfere with municipal dedications. Title Insurance commitments or
policies shall not be acceptable title evidence.
E. Uniform Street Names All streets shall follow the uniform street
name grid as maintained from time to time by the Anoka County Surveyor.
F. Plats Outletting to Unpaved Streets No plat which outlets on an
unpaved street shall be approved unless adequate assurance is obtained
that the unpaved street will be paved to City standards within a
reasonable period of time, in one of the following two methods:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
16
i) Where it appears that a typical special assessment project is
feasible to enable the paving project to occur, the developer shall
pay a per-lot fixed fee established by the City Council as a
contribution to the paving project, payable as lots are sold. Monies
so collected shall be maintained in a special fund and dedicated
only to the eventual paving of the particular street for which the
funds were reserved;
ii) Where it appears that the revenue generated by a typical
special assessment project will be insufficient to enable the paving
project to occur, the developer shall be required to pay for the
shortfall, and prior to plat execution, shall furnish performance
security in accord with the City’s policies for security, to guarantee
that the developer contribution will in fact be paid.
G. Maintenance of Improvements All developer-installed improvements
shall be maintained by the developer for at least one year after
acceptance by the City, with security posted to guarantee the
maintenance. The maintenance period shall generally be set by the
development agreement, but the City shall have the right to require a
maintenance period in excess of one year, particularly where certain
testing results show evidence of substandard or improper construction of
improvements.
H. Development Agreements If a developer proposes to complete all
improvements in a plat prior to recording the plat, the developer shall be
required to execute only a maintenance agreement and to post
maintenance security. In all other cases, a development agreement shall
be prepared for each plat, containing at least the following provisions:
i) The amount of performance and maintenance security required;
ii) The treatment of parkland dedication or fees;
iii) Streetlighting costs and escrow for initial power costs;
iv) Provisions for dealing with Oak Wilt or other vegetation
diseases;
v) The plans and specifications for improvements, including
completion timetable;
vi) Assurances as to the maintenance of proper insurances and
payment of subcontractors;
vii) Special matters pertaining to ponds;
viii) Payment of all municipal fees and expenses;
ix) Such other elements as are deemed necessary by the City’s
attorney.
I. Protective Covenants Lawful protective covenants shall be
encouraged, and if requested by the developer to do so, the City shall
decline to issue building permits for dwellings that do not meet the
standards of recorded protective covenants.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
17
J. Rain Gardens Rain Gardens are designed depressions in the
topography intended to impound surface water runoff so that it may
percolate into the soil. They are compatible with certain types of
decorative improvements, such as rock and vegetation, and exterior
decorative low-profile fencing or bordering. The developer of any
subdivision may incorporate Rain Gardens into new plats upon approval
of the City Engineer, subject to the condition that all Rain Gardens shall
be located in dedicate public drainage and utility easements. Abutting
property owners shall be allowed to, but not required to maintain the Rain
Gardens on which their lot abuts, subject to certain limiting conditions:
1. No obstruction to the flow or percolation of surface water may be
imposed within or affecting any Rain Garden.
2. The Rain Garden shall not be permitted to fill with silt, debris or
decaying or dead vegetation;
3. Decorative bordering, such as stone, commercial
paver/landscaping block or decorative mini-fencing may be placed around
the Rain Garden, but not to exceed six inches in height, and not to be
placed in a manner that hinders the receiving of surface water into the rain
garden in accord with the original approved drainage plan for the
subdivision.
4. No alteration of the Rain Garden shall be permitted beyond the
original footprint.
5. The City reserves the right to supersede any owner maintenance,
including, without notice or cause, the removal of items placed in the Rain
Garden.
A Short-Form Development Agreement making reference to the lots
abutting Rain Gardens shall be recorded at the time of plat recording.
10–430 Physical Standards The following general physical standards shall be
observed in each plat; however, each plat shall be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis, and upon recommendation of its Engineer, Attorney, Park Commission,
city staff, consultant, or other appropriate source, the City Council may establish
differing degrees of standards for each individual plat. In addition, where the
standards relate to surface water management, specific drainage and
impoundment measures as detailed in the City’s then current Local Surface
Water Management Plan shall be observed.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
18
A. Trees During construction of roads, other infrastructure, and lot
grading, Contractor will mark all trees identified in the Tree Preservation
Plan that will not be affected by construction activity. Identification shall
be done in a manner that will clearly identify each tree, through
delineation of gross lot areas or a perimeter around individual trees with
visible tape or temporary fencing that extends either outside of the drip
line of all trees within the protected area, or that extends for the entire
“critical root zone” of each tree within the protected area, whichever
distance is greatest. The critical root zone is that area that lies within a
radius obtained when the tree diameter at a height 4.5 feet above ground
level is measured in inches, and one foot of lineal distance from the trunk
is provided for each inch of diameter. No spikes, nails or other objects
shall be driven into the bark or trunk of any tree in the process of
delineating the protected area. During construction activity involving the
pouring of concrete, care shall be taken to avoid spillage of excess
concrete or cement that could affect the health of trees.
B. Erosion and Sediment Control All stormwater runoff shall be
contained in desiltation ponds prior to discharge into any watershed.
Proper erosion control measures shall be taken to insure that stormwater
runoff does not carry silt material onto public roads or adjoining properties
during or after construction.
C. Drainage Each plat shall have a positive drainage discharge into a
local watershed, in a manner which is designed according to accepted
engineering principals using a 100-year storm event as the guideline for
runoff control.
D. Ponding Each pond constructed for siltation or stormwater
containment shall include signage prohibiting trespassing within the
drainage easement area. No such pond shall be represented to lot
purchasers as being available to the adjoining landowner for recreational
purposes or landscaping.
E. Driveways
1) New Dwellings
Driveways on all lots containing or proposed for new residential
dwellings shall be limited to 30 feet in width on City streets and 24
feet on cul-de-sacs (see Article 11-730, and shall be paved with
either concrete or bituminous surfacing, in accord with standards or
specifications to be established by the City Engineer. The paving
requirements may be reduced by the City’s Building Official, after
conferring with the City’s engineer, to a length of 30 feet from the
paved portion of the abutting public street if there is a showing of a
special circumstance, such as inordinately long driveway length,
which makes literal compliance with this provision unfair or
unreasonable.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
19
2) Existing Dwellings or Structures
For any remodeling or other project that requires a building permit,
a condition of issuance of the building permit shall be the paving of
any existing unpaved or inadequately paved driveway serving
garages or accessory buildings on the parcel. If the parcel contains
an existing driveway having adequate pavement, and the property
owner agrees to abandon any other unpaved driveways and take
access solely from the paved driveway, then no additional paving
shall be required. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Building
Official, after conferring with the City’s engineer, may shorten the
paving requirement to a length of 30 feet from the paved portion of
the abutting public street if there is a showing of a special
circumstance, such as inordinately long driveway length, which
makes literal compliance with this provision unfair or unreasonable.
The Building Official may also eliminate paving needs under the
following circumstances:
a) Because of particular topographic conditions, the existence of
the driveway poses no immediate threat of erosion that could affect
the public road, and poses no immediate threat of siltation flowing
onto the public road; or
b) The driveway is not intended to be used more often than once
monthly, and topographic and vegetative conditions are present
that are likely to inhibit or preclude erosion or siltation from
developing if the limited usage is observed; and
c) The property owner consents in writing to a license, in
recordable form, as follows:
Driveway License Agreement
Agreement, made this ___ day of ___________, _________,
between the City of Ham Lake, Minnesota (“City”) and
________________________(“Owner”);
Recitals
Owner is the owner of the property described on hereto attached
Exhibit A, which property abuts a public road, namely
__________________. Owner has applied for a permit for activity
regulated by City, and has requested a modification of the City’s
normal requirement for driveway paving. City is willing to grant
such an exception on certain conditions.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
20
It is therefore agreed as follows:
1. Surrender of Right of Access
Except for any existing points of access via adequate paved
driveways, Owner hereby surrenders all right of access to
____________ to City.
2. Grant of License
City hereby grants a license to Owner for a driveway access
point to _______________ in the location noted on hereto
attached Exhibit B, subject to the following conditions:
a) Owner covenants that the driveway access shall at
all times be maintained by owner to prevent erosion
within City right of way and to prevent the flow of silt
onto the paved surface of the public road; and
b) Owner covenants that the driveway access shall
have limited use, to wit, not more than one round-trip
per month.
3. Remedies
If Owner is found by City to have violated any condition of
the License, City shall notify Owner of the violation and shall
inform the Owner of what paving requirements City intends
to impose, stating a date certain by which the paving must
be completed. If owner fails to complete the paving in a
timely manner, and of quality satisfactory to City, City shall
be entitled to erect and maintain barricades to prohibit
access to the public street from any location other than
approved driveway locations in existence prior to the date
hereof.
(Signature blocks, acknowledgments and drafting
statement)
3) Exemptions
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City’s Building Official may grant
an exemption or further modifications to paving requirements for
driveways that obtain access to unpaved public roads, taking into
account the topographic conditions and likelihood and timeliness of
future paving of the public road.
F. Utilities All utility lines shall be placed underground.
G. Streetlighting Streetlights shall be installed in all subdivisions using
the traditional platting process. One streetlight shall be required at each
intersection, with intervening placement as established by resolution of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
21
the City Council. The cost of initial construction, and power costs for the
first three years after platting shall be paid to the City at the time of plat
execution, in accord with policy to be established by resolution of the City
Council. The developer may propose the maintenance of a streetlighting
system and power costs through an owner’s association, as approved in
the discretion of the City Council. In all other subdivisions, the ongoing
power costs shall be billed pro rata to the individual lot owners.
H. Turf Establishment All boulevard areas shall be seeded or sodded to
the specifications of the City Engineer. For private homes and
businesses, turf establishment shall be completed or guaranteed at the
time that a Certificate of Occupancy is requested, and the following
standards and procedures shall be observed:
i) Suitable topsoil of not less than four inches in thickness shall be
installed in portions of the Yard Area which are not heavily
vegetated or landscaped;
ii) All such areas shall be sodded or seeded with commonly used
residential grass varieties of a perennial nature;
iii) At the time of final inspection of the building for Certificate of
Occupancy, the establishment of turf shall be inspected. If turf
establishment has not taken place to the satisfaction of the building
official, the property owner shall be required to post financial
security in the form of a cash deposit to insure turf establishment
by a date certain (not to exceed one growing season) in an amount
to be established by Resolution of the City Council. The owner
shall also be required to execute a right of trespass authorizing the
City to come upon the property to complete turf establishment if the
owner fails to do so within the required time.
I. Lot Standards
All lots shall meet the dimensional, setback and frontage requirements as
found in Table 10-1, and shall have frontage upon and access to a paved
public road, except those lots exempted from this access to paved road
requirement by Article 10-103. No construction or grading shall take place
on any portion of a lot where a gradient of 12 percent or more is found.
Monumentation irons shall be placed at all lot corners. Density in a plat
shall not be less than one acre per lot. For lots that are 1.5 acres or more
in size, lot configurations shall not contain “panhandles” or create
driveway conditions that could impede the ability of emergency vehicles to
access the dwelling. Lots that are smaller than 1.5 acres in size shall
meet the following standards:
1) Definitions:
a) “Front Lot Line” - the side of a lot containing road frontage on
which the lot will take access to a public road. If such road
frontage includes a straight portion and a curve or curves, the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
22
entire road frontage shall be deemed to be a single “side”. If the lot
is on a cul-de-sac, the portion of the cul-de-sac and any straight
line connected to the arc of the cul-de-sac, but containing road
frontage, shall be deemed to be a single “side”.
b) “Rear Lot Line” – the side of a lot that most closely parallels
the general direction of the Front Lot Line.
c) “Side Lot Line” - any lot lines that are not either a Front Lot
Line or a Rear Lot Line.
d) “Lot Depth” – the greatest distance between any point on a
Front Lot Line and any point on a Rear Lot Line.
e) “Lot Width” - the length of road frontage on the Front Lot Line.
f) “Deflected Lot Line” – a Side Lot Line that consists of two
connected lines that meet the following: Starting from the point at
which the Side Lot Line intersects with the Front Lot Line, the
bearing of the line from that point may not deflect more than fifteen
degrees at the point where the bearing changes course. A
Deflected Lot Line meeting this requirement shall be deemed to be
single “side”.
g) “Side” – a Front Lot Line, a Rear Lot Line, or a Side Lot Line
(including a single Deflected Lot Line).
h) “Triangle Lot” – a lot having three sides, but one of the sides
cannot be a Deflected Lot Line.
2) Standards
a) Rectangular Lots - Lots shall be generally rectangular in shape,
having no more than four sides, unless the Front Lot Line contains
a portion of the arc of a cul-de-sac. In such case, the lot may have
five sides, but none of the sides may be a Deflected Lot Line. No
other lot shall have more than one Deflected Lot Line, and the
interior angle of any two intersecting sides shall not be less than
sixty degrees. If the Front Lot Line contains a curvilinear portion
that is convex from the lot, the interior angles of the Front Lot Line
and the Side Lot Lines shall be computed using a hypothetical
Front Lot Line extending in a straight line between the two points of
intersection of the Side Lot Lines and the Front Lot Line.
b) Triangle Lots - Triangle lots shall be permitted where
topography or other physical conditions dictate, but no triangle lot
shall contain an interior angle of less than forty-five degrees nor
more than ninety degrees, and shall contain one interior angle that
is not less than eighty degrees. A triangle lot shall not contain a
Rear Lot Line, and the two lines that do not constitute the Front Lot
Line shall be considered Side Lot Lines. If the Front Lot Line
contains a curvilinear portion that is convex from the lot, the interior
angles of the Front Lot Line and the Side Lot Lines shall be
computed using a hypothetical Front Lot Line extending in a
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
23
straight line between the two points of intersection of the Side Lot
Lines and the Front Lot Line.
c) Concave Lots - If any lot has a Front Lot Line that is concave to
the lot, (except lots that have all of their road frontage on the arc of
a cul-de-sac) there shall be at least ten feet of tangency from the
intersections of the Side Lot Lines with the Front Lot Line, running
in the direction of the other Side Lot Line. The interior angles of
the corners on the Front Lot Line shall be measured using these
tangent sections and the Side Lot Lines. For lots having all of their
road frontage on a cul-de-sac (a minimum of 60 feet), for the
purposes of measuring interior angles, the Front Lot Line shall be
deemed to run in a straight line between the two points of
intersection of the Side Lot Lines and the right-of-way line, but the
two interior angles on the corners at the right-of-way line must total
at least 180 degrees.
d) Depth to Width Ratio - Lot Depth shall be no greater than twice
the distance of the Lot Width. For Triangle Lots, there is no “Lot
Depth” under the definition of that term, but the interior angle
limitations for Triangle Lots dictate the limits of length that can be
achieved.
e) Rear Lot Lines - Rear Lot Lines shall be at least sixty feet in
length.
f) Computation of Lot Size In calculating the square footage of
any lot in any existing subdivision, any future subdivision, or any lot
that has been or will be subdivided by means other than traditional
platting, the computation shall include the square footage of the
land lying between the centerline of any adjacent public road and
the nearest lot line of the lot in question, up to a maximum 33 feet
width of such road right of way or easement.
J. Avoidance of ISTS Areas At the earliest practical time in the platting
process, the developer shall stake and fence the ISTS area for each lot,
posting each such area with appropriate signage to warn the operators of
motor vehicles or construction equipment to avoid driving over the ISTS
area. The staking, fencing and signage may be of such quality as the
developer deems appropriate, but in the event that any subsequent
inspection by the City reveals that a portion of the ISTS area has been
disturbed or compacted, the City may decline to issue a building permit or
a Certificate of Occupancy for such lot. Following occupancy, the lot
owner shall refrain from compacting or disturbing that portion of the ISTS
area which is reserved for the backup ISTS.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
24
K. Streets Specific design standards for streets and roads shall be
established from time to time by Resolution of the City Council, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer. The following general conditions
will be met:
i) All streets will be paved with concrete or bituminous surfacing,
and shall have concrete curb and gutter;
ii) Where it is likely that a street will extend into adjacent lands, the
street will be paved to the property line and temporary cul-de-sacs
established; at the time that the temporary cul-de-sac is vacated,
the responsibility for removal of paving and restoration of the
vacated area shall not be that of the City.
iii) Cul-de-sac or “dead end” streets shall not exceed 1,100 feet in
length unless a substantial probability exists that the street will
someday be extended to provide a second outlet for the
subdivision.
iv) Street signs will be erected to the specifications of the City
Engineer.
v) The minimum allowable cul-de-sac will be 175 feet. If a
subdivision contains a temporary cul-de-sac or other street that is
intended to be extended in the future, a sign reading as follows
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the temporary terminus
of the street:
NOTICE
THIS STREET MAY BE EXTENDED BEYOND THIS POINT IN
THE FUTURE. FURTHER INFORMATION MAY BE OBTAINED
BY CONTACTING THE ZONING OFFICER AT HAM LAKE CITY
HALL.
TEL: 763-434-9555
The sign shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the City.
The City Council shall by resolution establish, from time to time, a
fee to be paid by the Developer to defray the cost of producing,
erecting and maintaining the sign.
L. Structure Heights
No residential or commercial building shall exceed 45 feet in height, as
measured from the lowest ground elevation abutting the foundation of the
building to the highest point of the building. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the following appendages, structures or ancillary features may exceed 45
feet in height, but height may be otherwise limited by the City Council as a
part of approval of any site plan or building permit, after review and
recommendation of the Planning Commission:
a) Spires, turrets or belfries attached to a building;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
25
b) Freestanding flag poles, monuments, water towers, or wind energy
generating towers;
c) Features of industrial operations, such as conveyors, chutes,
smokestacks
M. Mailboxes All residential mailboxes shall conform to United States Postal
Service rules and regulations regarding location and size. All residential
mailboxes installed in a cul-de-sac shall be cluster mailboxes, centralized in one
location for communal use for all lots with driveways exiting onto the cul-de-sac.
All other residential mailboxes shall be installed using a swinging or swing away
post system designed to minimize the risk of damage from snowplows. Specific
design standards for mailboxes may be established from time to time by
Resolution of the City Council.
10-500 Commercial Condominiums
Commercial Condominiums are subdivisions of land created under the
Minnesota Uniform Condominium Act, and which are located in zoning districts
other than residential districts.
10-510 Provisions of State Law Adopted by Reference
The proponent of any Commercial Condominium shall strictly observe all
requirements of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 515B, commonly known as
the Minnesota Uniform Condominium Act, in establishing and constructing
any Commercial Condominium. The terms of that act are hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference, as modified by this Code.
10-520 Condominium Plat Process
Commercial Condominium Plats shall be submitted under the same
procedures followed for Subdivision by traditional platting as found in
Article 10-200 of the Ham Lake City Code, with the following
modifications:
a) The following sentence shall be added to the Notice to
Developers as found in Article 10-201:
“For Commercial Condominiums, no occupancy shall be
permitted in any condominium unit unless that particular use is
a permitted use in the zoning district in which the condominium
is located, or which is a conditional use in that district, and has
obtained a conditional use permit.”
b) The Sketch Plan shall identify the proposed footprint of all
structures, a site plan identifying the location of all common
area parking and drives, as well as the area in which ISTS will
be constructed. In addition, the Sketch Plan shall depict a
projected floor plan for each floor in each structure.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
26
c) At the Preliminary Plat stage, in lieu of the materials required
under Article 10-202 (B), the proponent shall furnish to the
City’s engineer the ISTS design and Mitigation Plan described
in Article 10-530 below. In addition, at the Preliminary Plat
stage, the proponent shall submit a detailed landscaping plan,
a preliminary Grading and Drainage plan, and a rendering of
the outside appearance of all structures to be constructed.
Building materials and standards shall conform to requirements
for other commercial buildings in the zoning district.
d) At the Final Plat stage, in lieu of the materials required under
Article 10-203 (A), the proponent shall furnish to the City’s
engineer the items and elements required by Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 515B.2-110(c) together with a complete
Grading and Drainage plan. The Final Plat shall be submitted
in accord with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 515B.2-101. All
declarations and owners association documents shall be
submitted for approval by the City’s attorney.
e) In lieu of the Development Agreement format in Article 10-
203(B), a Development Agreement shall be prepared and
executed in recordable form, and recorded at the time of
recording the Final Plat, embodying the following conditions:
i. A time frame shall be established for completion
of all improvements;
ii. Security for completion of all unfinished
improvements shall be established and posted as
in the case of other subdivisions;
iii. The overall parking stall requirements shall be
stated, and notification given to future unit
purchasers that no usage of any unit will be
approved or permitted if the usage generates the
need for parking that exceeds the overall parking
stall requirements.
iv. The overall ISTS capacity shall be stated, and
notification given to future unit purchasers that no
usage of any unit will be approved or permitted if
the usage generates effluent that exceeds the
overall ISTS capacity.
v. Any other conditions imposed by the City,
particularly if tree removal is a part of the project.
10-530 Livability Standards
Article 10-300 of the Ham Lake City Code shall not apply to Commercial
Condominium developments. The usage of Standard or “Other” ISTS is
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
27
permitted in Commercial Condominium developments, subject to the
following conditions:
a) The proponent of the project shall present a design for the ISTS
system intended to serve the project, prepared by a state-licensed
or certified ISTS designer. The design shall include estimates of
water usage shall using United States Geological Survey statistics,
University of Minnesota Onsite Treatment Manual or other
comparable data as approved by the City’s building official. The
design shall include a Mitigation Plan that describes the alternative
replacement or corrective action to be taken if an ISTS fails. The
design may include multiple occupant usage of the drainfield or
treatment portion of the ISTS.
b) ISTS designs shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the
City’s Building Official, Engineer, and such consultants as the City
may from time to time determine to utilize.
c) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any unit until the
drainfield area for that unit has been constructed and approved by
the City’s Building Official. In addition, all changes in occupancy in
a commercial condominium must be reviewed by the City’s Building
Official to verify that no increase in effluent will occur that threatens
the capacity of the ISTS. No change in occupancy shall be
permitted unless a new certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the City’s Building Official.
10-540 Parking Requirements
All parking lots shall be common areas. The number of parking stalls to
be installed shall be determined by reference to a parking space chart to
be maintained by the City’s Building Official, as approved by resolution of
the City Council, and amended as needed by resolution of the City
Council. The parking space chart shall reference various land uses and
contain corresponding parking stall requirements. If the proponent
imposes restrictive covenants by recording, limiting the usage of units to
particular land uses that, in the sole judgment of the City, will generate
less parking needs than would occur at one stall per 350 square feet, the
City may reduce the number of parking stalls accordingly. otwithstanding
the foregoing, if any unit is used or proposed for use as a restaurant,
theater or other use generating high traffic volumes, the City shall have
the right to increase the parking requirements to accommodate such uses.
10-550 General Conditions
All other conditions of the City’s subdivision code as found in Article 10-
400 shall be observed in every Commercial Condominium development,
excepting the following Articles: 10-410 (D) and (E); 10-410 (A), except
that the easement shall be dedicated around the perimeter of the
Condominium Plat itself; 10-420 (B) and (H); 10-430 (E), (G) (H) and (I).
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
28
The following additional or modified general conditions shall apply to all
Commercial Condominium projects.
A) Driveways and Parking Areas
Driveways, walkways and parking areas will be paved with
bituminous or concrete, bounded by concrete curb and gutter, in
accord with standards for other commercial developments in the
City.
B) Streetlighting
A streetlight meeting the standards for residential streetlights in the
City shall be placed at every entrance to a public road, and one
streetlight shall be placed in the parking areas for every 20 parking
stalls.
C) Landscaping
All landscaping shall be in accord with the landscape plan, and
shall be located in common areas, to be maintained by an owner’s
association. At a minimum, all areas not covered by paved
surfaces, installed landscaping features or structures shall be
covered in mown sod.
D) Setbacks
All building structures and curblines in any Commercial
Condominium shall observe the setback requirements for such
items as found in Table 10-1 of Article 10 and/or elsewhere in the
Ham Lake City Code, except that the minimum rear yard setback
shall be 10 feet.
E) Density
No Commercial Condominium shall be permitted on any lot having
an area of less than one acre. There is no limit on the number of
units that may be placed in a Commercial Condominium, so long
as parking, livability and height requirements are met.
10-560 Certificates of Occupancy and Change in Unit Ownership
Upon completion of construction of a condominium building, the owner or
unit owners thereof shall not be entitled to Certificates of Occupancy
unless the particular usage of each individual unit has been reviewed and
approved under the provisions of Article 9-140 of the Ham Lake City
Code. If there is a change in ownership of a condominium unit after a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued for that unit, the provisions of Article 9-
150 of this Code shall apply.
10-570Office Condominiums
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
29
An Office Condominium is a condominium project in which all of the units
are intended exclusively for usage as business offices, staffed by
professional or clerical staff, with no retail sales, showrooms containing
inventory, warehousing, or equipment other than office equipment. If the
proponent of a Commercial Condominium designates the project as an
Office Condominium at the time of Preliminary Plat review, and
subsequently implements the designation through declarations that limit
uses to office uses, and records the declaration, after review and approval
thereof by the City’s attorney, then the following shall apply:
A) The project shall be entitled to the assumption that all units are
Low Volume Units for determination of ISTS requirements;
B) The project shall be entitled to the assumption that one parking
stall per 350 square feet of condominium space shall be sufficient
in determining parking requirements;
C) The units shall be entitled to certificates of occupancy without
the need for site plan review under Article 9-140.
10-580 Declarations
If the Declarations or other documents for any commercial condominium
contain land use restrictions limiting the usage of one or more units in the
condominium to specific land uses, the documents containing such
restrictions shall include the following language, or language similar
thereto if approved by the City’s Attorney:
No change in this instrument or in any land use restriction imposed herein
shall be permitted without the consent, by resolution, of the Ham Lake
City Council. Further, if the land use restrictions imposed herein have a
termination date stated herein or a termination date that results from
Minnesota statutory provisions, no such termination shall affect the right of
the City to enforce restrictions on the land uses that are intended to
observe the City’s codes and ordinances relative to parking requirements
and Individual Sewage Treatment System requirements.
The purpose of the foregoing clause is to prevent unilateral changes in
land use restrictions that may affect parking and ISTS requirements, it
being the intention of the City to premise its initial parking and ISTS
requirements on the uses being dictated by the land use restrictions as
stated by the operative documents. The City’s review of any requested
change in the land use restrictions imposed shall not be limited to
compliance with parking and ISTS issues.
10-600 Variances
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
30
The City Council shall have the power to authorize variances from the
requirements of Article 10, and to attach such conditions to the variance as it
deems necessary to assure compliance with the purpose of this Code. A
variance may be permitted if the following requirements are met:
a) There is an unusual physical hardship to the land that would prevent the
reasonable usage of the land without a variance, and all the conditions of
sub-paragraph b), c) and d) below are met.
b) The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Code and is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
c) The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property
not created by the landowner; and
d) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality.
Table 10-1: Lot Standards
Standards
I-P (Industrial Park)
CD-1,CD-2, CD-3,CD-
4 (Commercial
Development)
I-1 (Light Industry) GF
(Government
Facilities)
Lot Size 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre
Lot Width ** 200 ft. 200 ft. 200 ft.
Front Yard
Setbacks *
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
Side Yard Setbacks 10 ft. 30 ft. 1 0 ft.
Rear Yard
Setbacks ***
20 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft.
All setbacks refer to the minimum distance between a given lot line and any
building, other structure, or curb line or pavement edge of any driveway, aisle,
sidewalk or parking lot.
EXCEPTION: Non-residential structures or uses shall not be located or
conducted closer to any lot line of any other lot in any “R” or “PUD” District than
the distances specified in the following schedule:
• Twenty Feet Off-street parking spaces and access drives for
non-residential uses, churches, schools, and
public or semi-public functions, recreational
facilities, entertainment facilities, motels, all
business uses, and all industrial uses.
**For lots wholly abutting the turnaround circle portion of a cul-de-sac street, the
Lot Width may be 60 feet as measured at the right-of-way line. For lots partially
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
31
abutting the turnaround circle portion of a cul-de-sac street, the total of that
frontage plus the remaining frontage on the street must total 200 or more feet.
***Commercial Condominiums under Article 10-550(D) of this Code may have a
Rear Yard Setback of 10 feet.
Standards R-A (Rural Res)
R-1 (Single-
Family Res)
RS-1 & RS-2
(Shoreland Res.)
Lot Size 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre
Lot Width ** 200 ft. 200 ft. 200 ft.
Front Yard
Setbacks *
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
Side Yard
Setbacks *****
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Rear Yard
Setbacks *****
10 ft. – Accessory
Buildings, 50 ft. for All
other structures
10 ft .– Accessory
Buildings, 50 ft. for
All other structures
10 ft. – Accessory
Buildings, 50 ft. for
All other structures
Standards PUD
(Planned Unit Dev.)
Lot Size 1 acre
Lot Width ** 200 ft.
Front Yard
Setbacks *
30 ft.
Side Yard
Setbacks
10 ft.
Rear Yard
Setbacks
50 ft.
Standards R-AH (Aff. Housing) Townhomes Other
Lot Size Sufficient for
Sewerage
50’x 50’****or 1 A. ***
Lot Width *** *** ***
Front Setback * *** *** ***
Side Setback *** *** ***
Rear Setback *** *** ***
Ham Lake City Code
Article 10
32
Standards R-2 (Multiple Family Residential)
Lot Size 3 acres or more for two unit buildings; four acres or
more for three unit buildings; five acres or more for four
unit buildings. For buildings having more than four
units, five acres plus one acre for every unit in excess of
four units.
Lot Width 300 ft.
Front Yard Setbacks * 30 ft.
Side Yard Setbacks 10 ft.
Rear Yard Setbacks 50 ft.
* 50 Ft. when abutting any State or County Highway
** For lots located on cul-de-sacs the width may be 60 feet at the right-of-way line.
*** As approved by the City Council
**** If used in connection with Common Areas owned by Association
***** For corner lots, the lot owner, at the time of application for the first building
permit on the lot, may choose which of the non-road frontage lot lines shall be
considered the side yard and which shall be the rear yard, regardless of which
road provides the driveway access. Once this selection is made, this choice
shall apply to all future building permits on this lot.
Physical Standards for RS-1 and RS-2 lands shall be identical with CD-1 or CD-2
Standards for Commercial Uses, I-1 Standards for Industrial Uses, R-A
Standards for Residential Agricultural Uses, PUD Standards for planned Unit
Development Uses, all subject to any modification imposed by Article 12 of this
Code.
Updated through Ordinance 19-07, 19-10
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
1
ARTICLE 11 - GENERAL ACTIVITY REGULATIONS
11-100 Recycling
11-100.1 Legislative Statement of Intent and Purpose
11-100.2 Definitions
A. Refuse
B. Recyclable Material
C. Non-recyclable Materials
D. Hauler
E. Recycling Container
F. Household
G. Plastic Containers
H. Co-mingled
11-100.3 Recycling Opportunities and Refuse Hauling Procedures
A. License Requirement for Haulers
B. Recycling Opportunities
C. Fees and Expenses
D. Annual Compliance Audit
E. Master List
F. City Recycling Center
G. Disposal of Recyclable Materials
11-100.4 Miscellaneous
A. Surety Bond
B. Insurance
C. Removal of Recyclable Materials
11-100.5 Enforcement of Minnesota Statutes requiring Waste
Collection Contracts
A. Mandatory Waste Collection Contract
B. Enforcement
C. Environmentally Sound Alternatives
11-200 Fences and Hedges
11-210 Definitions
A. Fence
B. Hedge
C. Front Yard
D. Side Yard
E. Back Yard
F. Principal Structure
11-220 Height
11-220.1 Varied Height Requirements
11-230 Reserved
11-240 Construction and Maintenance of Fences Generally
11-250 Residential District Fences
11-260 Commercial and Industrial Fences
11-270 In ground Swimming Pools
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
2
11-280 Electrified Security Fences
11-300 Signs – General Provisions Applicable to all Signs
11-310.1 Locations
11-310.2 Permits Required
11-310.3 Maintenance
11-320 Standards in Commercially Zoned Districts
11-320.1 Construction
11-320.2 Height of Freestanding Signs
11-320.3 Height of Signs Affixed to Buildings
11-320.4 Configuration of Lettering
11-320.5 Moving Parts
11-320.6 Maximum Size
11-320.7 General Sign Aesthetics
11-320.8 Illumination
11-320.9 Affixed Building Signs
11-320.10 Temporary Signs
11-320.11 Special Events
11-320.12 Construction Signs
11-330 Standards in R-A Zoning Districts
11-340 Standards in Specific Residential Districts
11-350 Exempt or Partially Exempt Signs
11-350.1 Small Signs
11-350.2 No Permit or Regulations Not Applicable
11-350.3 Temporary Neighborhood Signs
11-350.4 Neighborhood Monument Signs
11-360 Administration and Miscellaneous Signs
11-360.1 Non-Conforming Signs
11-360.2 Permit Procedures
11-360.3 Severability
11-400 Building, Well and Sewage Code
11-410 Building Code
11-411 Architectural Standards for Residential Structures
11-411.1 General Provisions
11-411.2 Residential and Agricultural Districts
A. Minimum Width
B. Minimum Roofage
C. Placement
D. Foundation
11-420 Mandatory Appendices
11-421 Organization and Enforcement
11-430 Building Permits: General Provisions
11-430.1 Fee Establishment
11-430.2 Permits and Standards
11-430.3 Failure to Achieve Exterior Completion
11-430.4 Final Submissions
11-440 Exceptions
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
3
11-450 Regulation of Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems
(SSTS)
11-450.1 Definitions
11-450.2 General Provisions
11-450.3 Use of Non-Standard Systems
11-450.4 Required SSTS Compliance Inspections
11-450.5 Inspections and Pumping Record
11-450.6 Types of SSTS Permitted, Standards and Requirements
11-450.7 Repairs/Replacement
11-450.8 Ground Surface Discharges
11-450.9 Qualifications
11-450.10 Dispute Resolution
11-460 Minnesota Water Well Contractor’s Code
11-470 Financial Assistance Program
11-600 Excavations and Reclamation
11-610 Definitions
11-620 Permissible Excavations (No Municipal Excavation Permit
Required)
11-630 Excavations Requiring Municipal Permit (“Regulated
Excavations”)
11-640 Standards for Excavations Requiring a Municipal Excavation
Permit
11-650 Permit Application
11-651 Initial Mining Precincts and Access Roads
11-652 Variances
11-700 Roads and Streets
11-710 Physical Standards
11-720 Special Standards for MSA and CSAH Roads
11-730 Residential Driveway Widths
11-800 Building Numbering System
11-810 Uniform Numbering System
11-820 Assignment of Numbers
11-830 Display of Numbers
11-840 Administration
11-900 Demolition and Moving-In of Buildings
11-910 Definitions
11-911 Building
11-912 Moving-In
11-913 Demolition
11-920 Permit Required
11-930 Permit for Demolition
11-1000 Solid Fuel Burning Appliances
11-1001 Adoption by Reference
11-1002 Definitions
11-1003 Permit Required
11-1004 Standards for Installation
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
4
11-1005 Identification Labels
11-1006 Inspection of Installation and Certificate of Compliance
11-1007 Miscellaneous
11-1100 Hotels, Motels and Lodging Houses
11-1101 Definitions
11-1101.1 Hotel/Motel
11-1101.2 Lodging House
11-1102 License Required
11-1102.1 Annual License
11-1102.2 Procedure for Issuance
11-1102.3 Additional Conditions
11-1102.4 Existing Facilities
11-1102.5 Violation of Terms
11-1102.6 Revocation
11-1103 Standards of Operation
11-1103.1 Sanitation
11-1103.2 Health, Fire and Building Code
11-1103.3 Quiet Enjoyment and Safety
11-1103.4 Compliance with Zoning Code
11-1103.5 Nuisances
11-1104 Local Lodging Tax
11-1104.1 Definitions
11-1104.2 Imposition of Tax
11-1104.3 Collections
11-1104.4 Exemptions
11-1104.5 Advertising No Tax
11-1104.6 Payments and Returns
11-1104.7 Examination of Return, Adjustment, Notices and Demands
11-1104.8 Refunds
11-1104.9 Failure to File a Return
11-1104.11 Penalties
11-1104.12 Administration of Tax
11-1104.13 Examination of Records
11-1104.14 Violations
11-1104.15 Use of Proceeds
11-1104.16 Appeals
11-1200 Natural Gas Pipelines and Installation
11-1201 Legislative Purpose
11-1202 Prohibited Activity
11-1203 Service Areas
11-1204 Installers
11-1300 Pawn Shops
11-1310 Legislative Finding of Fact
11-1320 Definitions
11-1330 License Required
11-1340 Conditions of Every License
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
5
11-1350 Physical Requirements
11-1360 Records Required to Be Kept
11-1370 Holding Of Property
11-1380 Hours of Operation
11-1390 Surety Bond Required
11-1400 Shade Tree Damage
11.1400.1 Annual Inspection Period
11.1400.2 Inventory of Damaged Trees
11.1400.3 Notification to Property Owners
11.1400.4 “No Cut” Period
11.1400.5 Other Assistance or Educational Programs
11.1400.6 Tree Commission
11-1500 Flea Markets
11-1510 Definitions
11-1520 Conditional Use Permit Required
11-1600 Radio Signal Towers
11-1610 Definitions
11-1611 Antenna
11-1612 Tower
11-1613 Tower User
11-1620 Tower Locations
11-1630 Physical Standards
11-1631 Height
11-1632 Construction Standards
11-1634 Number of Tower Users
11-1635 Aesthetics and landscaping
11-1640 License
11-1641 Term of License
11-1641.1 Tower Owner License
11-1641.2 Tower Use License
11-1642 License Fee
11-1650 Conditions of Issuance
11-1651 Maintenance
11-1652 Security
11-1653 Priority of Tower Users
11-1654 Violation of License Terms
11-1660 Miscellaneous Provisions
11-1661 Eminent Domain
11-1662 Termination of License
11-1663 Existing Towers
11-1664 Conflict of Law
11-1700 Right-of-Way Ordinance
11-1800 Landscaping in Commercially Zoned Areas
11-1810 Landscaping Plan Required
11-1820 Installation Required
11-1830 Time for Submission
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
6
11-1840 Contents and Specifications
11-1850 Minimum Landscaping Requirements
11-1851 Paved Surfaces
11-1852 Ground Cover
11-1853 Tree Plantings
11-1860 Case by Case Evaluation
11-1900 Illicit Discharges and Connections to Storm Drainage
System
11-1900.10 Definitions
11-1900.20 General Provisions
11-1900.30 Discharge Prohibitions and Certain Remedies
11-1900.40 Monitoring of Discharges
11-1900.50 Best Management Practices
11-1900.60 Notification of Spills
11-1900.70 Enforcement
11-2000 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
11-2000.10 Definitions
11-2000.20 Application and SWPPP Requirements for Contractor
11-2000.21 General Criteria
11-2000.30 Right of Entry Provision and Inspection Provision
11-2000.40 Onsite Activity Requirements
11-2000.50 Submittal Components
11-2000.51 Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plans
11-2000.52 SWPPP Design Components
11-2000.53 SWPPP Implementation Components
11-2000.54 Review
11-2000.55 Modification of Plan
11-2000.56 Financial Securities
11-2000.57 Emergency Action
11-2000.58 Notification of Failure of the SWPPP
11-2000.60 Sanctions for Compliance
11-2100 Subsurface Sewage Treatment System (SSTS) and Well
Water Loan Program
11-2110 Eligibility: Conditions
11-2120 Eligibility: Financial
11-2130 Assistance and Assessments
11-2140 Procedure for Approval
11-2150 Closing
11-2200 Transport of Fill to Lands
11-2210 Permit Required
11-2220 Exceptions
11-2230 Procedure
11-2300 Post-Construction Storm Water Management
11-2300.10 Definitions
11-2300.20 Applicability
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
7
11-2300.21 Exemptions
11-2300.22 Redevelopment Projects
11-2300.23 Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance
Requirements
11-2300.30 Post-Construction Stormwater Standards
11-2300.40 Post-Construction Stormwater Standards Exceptions and
Mitigation
11-2300.50 Post-Construction Maintenance and Inspections of
Structural Stormwater BMPs
11-2300.60 Public Structural Stormwater BMPs and Drainage
Easements
11-2300.70 Violations and Enforcement
11-2300.80 Development of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
11-2300.90 Permit Procedures and Requirements
11-2300.91 Application Requirements
11-2300.92 Application Procedure
11-2300.93 Development Agreement
11-2300.94 Reimbursement of Costs
11-2300.95 Inspection
11-2300.100 Waivers to Storm Water Management Requirements
11-2300.110 General Performance Criteria for Storm Water Management
11-2300.111 Peak Flow Rates
11-2300.112 Discharge
11-2300.113 Channel Protection
11-2300.114 Sensitive Areas
11-2300.115 NPDES Compliance
11-2300.116 Hotspots
11-2300.117 Additional Requirements
11-2300.118 Sizing
11-2300.120 Basic Storm Water Management Design Criteria
11-2300.121 Minimum Control Requirements
11-2300.122 Site Design Feasibility
11-2300.123 Conveyance Issues
11-2300.124 Pretreatment Requirements
11-2300.125 Treatment/Geometry Conditions
11-2300.126 Landscaping Plans Required
11-2300.127 Operation and Maintenance Agreements
11-2300.128 Non-Structural Storm Water Practices
Table No. 11-4 - PHYSICAL STANDARDS FOR ROADWAYS
Table No. 11-5 - PHYSICAL STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL PARKING
LOTS
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
8
ARTICLE 11 - GENERAL ACTIVITY REGULATIONS
11-100 Recycling
11-100.1 Legislative Statement of Intent and Purpose
The City Council of the City of Ham Lake finds that it is in the public interest,
and in furtherance of the promotion of the general health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the City of Ham Lake, to promote the practice of recycling
certain materials, so as to avoid overburdening sanitary landfills, and to make
more effective use of natural resources. The City Council further finds that
the benefits to be derived from recycling are of a community-wide nature and
that the cost associated with recycling are therefore legitimately a communitywide
expense. Finally, the City Council finds that at the present time, the City
of Ham Lake can best implement a recycling and refuse hauling program
through the use of a contract hauler, to be regulated in accordance with the
City’s overall goal of encouraging recycling, at a common expense. It is
therefore the purpose and intent of this ordinance to develop a method by
which a contract hauler can in fact perform the function of providing recycling
opportunities, in accordance with the above-stated goals, and in furtherance
of Laws of Minnesota, 1989 First Special Session, Chapter 1, Article 18, and
provide for refuse hauling.
11-100.2 Definitions
A. Refuse. REFUSE shall mean any material intended by the owner to be
discarded, which is picked up at the owner’s location by a licensed
HAULER.
B. Recyclable Material. The following items are, for the purposes of this
code, considered to be recyclable materials:
1. Glass containers, having no plastic, metal or other lids or
attachments;
2. Plastic containers, limited to PET, HDPE, and PVC having no metal
or other attachments made of a material other than plastic;
3. Metal objects or containers, limited to beverage and food cans;
4. Newspapers printed on paperstock commonly known as
“newsprint”, and excluding magazines, books, and other
publications.
C. Non-recyclable Materials. All REFUSE which does not meet the
definition of a recyclable material.
D. Hauler. A person, corporation, or other entity which is licensed by the
City of Ham Lake to collect, on a contract basis, REFUSE and
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. A Hauler may include an association of
individuals or corporations formed for the purpose of jointly providing
services.
E. Recycling Container. A container to be supplied to each customer or
HAULER who desires to take advantage of recycling opportunities. The
recycling container shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
from time to time established by the Ham Lake City Council.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
9
F. Household. Single family residential dwellings, including mobile homes,
or any single building consisting of four (4) or less separate dwelling
places with individual kitchen facilities for each located in the City of Ham
Lake who uses a contract HAULER for regular weekly REFUSE pickup,
for a fee charged by the HAULER, and/or participates in recycling offered
through contract HAULER.
G. Plastic Containers:
PET (polyethylene terephthalate) PET can be clear or tinted, but you can
see through it. Bottles have a small raised “tip” in the center of the base or
bottom. All 2-liter soft drink bottles are made from PET.
HDPE high density polyethylene) used for one- gallon and half gallon milk
containers, distilled water bottles, liquid laundry and dish-washing
detergent bottles, auto motor oil containers, windshield-washer fluid
containers, and as bottles for many brands of personal shampoo and
conditioners. HDPE is never clear, you cannot see through it because it is
either colored or frosted. Containers will float in water, even when they
are filled with water.
PVC (polyvinylchloride) PVC is used for cooling oil bottles, dry laundrydetergent
bottles, and other products. Unlike PET, PVC is hard. It is
clear and shiny. It will sink in water when filled with water.
H. Co-mingled. The practice of placing all recyclable material in a recycling
container without having to separate by type of material.
11-100.3 Recycling Opportunities and Refuse Hauling Procedures.
A. License Requirement for HAULERS. HAULER serving households
located within the City of Ham Lake shall first obtain a license, to be
issued by the City Clerk/Administrator.
1. Prerequisite to Issuance of License
a. Execution of Contract. The City Council shall grant, by contract
negotiated with a Hauler or Haulers, in accordance with law, the
authority to collect and dispose of all refuse and recyclable material
originating on residential premises located in the City of Ham Lake.
The HAULER shall execute a HAULER’S Contract, on forms to be
prescribed by the City Council, setting forth in detail the specific
duties and obligations of the HAULER with respect to recycling
opportunities and refuse disposal.
b. License Fee. An annual license fee shall be charged, to be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
c. Collection Exclusively by Contract Hauler. No person shall
collect refuse or recyclable materials from residential premises
within the City of Ham Lake except an entity holding a contract with
the City to do so. No person shall permit refuse or recyclable
materials to be picked up from residential premises owned or
rented except by such a contract hauler.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
10
B. Recycling Opportunities HAULER shall implement the following
recycling opportunities for households located in the City of Ham Lake.
1. Bi-monthly Pickup. Every household shall be afforded the
opportunity to dispose of recyclable materials on a co-mingled
basis on at least two dates each month, which dates shall coincide
with a regular refuse hauling date, (and there shall be at least two
weeks between recycling opportunity dates.
2. Recycling Container. Recycling containers shall be available for
purchase at the City Hall at cost plus tax.
3. Tonnage Reports. HAULER shall report on a quarterly basis the
total tonnage of recyclables collected in the City.
C. Fees and Expenses
1. Volume Fees. The HAULER shall afford to every household the
opportunity to be charged for REFUSE collection on the basis of
volume of REFUSE disposed of, to carry out the general intent that
the less REFUSE generated, the lower the REFUSE collection bill.
Volume shall not necessarily be deemed to refer to weight, but may
also refer to physical dimensions to include at least four levels.
D. Annual Compliance Audit. On or about November 15 or each and every
year, the City shall conduct a compliance audit to insure that HAULER is
in fact providing the recycling opportunities and refuse collection
mandated by this code, is following the proper procedure in administering
those opportunities, and is otherwise observing all of the conditions of this
ordinance and the regulations of any other agency having jurisdiction over
the disposal of REFUSE.
E. Master List. HAULER shall keep a master list of all households who
have received a recycling container, listing the name, address and
telephone number of the household. HAULER shall provide an updated
master list to the City upon request.
F. City Recycling Center. HAULER shall be responsible for maintaining
City Recycling Center located at 15544 Central Avenue NE, which shall
include removing the recyclable materials at least twice a month or more
frequently if containers are overflowing.
G. Disposal of Recyclable Materials. The recyclable materials collected by
HAULER shall be properly disposed of by HAULER, and the HAULER
shall be entitled to any revenues which are available from the disposal or
resale of recyclable materials collected in the City.
11-100.4 Miscellaneous
A. Surety Bond. The City Council shall require of HAULER a surety bond to
guarantee faithful and continuous refuse collection service under the
conditions imposed by the ordinance of the City.
B. Insurance. No license shall be issued until the applicant therefore has
placed on file with the City Administrator a certificate of insurance
indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any
damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and
facilities operated in connection with the applicant’s business. Such
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
11
insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000 for each person
and $300,000 for each accident.
C. Removal of Recyclable Materials. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than licensed HAULER, to remove any recyclable materials from
recycling containers at curbside.
11-100.5 Enforcement of Minnesota Statutes requiring Waste Collection
Contracts
A. Mandatory Waste Collection Contract
Every residential household and business within the City of Ham Lake shall,
by December 31, 1993, maintain a contract with solid waste collection service
for regular waste collection. Regular waste collection shall be deemed to be
at least twice monthly.
B. Enforcement
Upon receipt of any report from any source that a particular household or
business is not in compliance with Article 11-100.5 (A), the CITY
ADMINISTRATOR shall serve notice in the manner provided for service of
process under the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure, of the above
requirements to the occupant of the premises. Within thirty (30) days after
notice, exclusive of the day of service, the occupant shall provide evidence of
an environmentally sound alternative to contracted solid waste collection
service.
C. Environmentally Sound Alternatives
Households or businesses which can demonstrate that they are utilizing
environmentally sound alternatives to contracted regular waste collection
services may be exempt from this ordinance, if such household or business
complies with documentation requirements of the City Council. The Ham
Lake City Council shall determine whether or not the documentation provided
by the household or business does indicate an environmentally sound
alternative, and upon a finding by the Ham Lake City Council that such
documentation does not evidence an environmentally sound alternative, the
household or business requesting such exemption shall, within 30 days after
written notice of such a finding, contract for the services of a waste collection
service in accordance with the City’s ordinance licensing waste collection
services, and shall provide proof of compliance within said time period.
11-200 FENCES AND HEDGES
11-210 Definitions
For the purposes of this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein stated:
A. Fence. Any structure which is 36 inches or more in height, and a length
of 6 feet or more, which is composed on non-living materials which cover
the entire area bounded by said height and length criteria;
B. Hedge. Any grouping of vegetation which creates a visual barrier of a
substantially opaque nature for a length of 6 feet or more and for a height
of from ground level to 36 inches above ground level;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
12
C. Front Yard. The area between the public street right-of-way line and the
minimum required building setback line, as measured along any side of a
lot. Lakeshore properties shall be considered on both lakeside and
roadside to be front yards.
D. Side Yard. The area between the front yard and back yard of any lot;
E. Back Yard. The area lying to the rear of the rear building line of the
principal structure on any lot;
F. Principal Structure. In the case of property used wholly or partially for
residential purposes, the principal structure shall be the structure housing
any dwelling unit. In all other cases, the principal structure shall be the
structure located closest to any adjacent street, or, in the case of more
than one building equidistant from such street, the building containing the
greater square footage shall be deemed the principal structure.
11-220 Height
Fences and hedges shall not exceed the following heights unless a variance
from this ordinance is granted by the City Council.
11-220.1 Varied Height Requirements
The above fence height requirements may be varied by resolution of the City
Council, where the following conditions are met:
a) The fence will not present any public safety problems;
b) The height requested will not deprive adjoining properties of air,
light, or ventilation, sight lines or create aesthetic problems.
Zoning
Classification
Front Yard Side yard Back Yard
R-1, R-2, RS-1, RS-
2, ML-PUD, PUD
4 feet 6 feet 6 feet
R-A, C-A 4 feet 6 feet 6 feet
CD-1-2-3 & 4, B-1,
B-2
• 6-12 feet • 6-12 feet • 6-12 feet
I-1, I-2 • 6-12 feet • 6-12 feet • 6- 12 feet
• Height marked with an asterisk may be increased by two feet to
accommodate a barbed wire security arm top.
11-230 Reserved
11-240 Construction and Maintenance of Fences Generally. Every fence
shall be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike manner and of substantial
material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be
used. Fences shall be constructed so that their more attractive side faces
neighboring property. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of
reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition
of disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such
fence which is, or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare,
is a public nuisance and the Ham Lake Building Inspector shall commence
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
13
proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. Link fences, wherever permitted,
shall be constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top
except in Industrial and Commercial Districts. Electric and barbed wire fences
shall be permitted only on agriculturally zoned property (R-A), and shall be
permitted only when necessary to further so bona fide agricultural purpose.
11-250 Residential District Fences. The following conditions shall apply in the
R-1, RS-1 and PUD zoning districts:
(1) No fence shall be erected in any front yard to a height in excess of
four (4) feet, nor in any other location to a height in excess of six (6)
feet.
(2) On corner lots in all districts, no fence or planting in excess of thirty
(30) inches above the street center line grade shall be permitted within
a triangular area defined as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
the projected curbing lines of two intersecting streets, thence twenty
(20) feet along one property line, thence diagonally to a point twenty
(20) feet from the point of beginning on the other property line, thence
to the point of beginning.
(3) In those instances where a fence exists as an enclosure which
restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate, identifiable
collapsible section, or other such means of recognizable
ingress/egress shall be unobstructed and a minimum of three (3) feet
in width. The location of such ingress/egress points shall be positioned
at any point paralleling the front lot line, between the side lot property
line and the principle structure. In those instances where a property
contain ponds or Public Works needs to access the property for
stormwater management purposes, the gate or ingress/egress point
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
(4) Fences on the corner lots must receive special consideration from the
Ham Lake Building Official to assure site safety before a Building
Permit is issued. This review may require the applicant to pay an
additional fee if extraordinary means need to be taken to ascertain
impacts (i.e. consultation by a Traffic Engineer).
(5) Lakeshore properties shall be considered on both lakeside and
roadside to be frontyards. In lakeside frontyard of lakeshore
properties a maximum of twenty (20) feet of privacy fence can be
erected from the rear of the home. Beyond twenty (20) feet a four (4)
foot fence, not of opaque material may be erected to extend no further
than the high water mark. In roadside frontyard of lakeshore
properties shall meet the residential frontyard requirements.
(6) No fence shall be constructed of plastic mesh, snow-fence lath,
chicken-wire, or any other metal except for wrought iron or chain-link.
11-260 Commercial and Industrial Fences.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
14
Fences in all Commercial and Industrial Zoning shall not be less than 6 (six)
feet and not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and may be increased to
accommodate a barbed wire security arm top except that:
(1) Special Purpose Fences. Fences for special purposes and fences
differing in construction, height or length may be permitted in any
district in the City of Ham Lake with approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council. Findings shall be made that the
fence is necessary to protect, buffer or improve the premises for which
the fence is intended.
(2) Metal panel and chain link fencing are not appropriate in Commercial
Development Tier 1 (CD-1) zoning. Fencing is not appropriate in front
yard area facing Highway 65.
11-270 Inground Swimming Pools – Every “in-ground” swimming pool shall be
enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet high. In-ground shall be
defined to mean a pool requiring excavation of more than 12 inches of existing
grade.
11-280 Electrified Security Fences
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 11-240, electrified security fencing may
be installed in areas zoned CD-1, CD-2, CD-3, CD-4, I-P, I-1, or G-F, under the
following circumstances:
(a) The electrification is necessary to prevent or deter intrusion into an
outdoor storage area during non-business hours. In order to document
need, the applicant shall furnish a written communication from a
representative of the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office confirming that an
electrified fence would constitute a crime deterrent for the particular
parcel to be served;
(b) The electrification is charged only during non-business hours of the
establishment;
(c) The electrification is at a voltage level that is non-lethal to humans, and
otherwise not a threat to cause serious injury;
(d) The installation meets all applicable electrical codes;
(e) The design of the system is approved by the City’s building official after
review by the Fire Department and the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office.
The City may establish as a design limitation a condition that only
limited strands of wires at predetermined heights may be electrified;
(f) Adequate warning signs are posted, to the specifications of the City’s
building official;
(g) The system has a shutoff that is easily accessible by emergency
responders;
(h) A permit has been obtained from the City’s building official, after
payment of a permit fee to be established from time to time by the City
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
15
Council. The City may revoke a permit if the fence is not properly
constructed, used or maintained.
11-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS AND
DEFINITION A “sign” shall mean any device designed to attract attention to a
particular object or activity.
Substitution Clause: In the body of the following article, references may
be made to specific messages that may appear on a particular sign,
Notwithstanding such references, nothing in this code shall be deemed to
limit the message that may appear on any sign described in this code, and
any message may be substituted for any specific content characterized
below, so long as the size, number of signs and other required physical
characteristics of the sign are compliant with this code. The use of
specific content references is intended only to serve as an example of
what types of content typically appear on various signs, but does not limit
content to those examples.
11-310 Regulations Common to all Signs
11-310.1 Locations No sign shall be permitted within ten (10) feet any
public right-of-way, or in any location which interferes with sight lines for
motorists or pedestrians in a manner which could be inimical to public
safety. No sign shall be permitted upon any public or private utility
easement unless the benefited party under such easement has granted
written consent for the sign.
11-310.2 Permits Required Except as exempted under Article 11-350,
no sign shall be erected unless a permit shall have first been obtained
from the City. The City’s building official shall issue permits for all signs,
except that any sign proposed to be located in any commercial or
industrial district may, if referred by the building official, be reviewed by
the Planning Commission and the City Council. Sign review shall be
limited to commentary on sign aesthetics, and no regulation of sign
content shall be permitted or attempted. The building official may also, in
his or her discretion, refer any other application for a sign permit for
Planning Commission review and City Council action. If a sign for which a
permit is obtained is not properly completed within one year after the date
of the permit, the permit shall be deemed expired.
11-310.3 Maintenance The party to whom a sign permit is issued shall
be responsible to maintain the sign at all times, both in terms of structural
integrity and physical appearance. Maintenance shall include, without
limitation, the avoidance of faded coloring, cracked or peeling paint,
visible rust, broken fixtures, cracked or broken masonry, malfunctioning or
non-functioning electrical components, untrimmed, dead or dying
landscape vegetation, or unrepaired vandalism. The failure of a permittee
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
16
to correct an improperly maintained sign within thirty days of written notice
from the City shall be grounds for the City to revoke the sign permit.
11-320 Standards in Commercially Zoned Districts
The following standards shall be followed for all signs located in areas zoned
CD-1, CD-2, CD-3, CD-4, I-P, I-1, or GF.
11-320.1 Construction Except as specifically excluded by this code, all
signs shall be constructed in conformance with standards prescribed by
the Uniform Building Code and by the 1991 edition of the Uniform Sign
Code. These standards include, without limitation, structural
requirements, specifications for materials, seismic and wind loads, glass
and plastic usage and specifications, electrical wiring specifications and
other requirements.
11-320.2 Height of Freestanding Signs No portion of any freestanding
sign shall exceed twenty-five feet in height, as measured from the highest
elevation of ground level beneath the sign footprint. Berms or hills created
to artificially increase the natural or normal elevation of ground level
beneath the sign shall be disregarded in computing sign height.
11-320.3 Height of Signs Affixed to Buildings No portion of any sign
which is affixed to a building (including a sign placed upon an awning)
shall exceed the parapet height of the building, or, if there be no parapet,
then the eaves of the building.
11-320.4 Configuration of Lettering No lettering on any sign shall
exceed thirty-six inches in height. All lettering shall be in aesthetic
proportions to the sign perimeter or surrounding structures. Except where
necessary to display a logo or trademark, lettering shall be uniform in style
for each sign or common sets of signs.
11-320.5 Moving Parts Except for changeable copy lettering and
electronic readerboard images, no sign shall contain moving parts
designed to attract attention to the sign. Moving parts, such as access
panels, which are a component of the functional aspects of the sign are
permissible.
11-320.6 Maximum Size
a) No sign shall be permitted which contains more than one
Hundred (100) square feet, or 200 square feet if two-sided. Where more
than one sign or element of signage is proposed for a given real estate
parcel of record, the aggregate square footage of all signage on the parcel
shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. The area of a sign
shall be computed using the outside perimeter which reasonably borders
or encompasses the sign content, including all lettering or imagery.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
17
b) If a building contains multiple tenants, each tenant may be allotted
a pro-rata share of the permitted square footage allowed on that parcel for
a freestanding sign or signs, as determined by the sign owner. In addition
to signage on a freestanding sign, individual tenants of a multi-tenant
building may have signage affixed to the front of their occupied space
building that is of a size of up to 10% of the square footage of the front of
the occupied space, but not to exceed 100 square feet. The front of the
occupied space shall be considered to be the area on the side of the
building containing the main entrance to the tenant space that is
obtained by multiplying the building height times the width of the actual
space occupied by the tenant.
c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a commercial building has a
corner consisting as two wall surfaces each facing a separate public road,
then in addition to the wall signage allowed on the main entrance side, a
total of 100 square feet of wall signage may be permitted on the side that
does not contain the main entrance, to be allocated by the landlord
among the tenants. The “main entrance side” shall be the wall surface
that contains the greater number of tenant entrances.
(d) If a commercial building with a single tenant has a corner consisting
as two wall surfaces each facing a separate public road then in addition to
the allowed 300 square feet, an additional 100 square feet of total signage
will be allowed.
11-320.7 General Sign Aesthetics All sign owners shall be encouraged
to construct signs in which signage intensity, color schemes, images,
dimensions and construction materials are generally compatible with
buildings, nearby land usages, and reflect a reasonable balance between
aesthetics and the need to provide advertisement of a particular subject or
object. Any sign constructed of materials blended with the ground
surface, such as a monument sign, shall be accompanied by
complementary landscaping.
11-320.8 Illumination No illumination shall be permitted in connection
with any sign which creates any danger to public safety, or which casts
light or images which interfere with the quiet enjoyment of adjacent or
nearby residential property.
11-320.9 Affixed Building Signs Affixed Building Signs are letters that
are either directly affixed or attached to a track on one or more walls of
the building from which the business operates. Such letters may not be
painted on the wall, but must be constructed of a durable and color-fast
material, and constructed in manner where individual letters are affixed to
the wall by usage of glue, fasteners, or a combination thereof. Letters of
such signs may be up to thirty-six inches in height. The area of such a
sign shall be computed by drawing an imaginary line around the perimeter
of the lettering, which line shall be located six inches above the highest
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
18
elevation of any letter; six inches beneath the lowest elevation of any
letter; and six inches on either side of the letters furthest to the left and
right as one faces the sign. The area of this rectangle shall be deemed to
be the area of the Affixed Building Sign, and shall count against the
maximum sign areas noted in Article 11-320.6 (a, b, or c). Lettering may
not protrude above the roof or parapet of any building, nor may lettering
protruded beyond the corner of a building.
11-320.10 Temporary Signs The Zoning Official may issue permits for
temporary signs in any commercially zoned district, such as portable
signs, provided that the temporary signs are used for no more than thirty
(30) consecutive days, and on no more than three (3) occasions per year
per business.
11-320.11 Special Events The Zoning Official may issue permits for
temporary signs designed for usage in connection with special events,
such as holidays, initial business grand openings, or civic events. Such
temporary signs may include inflatable devices, pennants, hand-painted
banners, searchlights, streamers or the like. No such temporary sign shall
be in use for more than thirty (30) days in the case of civic events, or more
than seven (7) days for all other events. City sponsored civic events are
exempt from this provision.
11-320.12 Construction Signs The building official may issue permits
for temporary construction signs. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet, and shall be limited to one sign facing each road which
abuts the lot upon which construction is taking place. Such temporary
signs may remain in place for up to one year.
11-330 Standards in R-A Zoning Districts
The standards for signs in the R-A Zoning District shall be identical to those
found in Article 11-320, except that no sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in
area, and no sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
11-340 Standards in Specific Residential Districts
No signs shall be permitted in any area zoned R-1, R-M, R-AH, PUD, RS-1 or
RS-2 except for temporary signs that are no greater than six square feet in size,
except that Neighborhood Monument Signs as defined in Article 11-350.4 of this
code may be up to 40 square feet in size, as measured on the perimeter of the
border of the message displayed (excluding structural components of the sign).
Only one sign may be placed on a residential lot, except that if it is a corner lot
with two road frontages, one sign may be permitted facing each road. Such
signs may be in place for no more time than is necessary to accomplish the
intended purpose of the sign. A single “monument” or other sign erected by a
neighborhood association or land developer may be placed on private property
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
19
at any road entrance to the neighborhood, provided that the sign is maintained
by the property owner on whose parcel the sign is placed.
11-350 Exempt or Partially Exempt Signs The following categories of signs
shall be permitted in accordance with the standards or requirements noted
below.
11-350.1 Small Signs No permit or regulation shall be required for signs
of less than two (2) square feet, provided that the attaching of such signs
to utility poles or otherwise within public right of way without the written
permission of the easement or fee owner shall be prohibited.
11-350.2 No Permit or Regulations Not Applicable The following items
shall not require permits and shall not otherwise be considered “signs” or
“signage” for the purposes of code regulation:
a) Signs or lettering affixed to the inside of a window, comprising
not more than 30% of the window area;
b) On-premise signs affixed to a building and comprising less than
four (4) square feet;
c) Signs located entirely within the interior of a building;
d) Signs erected by or at the direction of any governmental
authority, or which are required by law to exist, such as warning
beacons or devices.
e) Signs for which regulation has been preempted by State Law,
such as Minnesota Statutes Chapter 211B.045 (election year
signage).
11-350.3 Temporary Neighborhood Signs Signs meeting the criteria of
Article 11-340 shall not require permits.
11-350.4 Neighborhood Monument Signs A “Neighborhood Monument
Sign” is a sign that is erected by a residential subdivision developer or
owner’s association at the time of marketing and construction of the
subdivision. Neighborhood Monument Signs shall be constructed of
materials requiring little or no ongoing maintenance, such as masonry. No
portion of any Neighborhood Monument Sign shall be located closer than
ten feet from any road right-of-way. No Neighborhood Monument Sign
shall be permitted unless, as a part of the development agreement for the
subdivision, a reasonable system for ongoing maintenance of the sign is
provided, at no cost or expense to the City. Further, the development
agreement shall provide that if the sign is not properly maintained, the City
may, upon reasonable notice to the residents of the neighborhood, come
upon the property upon which the sign sits and remove the signage.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
20
11-360 Administration and Miscellaneous Provisions
11-360.1 Non-Conforming Signs Existing signs which do not conform
to the provisions of this code, meaning signs which were legally in
existence as of the effective date of this Article 11-300 et seq., shall be
recognized as legal usages unless the sign is abandoned, meaning that
the sign is destroyed or rendered incapable of conveying its message,
and such state continues uncorrected for twelve consecutive months.
11-360.2 Permit Procedures
a) Permit Application
Applications for permits shall be reviewed by the building official.
Application for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and
shall state or have attached thereto the following information, if required
by the building official.
i) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant,
the owner of the parcel on which the sign is to be erected or
affixed, the owner of the sign, and the person to be erecting or
affixing the sign.
ii) Type of sign.
iii) Type of construction materials to be used.
iv) Location of building, structure or parcel to which, or upon which,
the sign is to be attached or erected.
v) Position of the sign or other advertising structures in relation to the
nearest buildings, structures, public streets, right-of-ways and
property lines, along with location and square footage areas for all
existing signs on the same premises. The drawing showing such
position shall be prepared “to scale”;
vi) If illuminated, method of illumination shall be outlined in
accordance with illumination standards.
vii) Blueprint or ink drawing of the plans and specifications, and
method of construction or attachment to the building or in the
ground, including all dimensions, footings, locating all light sources,
wattage, type and color of lights and details of any light shields or
shades.
viii) Copy of stress sheets and calculations, showing the structure is
designated for dead load and wind velocity in the amount required
by this and all other ordinances of the City.
ix) Site plan and landscaping plan.
b) Permit Fees Permit fees shall be established from time to time by
ordinance adopted by the City Council.
11-360.3 Severability Article 11-300 shall be deemed in all respects
severable, such that if any portion of this article shall be found
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
21
unenforceable, such a finding shall affect only that portion, and shall not
invalidate the entire Article.
11-400 Building, Well and Sewage Code
11-410 Building Code:
Section 1 Application, Administration and Enforcement. The application,
administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with
Minnesota Rule Chapter 1300. The code shall be enforced within the
extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1,
when so established by this ordinance.
The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the Building
Department.
This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official
designated by this Municipality to administer the code (Minnesota statute
16B.65) subdivision 1.
Section 2 Permits and Fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees
shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1. Permit fees
shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by the municipality in (ie. City Code #, Ordinance # etc.). In
addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this code in accordance with Minnesota statute 16B.70.
Section 3 Violations and Penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor
(Minnesota statute 16B.69) and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1300
Section 4 Building Code. The Minnesota State Building Code, established
pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 16B.59 to 16B.75 is hereby adopted as the building code for
this
Municipality. The code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out
herein.
A. The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following chapters of
Minnesota Rules:
1. 1300, Administration of the Minnesota State Building Code;
2. 1301, Building Official Certification;
3. 1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals;
4. 1303, Minnesota Provisions;
5. 1305, Adoption of the 2000 International Building Code;
6. 1307, Elevators and Related Devices.
7. 1309, Adoption of the 2000 International Residential Code;
8. 1311, Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing
Buildings;
9. 1315, Adoption of the 2002 National Electrical Code;
10.1325, Solar Energy Systems;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
22
11.1330, Fallout Shelters;
12.1335, Floodproofing Regulations, excluding 1335.0600 through 1335.1200;
13.1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code;
14.1346, Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code;
15.1350, Manufactured Homes;
16.1360, Prefabricated Structures;
17.1361, Industrialized/Modular Buildings;
18.1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);
19.4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code
21. 7670, 7672, 7674, 7676 and 7678, Minnesota Energy Code
B. This municipality may adopt by reference any or all of the following optional
chapters of Minnesota Rules: Chapter 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems;
and Chapter 1335,
Floodproofing Regulations, parts 1335.0600 to 1335.1200.
C. This municipality may adopt by reference appendix chapter K (Grading), of
the 2001
Supplements to the International Building Code.
The following optional provisions identified in Section 4, Subp. B and C are
hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the building code for this
municipality.
Section 5 The adoption of Article 11-410 is intended to include all future
amendments and revisions to the Minnesota State Building Code
Section 6 All references in Article 11 referring to “Minnesota State Building
Code” are amended and refer to the “2006 International Building
Code” (IBC) and the “International Residential Code” (IRC).
11-411 Architectural Standards for Residential Structures.
11-411.1 General Provisions
No building permit for structures in the City of Ham Lake shall be issued
where the materials, scale, bulk, or character of a structure, house, or
building, is so dissimilar to other structures, houses or buildings in the
vicinity as to result in the depreciation of property values or the
degradation of the environment in the immediate area. The Zoning
Officer shall, in his discretion, make a determination as to whether or not
any proposed structure fails to meet the above criteria, and in the event of
such an opinion, said opinion shall be confirmed by the City Council,
which may, in its discretion, refer the proposed plans to the Planning
Commission for comment prior to acting upon such a request.
11-411.2 Residential and Agricultural Districts.
In districts RA, R1, R2, R3, RS1 and RS2, the following standards shall
apply for single family detached dwellings.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
23
A. Minimum Width. The minimum width of the main portion of the
structure shall be not less than 24 feet, as measured across the
narrowest portion.
B. Minimum Roofage. The pitch of the main roof shall be in
compliance with the Minnesota Residential Building Code as
adopted by the City of Ham Lake.
C. Placement. All single family dwellings shall be placed so that the
apparent entrance or front of the home faces or parallels the
principal street frontage.
D. Foundation. All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent
foundation in compliance with the Minnesota Residential Building
Code as adopted by the City of Ham Lake.
11-420 Mandatory Appendices. In addition to those items listed above, the
following Appendices, Standards and Supplemental Materials reference in
the Code are hereby adopted by reference as part of the Building Code in the
City of Ham Lake and incorporated into this ordinance as completely as if set
out in full.
1. Minnesota State Building Code, Technical Requirements for Fallout
Shelters, Minnesota Rules Chapter 1330;
2. Minnesota State Building Code, Variations in Snow Loads, Minnesota
Rules Chapter 1365;
3. Latest Uniform Building Code Appendix Chapter 35;
4. Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minnesota Rules 4715.3900 - 4715.4100.
11-421 Organization and Enforcement: The organization of the Building
Department and enforcement of the Code shall be as established by Chapter
2 of the Uniform Building Code latest Edition. The Code shall be enforced
within the incorporated limits of the City, and extraterritorial limits permitted by
Minnesota Statutes, 1984.
The Building Department shall be the Building Code Department of the City
of Ham Lake. The administrative Authority shall be a State Certified “Building
Official”.
The Appointing Authority shall designate the Building Official for the
jurisdiction of Ham Lake.
11-430 Building Permits: General Provisions. The following terms and
conditions shall apply to all projects for which a Building Permit is
required.
11-430.1 Fee Establishment Permits, inspections and collection of fees
shall be provided as for by resolution of the City Council. In addition to the
municipal permit fee the applicant shall pay a surcharge to be remitted to
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
24
the Minnesota Department of Administration as prescribed by Minnesota
Statutes Section 16B.70.
11-430.2 Permits and Standards A building permit, once issued, shall
be valid for the period of time permitted by the State Building Code,
including any authorized extensions thereof. However, the structure for
which the permit has been issued must attain “Exterior Completion” within
one year of the date of issuance of the Building Permit. Exterior
Completion means that the structure must have the exterior appearance
of a completed structure, including, without limitation, the following
features:
a) All roofing is covered in an approved roofing material, such
as shingling;
b) All exterior walls have been covered with painted or treated
siding, masonry, stucco or other approved siding material;
c) All doors and windows have been installed, and all outside
door and window frames have been installed and either painted
or sheathed;
d) All soffit and fascia have been installed and either painted or
sheathed;
e) All sidewalks and driveways have been paved;
f) Turf has been established on all lawn areas.
11-430.3 Failure to Achieve Exterior Completion If the applicant or
property owner has not achieved Exterior Completion by the required
date, then, in addition to any enforcement remedies available to the City
under its nuisance codes, the City’s building official may decline to make
any additional inspection of work pursuant to the permit until and unless
the Exterior Completion is attained The City Council may, by resolution
from time to time adopt escrow policies to insure the timely completion of
various stages of construction.
11-430.4 Final Submissions. After completion of all inspections, the
applicant shall submit to the City’s Building Official a well log containing
such information as is required by the Building Official; a water test
performed by a qualified testing lab acceptable to the Building Official,
demonstrating water quality within acceptable ranges; and an as-built plan
of the Individual Sewage Treatment System (ISTS) prepared by a
qualified designer or installer, demonstrating compliance with codes that
are applicable to ISTS. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for
any structure unless these submittals are made.
11-440 Exceptions. The above listed uniform codes are hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference with the following exceptions:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
25
A. The City Council shall be the Board of Appeals and shall act upon all
questions as they may arise in the administration of this code and shall
hear, review and decide upon all appeals that are brought before this
Board. The decision of such Board shall not be final and any person
having an interest affected by such Code shall have the right to appeal to
the Minnesota State Commissioner of Administration.
B. Fees for building permits shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. A schedule of fees shall be posted or
maintained by the Zoning Officer at City Hall for inspection by the public.
C. Minimum Size for Single Family Residential Dwellings. Subject to the
provisions of any state law to the contrary, no building permit shall be
issued for any single family dwelling unit which does not meet the
following minimum square footage size requirements:
1. For those types of construction having finished living space on more
than one level, there shall be a total of 960 square feet of finished
living space, of which not less than 720 square feet shall be on the
main level, and not less than 240 square feet shall be on one other
level, which level shall not be immediately above or below the main
level. Main level shall refer to that level which contains the greatest
amount of living space as measured by its square footage.
2. For all other types of construction, the minimum square footage shall
be 960 square feet on the main level. The main level shall be that
level which sits at or above the grade of the lot.
11-450 Regulation of Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems (SSTS)
11-450.1 Definitions
The definitions found in Minnesota Rules 7080.1100 are hereby adopted
by reference as if fully set forth herein. In addition, the following definitions
apply:
A. Failed System - an SSTS which poses an imminent threat to
public health or safety or which is discharging effluent above ground.
B. Non-Standard System - an SSTS which meets the description of a
Type II, Type III, Type IV or Type V system as described in the following
sections of Minnesota Rules:
Type II: Rule 7080.2250
Type III: Rule 7080.2300
Type IV: Rule 7080.2350
Type V: Rule 7080.2400
C. Standard System - an SSTS meeting the description of a Type I
system as found in Minnesota Rule 7080.2200.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
26
D. Non-Complying System – an existing SSTS which is protective of
groundwater, is not an imminent threat to public health or safety, is not
discharging effluent above ground, but which otherwise does not meet
applicable government codes for SSTS construction.
E. Failing System – an SSTS that meets the criteria of a system that
fails to protect groundwater as outlined and described in Minnesota Rules
7080.1500 Subpart 4 (B).
11-450.2 General Provisions
All sewage generated in the City shall be treated either in a Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency–permitted facility, or in an SSTS that meets the
requirements of this code.
No person shall install, alter, repair or operate an SSTS except in
compliance with this code. No person shall cover any portion of any
SSTS which is being constructed, altered or repaired unless in
compliance with written inspection policies as developed and maintained
from time to time by the City's Building Official. No activity which
constitutes construction, alteration or repair of an SSTS or Holding Tank
shall commence unless the plans for the activity have been first approved
by the City's building official, and without a permit having been issued by
the City's building official for the activity. Any structural activity, such as
remodeling, which will add effluent to an SSTS, shall be considered
activity which constitutes construction, alteration or repair of an SSTS.
For the purposes of this Code, a person responsible for violations hereof
shall include the contractor performing any activity, and shall also include
the owner(s) of the parcel upon which the activity is being performed. New
SSTS construction that is not compliant with this code, or other work on a
system that is not compliant with this code shall be brought into
compliance within seven days after written notification from the Building
Official, unless a different deadline is specified in the notice.
11-450.3 Use of Non-Standard Systems
Non-Standard Systems shall be used only when the use of a Standard
System is infeasible, and when used, shall be constructed in accord with
all applicable rules and regulations.
11-450.4 Required SSTS Compliance Inspections
An SSTS compliance inspection (meaning an inspection by a person or
entity licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency to determine
compliance with minimum construction standards) shall be required in the
following circumstances:
a) For a new or replacement SSTS;
b) When altering an existing structure to add a bedroom;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
27
c) When a parcel having an Existing System undergoes development,
subdivision by platting or lot split.
If an SSTS is found to be noncompliant with minimum construction codes,
notice thereof shall be sent by regular US Mail to the property owner.
11-450.5 Inspections and Pumping Required
A. Inspections
Every SSTS shall be inspected at least one time in every three years,
provided, that in order to spread the time for review of inspection reports
uniformly, the City Administrator may divide the City into three separate
reporting groups. The City shall maintain a database which contains a
complete inventory of every SSTS in the City, the name and address of
the property owner, and such other data about each SSTS as may be
available to the City. The inspection shall be performed by the owner of
the real estate upon which the SSTS is located, or by the owner’s
designated inspector. The inspection shall be at the expense of the
property owner. Inspections shall include, at a minimum, a thorough
evaluation of whether or not any effluent is or has been percolating to the
surface of the ground, and each inspection shall also include the following
measurements:
1) The distance between sludge and the bottom of outlet baffles;
2) The distance between scum and the bottom of outlet baffles.
B. Standards, Reporting and Maintenance
Where there is less than 12 inches between sludge and the bottom of
outlet baffles, or where the scum line is found to be less than 3 inches
above the bottom of outlet baffles, this condition shall be noted on the
inspection report. The inspector shall complete an inspection report on
forms to be maintained by the City Building Official and shall forward
copies to the City Building Official as soon as inspections are complete.
Maintenance of SSTS shall be in accord with Minnesota Rules 7080.2450.
C. Pumping
If any inspection reveals that there is less than 12 inches between sludge
and the bottom of outlet baffles, or where the scum line is found to be less
than 3 inches above the bottom of outlet baffles, the SSTS shall be
pumped within 30 days of the inspection, and the owner shall provide
evidence to the City Building Official that pumping was completed.
Pumping shall be performed only by pumpers who are licensed or
otherwise approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
D. Identification of Failed System or Failing System
If an SSTS is reported by an Inspector to be a Failed or Failing System
and the property owner does not agree with the finding, the property
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
28
owner may request that the City Building Official re-inspect the SSTS to
provide a second opinion as to the status of the SSTS. A fee equal to the
City's actual labor and mileage costs to perform such second opinion
inspections may be established by resolution of the City Council. In such
cases, the decision of the City's Building Official shall be deemed final.
E. Special Provisions for Inspections of Systems Other than
Standard
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 11-450.4 (A), (B) and (C) above,
inspections of SSTS that are other than Standard Systems shall be in
accord with a Management Plan to be developed on a case-by-case basis
at the time that a permit is issued for such a system. The Management
Plan shall be established in writing by the System Designer, and may
include, without limitation, the following features:
i) Inspections, as often as semi-annually, to standards described in the
Management Plan;
ii) Periodic pumping different than that described in Article 11-450.4(C)
above;
iii) Maintenance of a cash deposit or performance security on an ongoing
basis to guarantee proper maintenance and inspections of the system;
iv) Monitoring or inspections may be required to be made by independent
agents.
11-450.6 Types of SSTS Permitted, Standards and Requirements
All SSTS shall be constructed in accord with the standards imposed by
Minnesota Rules 7080 and 7081, except that the following table shall be
substituted for the table found in 7080.1930, subp. 1:
Number of Bedrooms Septic Tank Liquid Capacity
4 or Less 1,500 Gallons (two compartments)
5 or 6 2,000 Gallons (two compartments)
7 or More As determined by Building Official
A. Vacant Residential Land
For land which is not currently being used for residential purposes,
meaning parcels which do not presently have an SSTS, including
new residential development, the preferred type of SSTS shall be a
Standard System. Notwithstanding the foregoing language, all lots
in newly platted residential subdivisions shall be required to install
Standard Systems.
B. Occupied Residential Land
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
29
For lots which currently have an SSTS which is a Failed or Failing
System, the system shall, if possible, be replaced by a Standard
System.
C. CD-1, CD-2, CD-3, CD-4 and I-P (Industrial Park Land)
SSTS’s in the foregoing zoning districts may be Non-Standard
Systems, provided that they meet the design criteria outlined in
Minnesota Rules 7080, 7082 and 7083.
D. Flood Plain
SSTS shall be not permitted to be constructed in whole or in part
within any Flood Plain area or drainage easement, unless there are
no other options available, and then only in accord with
specifications established on a case-by-case basis by City officials.
E. Backup Absorption Area
All residential lots that were created by subdivision after January
23, 1996 shall have adequate space for a primary and successor
SSTS in accord with Article 10 and 11 of this code. This
requirement shall also apply to any unplatted tracts of land for
which a residential building permit is requested, and to any platted
residential lots created by subdivision on or prior to January 23,
1996 if the lot area and soil composition afford sufficient space for
a primary and successor SSTS.
F. Technical Standards
The technical standards found in Minnesota Rules 7080 and 7081
are hereby adopted by reference.
G. Variances
Variances to normal setback requirements may be granted in
accord with variance standards found in Articles 9 and 10 of this
code, and where not prohibited by state or federal law or county
codes.
H. Holding Tanks
Holding Tanks may be allowed as replacements for an SSTS that
poses an imminent threat to public safety. The holding tank must
be installed by a Qualified Technician (see Code Article 11-450.9
below) who shall also direct the following of a written monitoring
and disposal program. The owner must enter into and furnish a
true and correct copy of a monitoring and disposal contract with a
licensed maintenance business, which contract must guarantee the
removal of the tank contents before overflow or any discharge.
I. Management Plan for New or Replacement SSTS
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
30
Prior to the issuance of any permit for the installation of any new or
replacement SSTS, the designer shall submit a management plan
to the City’s Building Official.
J. Class V Injection Wells
All owners of new or replacement Class V Injection Wells, as
defined in Code of Federal Regulations, title 40, part 144, must
submit inventory information to the federal Environmental
Protection Agency and the City. All Class V wells shall be identified
as such in property transfer disclosures.
K. Approvals
All repairs, installation, alteration, rejuvenation or remediation of an
SSTS shall require a Permit approved by the City’s building official,
who may employ the counsel of such outside consultants as are
deemed necessary.
L. Vertical Separation Requirements
Minnesota Rules 7080.1500 Subp. 4(D) are hereby adopted by
reference, but are amended to allow a 15 percent reduction of
vertical separation (separation distance no less than 30.6 inches)
to account for settling of sand or soil, normal variation of
measurements, and interpretations of the limiting layer conditions,
for SSTS built after March 31, 1996 or which are in an SWF area.
M. Operating Permits
Operating Permits issued by the City’s Building Official shall be
required of all SSTS that are Type IV Systems (see Minnesota
Rules 7080.2350); Type V Systems (see Minnesota Rules
7080.2400); SSTS constructed under the provisions of Minnesota
Rules 7081.0010; and holding tanks (see Minnesota Rules
7080.2290).
N. Loading Rates
Loading rates for determining bottom absorption area and
absorption ratios may be determined either by using detailed soil
descriptions or by percolation testing, utilizing Table IX or Table IXa
in Minnesota Rules 7082.2150, Subpart 3(E).
11-450.7 Repairs/Replacement
A. Failed System
A Failed System (as defined in Article 11-450.1 (A) above) shall be
replaced according to instructions from the City’s building official
and be brought into compliance with this code in accordance with a
schedule established by the building official, not to exceed ten
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
31
months from the date of notice of non-compliance by the Building
Official of the City.
B. Failing System
A Failing System (as defined in Article 11-450.1 (E) above) shall be
brought into compliance with this code in accordance with a
schedule established by the Building Official, not to exceed 24
months from the date of notice of non-compliance.
C. Non-Complying Systems
Non-Complying Systems (as defined in Article 11-450.1 (D) above)
may continue in use so long as the use of the system is not
materially changed or expanded.
D. Abandoned Systems
SSTS that are abandoned shall be treated in accord with
Minnesota Rules 7080.2500.
11-450.8 Ground Surface Discharges
An SSTS discharging raw or partially treated wastewater to ground
surface or surface water is prohibited unless permitted under the National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
11-450.9 Qualifications
Site evaluation, system design, construction, inspection and servicing
shall be performed only by “Qualified Technicians”, meaning entities or
persons licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, by
appropriately certified qualified employees of the City, or by persons
exempted under Minnesota Rules 7083.0700.
11-450.10 Dispute Resolution
If a dispute arises between two or more Qualified Technicians as to the
condition of any SSTS, the issue shall be presented to the City’s engineer,
who shall hear and review the conflicting information, and whose decision
shall be final.
11-460 The Minnesota Water Well Contractors Code.
The Minnesota Water Well Contractors Code, as the same is described in
Minnesota Statues Chapter 156A.01 through 156A.08, together with all
amendments and appendices thereto, and together with any and all regulations
administrative of said Code as may have been or to be promulgated by the
Minnesota State Board of Health is hereby adopted by the City of Ham Lake, by
reference, to become a part of the City Code of the City of Ham Lake, as fully as
if set out in full.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
32
11-470 SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (SSTS) AND WELL
WATER LOAN PROGRAM
Pursuant to the authority of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 115.57, the City of Ham
Lake hereby establishes the following SSTS and Well Loan Program. The
program is intended to offer loans to eligible parties to repair or replace existing
SSTS or water wells. The program is to be funded from monies made available
from the Anoka County Housing and Redevelopment Authority (HRA) out of a
special tax levy that has been and is being imposed on Ham Lake properties for
the benefit of Ham Lake housing issues.
11-470.1 Eligibility: Conditions
The conditions that are eligible for consideration for repair and/or
replacement under this program include SSTS that have failed or which
consist of leaking holding tanks, holding tanks which can be replaced by
a conventional or “other” SSTS”, privy vaults and straight pipe systems.
An SSTS is a “failed” SSTS” if it is discharging effluent above ground
level. These criteria shall be used in place of any other criteria that may
be found in State or County health codes, and regardless of terminology
as may be found therein.
The conditions that are eligible for consideration for repair and/or
replacement of water wells are:
a. contamination making the water unfit for human consumption; or
b. lack of water pressure caused by a lack of well depth, a insufficient
groundwater elevation or pipe sedimentation; or
c. mechanical or electrical failure of or in the pump apparatus; or
d. a well that needs to be abandoned and capped.
The City’s designated officials shall be the sole judge of whether or not
the qualifying criteria are met.
11-470.2 Eligibility: Financial
In order to qualify for the program, the property owner must be a natural
person or persons, named in the title to the property as joint tenants or
tenants in common, and meeting the following financial criteria.
a. The applicant(s) must meet the qualifying income limits as
published by the United States Housing and Urban Development
Department (HUD) as stated in the most current eligibility
tabulations by HUD for qualification for Section 8 housing,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
33
according to household size, for the Minneapolis St. Paul Statistical
Area.
b. Aggregate net worth of all of the owners must be less than
$50,000.00 as disclosed on signed Financial Statements. Financial
Statements must be in a form acceptable to persons designated by
the City Administrator to review same.
c. A Title search must be prepared or reviewed by the City Attorney,
and the property cannot be in foreclosure or encumbered by tax
liens or mechanics liens. Real estate taxes must be current.
d. There must be reasonable positive equity in the property, meaning
that the City staff’s estimate of fair market value must exceed the
apparent amount of debt encumbering the property, and the
decision as to whether or not to approve the application may be
based on the City’s evaluation of the likelihood that the
assessments will in fact be paid in full. No credit check of the
applicant(s) shall be required. The City may require a fee
appraisal, the cost of which can be included in the loan, at the
City’s option, prior to making a decision on the application.
The applicant(s) shall furnish whatever financial information is requested
of the City, including tax returns. Financial data will be considered private
data to the extent permitted by law.
11-470.3 Assistance and Assessments
a. Loan. Assistance to the property owner shall be in the form of a
loan to the property owner(s) in an amount necessary to effect the
replacement or repairs, not to exceed a total of $25,000.00. The
loan shall become an assessment against the property on which
the repair/replacement occurs pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 115.57 (Subd. 6). At the time of issuing the loan, the City
shall provide the notices required by said statute. The assessment
shall be certified for collection with real estate taxes on November
15 of the year in which the loan is made, and shall be payable over
a ten year period, together with interest accruing at a rate
established by City Council resolution at the time that the loan is
made.
b. Prerequisites to Loan. Prior to closing the loan, the applicant(s)
shall supply information satisfactory to the City documenting the
need for the repair/replacement, and provide a quote or quotes
from licensed and qualified septic and/or well installers
documenting the cost of repair/replacement, and in the case of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
34
SSTS, providing a design plan for the new or repaired SSTS that
meets City codes. The applicant(s) shall also provide evidence
satisfactory to the City that they meet the financial eligibility
requirements as contained in item 11-2120 above.
11-470.4 Procedure for Approval
a. Submissions. Applicant(s) shall complete such forms as the City staff
prepares in application for approval, and staff shall complete a report to
the City Council for review when all application material is complete. The
report shall not include the actual financial data provided by the
applicant(s). Staff shall not forward an application to the City Council
unless all eligibility and submission requirements are complete, and Staff
shall have the authority to summarily reject an application for noncompliance
with eligibility or submission requirements, provided that the
applicant(s) receive written notice from Staff as to the reasons for
rejection.
b. City Council Approval. The City Council shall review the staff report
and shall act on the application by resolution. If disapproved, the
resolution shall contain findings of fact supporting the disapproval. If
approved, the resolution shall include an interest rate and such other
matters as the City Council deems appropriate.
c. Appeal of Staff Decision. If Staff has summarily rejected an
application, the applicant(s) may appeal the decision by requesting an
appearance before the City Council.
d. Variances. The City Council may grant reasonable variances to the
eligibility requirements if there are special circumstances which justify
such variances. Special circumstances may include, without limitation, the
use of shared SSTS systems or wells, unusual sub-surface conditions, or
net worth affected by non-liquid assets.
11-470.5 Closing
At the time that the loan is closed, the applicant(s) shall execute any and
all documents deemed necessary and appropriate by the City in
connection with the loan.
11-600 Excavations and Reclamation
11-610 Definitions The following definitions shall apply to this Article 11-
600:
a) Excavation - the removal of soil in a manner intended to create a
permanent or temporary hole in the ground, or removal of soil that has
been stockpiled above the normal grade of the ground. Notwithstanding
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
35
the foregoing, the removal and/or transport of soil, rock, sand, gravel, clay
or other granular material that is stockpiled or to be stockpiled as
inventory for sale at any landscaping business that is lawfully operating in
the City shall not be considered “Excavation” nor shall it be considered
“Excavation for Transport”. All such activities shall be in compliance with
the requirements of Articles 11-1900 and 11-2000 of the Ham Lake City
Code.
b) Bona Fide Subdivision - a land development in which an applicant is
dividing land for resale or reconveyance under Article 10 of the Ham Lake
City Code, either by platting or by lot split.
c) Private Pond – an excavation made for the purpose of creating an
aesthetic appearance, wildlife habitat or retention pond, which is not
intended for any public usage, provided, that a pond created in a Bona
Fide Subdivision which is primarily intended for storm water retention or
desiltation is not a Private Pond.
d) Marginal Lands - State classified wetlands, unclassified wetlands
bearing the characteristics of classified wetlands, marshes, bogs, fens,
peat land, ditches, ponds, lakes, streams, creeks, sod fields, or other land
incapable of housing dwelling units or commercial buildings by reason of
unsuitable soils for Individual Sewage Treatment Systems.
e) Pond Perimeter - The outside edge of the anticipated normal high
water level of a pond, as determined by the City’s engineer.
f) Small Private Pond - a Private Pond which has a maximum area of
2000 square feet, as measured at the Pond Perimeter
g) Excavation for Transport - The practice of removing soil for transport
from the land parcel from which the excavation occurs.
h) Land Reclamation - A project in which excavation is to occur, but the
excavated area is to be filled with other soil, which is to be obtained on
site or which must be transported to the site.
i) Mining Overlay Districts - The areas within the City that contain soils
suitable for mining through excavations of the nature contemplated by this
Code shall be considered Mining Overlay Districts, to be established from
time to time by ordinance as a part of the zoning code and zoning
classification for those particular tracts. The Mining Overlay Districts shall
be identified on the official City zoning map provided in Article 9 of the
Ham Lake City Code.
j) Mining Precincts - Specific geographic areas of the City that are
established by Article created from time to time by resolution of the Ham
Lake City Council for the purpose of establishing spatial controls over
mining operations.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
36
k) Access Roads - Roadways of at least 9 tons bearing capacity that are
located adjacent to mining projects, and used as the exclusive routes into
and out of the sites.
11-620 Permissible Excavations (No Municipal Excavation Permit
Required)
The following types of excavations shall be allowed (assuming compliance
with regulatory provisions of all jurisdictions, such as building permit
issuance, watershed, DNR or Corps of Engineers approvals, and the like),
without the need for any municipal permit for the excavation itself:
a) Excavation of soil to create a basement, foundation or
footings for any building, sign, or other structure, or in
connection with the paving of any driveway, road, sidewalk,
parking lot or tennis court;
b) Excavation of soil to remove peat or other unsuitable soils,
for replacement by suitable soil, such as in a land
reclamation project, but in which no soil is being transported
to or from the site;
c) Excavation of soil in connection with the installation of any
type of Individual Sewage Treatment System;
d) Excavation on any public works project being performed by
governmental employees or by agents under contract to a
governmental agency pursuant to such a public works
project being conducted on public or private lands,
easements or rights of way;
e) Landscaping projects by private landowners in which the
excavation is to be filled with other solid material;
f) Excavation of soil in connection with any Bona Fide
Subdivision, but limited to excavation necessary to build
roads or drainage ditches, grade lots, provide desiltation
ponds, private ponds or to provide storm water retention
areas, and which are done in conformance with an approved
grading and drainage plan which is a part of the platting
process, and do not involve any Excavation for Transport;
g) Routine agricultural activities, such as plowing, hoeing,
discing and the stripping or harvesting of sod;
h) The creation of small Private Ponds;
i) Excavations which are necessary to effect repairs or provide
structural stability to existing lakes or ponds, however
created, provided, that no such excavation shall take place
unless the project has been approved in writing by the City’s
building official after consultation with the City’s engineer.
j) Excavation by the owner (or authorized agent) of any ditch,
culvert, utility or utility feature, including, without limitation,
electrical, natural gas, cable television, gas pipeline, storm
sewer, sanitary sewer line, telephone line, transmission
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
37
tower or substation, in connection with the proper
installation, repair or maintenance of such element.
k) Excavations by the City of Ham Lake on lands or easements
owned, leased, encumbered or otherwise controlled by the
City.
l) Land Reclamation of less than 400 cubic yards.
11-630 Excavations Requiring Municipal Permit (“Regulated
Excavations”)
The following types of excavation shall be allowed only after issuance of a
municipal excavation permit:
a) Private Ponds that are not a part of a Bona Fide Subdivision;
b) Excavations for Transport, including Excavations for
Transport that are a part of a Bona Fide Subdivision;
c) Land Reclamation projects of 400 cubic yards or greater,
provided, that only one Land Reclamation project of less
than 400 cubic yards shall be allowed without a permit on
any parcel of record within any given 36 month period of
time.
11-640 Standards for Excavations Requiring a Municipal Excavation
Permit
Upon receipt of the application data required under Article 11-650, the
City’s engineer shall prepare specifications for slope, depth, erosion
control and other physical standards for Regulated Excavation, in concert
with regulations established by other governmental jurisdictions, including,
without limitation, any local watersheds, Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and water or soil
conservations services.
a) Permit Required - A Permit shall be required for any
Regulated Excavation. Prior to issuance of a Permit, the
application shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and acted upon by the City Council. The issuance of a
Permit by the City shall not be in lieu of any permit required
by any other governmental agency, and it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to determine the need for, and
to obtain all other such permits. The City Council may
require a written Development Agreement in connection with
any permit.
b) Conditions of Approvals
i) Location - Regulated Excavations may occur only in the
Mining Overlay Districts, and only in conjunction with a Bona
Fide Subdivision which meets or is subject to the following
criteria:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
38
aa) The subdivision shall contain at least one lot for
each acre within the perimeter of the pond to be
constructed on the site;
bb) The subdivision shall require no variances from
lot sizes, frontages or cul-de-sac length;
cc) The City may impose reasonable setback
distances in excavation projects so as to protect
adjacent properties from unnecessary or undue
interference due to noise or vibration from
construction activity. In addition, where a project is
located near land owned by entities other than the
developer that is capable of future development, the
excavation plans shall be accompanied by a ghost
plat for such adjacent lands demonstrating that the
excavation project does not permanently impair the
ability of nearby property owners to subsequently
develop their properties.
ii) Environmental Assessment Worksheet (“EAW”) - for
all Regulated Excavations in which the Pond Perimeter to be
created is greater than two acres in size, an EAW shall be
required, which demonstrates that there is no significant
likelihood of adverse environmental consequences as a
result of the activity. Every EAW shall require
comprehensive analysis and reporting on the following
elements. In addition, for each element of the EAW, the
written reports shall be prepared by qualified professionals
that are bona fide experts in the field being reported upon,
either as listed below or as determined in the sole judgment
of the City staff.
aa) Projected Dewatering activity, including the
proposed rate of dewatering, the cone of depression
to be formed, the drawdown effects of the dewatering,
and the methods proposed to monitor the effects of
dewatering. Qualifications of author: Registered
Professional Engineer specializing in the field of
hydrology.
bb) Location and effect upon wildlife habitat and
vegetation, including migration corridors.
Qualifications of author: Bachelor’s Degree in a field
of Biology, Forestry or a related science.
cc) Ambient noise levels to be experienced during
peak construction periods by adjoining properties,
showing projected decibel levels from construction
equipment and hauling trucks. Qualifications of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
39
author: Bachelor’s Degree in a field related to
acoustical engineering.
dd) Effects upon traffic on roads to be used to
transport material. Qualifications of author:
Registered Professional Engineer specializing in
traffic engineering.
ee) Such other elements as may be appropriate to
the individual project or as directed by the City.
iii) Time Limits - All permits shall be for a specific
maximum duration, not to exceed three construction
seasons, including post-excavation work, and if greater than
one year, the permit shall be subject to annual renewal.
Renewal shall be granted under the same conditions as for
the previous year, but if any conditions of the permit were
violated during the year, the City may decline to renew or
may alter the conditions of the Permit. Permits may be
conditioned upon the periodic cessation of all or some
activities for given durations of time. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, on request of the Developer at the time of permit
approval, the City may grant a window of five years during
which the permit may be activated a single time within 24
months of the approval date, but once activated, all work
must be completed within 36 months from the time it begins,
not to exceed five years from the permit approval date.
Work will deem to have begun on a date when an item of
construction equipment is first placed on the property, or
when the Developer notifies the City, whichever first occurs.
iv) Sanctions - In addition to the annual renewal sanctions
allowable under Article 11-640(b)(iii) above, all permits shall
be subject to revocation for violation of terms and conditions.
Furthermore, it shall be a condition of each permit that all
activities may be summarily suspended by the City at any
given time, and the City shall have the right to enforce such
stop-work orders by having direct access to the property and
equipment used on the project.
v) Payment of Costs - the Permitee shall be responsible to
pay for all of the City’s costs in reviewing any application, in
monitoring compliance, and in enforcing any conditions.
vi) Access Roads - No permit shall be granted for any
project which must use public roads to transport material, if
any such public roads to be used have a bearing capacity of
less than nine tons. In addition, the specific roads that may
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
40
be used to transport material shall be identified at the time
that Mining Precincts are established, and once identified, it
shall be unlawful for any person to depart from the
designated transport roads while operating a vehicle
regularly used to transport fill.
vii) Precinct Limitations - only one excavation permit may
be in existence at any given time within a single Mining
Precinct. Notwithstanding the foregoing language, no
Mining Permit shall be issued for any excavation project
where the outside perimeter of the proposed excavation is
closer than two miles from the outside perimeter of any preexisting
excavation operating under a Mining Permit,
regardless of whether or not the two operations are in
different Mining Precincts. Where such conflicts arise,
permits will be issued on a first-come, first served basis, and
the latter project may not commence activity until the former
project has been completed.
viii) Air-Braking – vehicles using Access Roads to and
from excavation site shall refrain from using air braking
systems (commonly referred to as “Jake-Braking”).
ix) Haul Roads - Every excavation project shall maintain
interior haul roads from the nearest 9-ton road to the outside
perimeter of the excavated area. Interior haul roads shall be
treated with water or environmentally safe chemicals and
shall be properly maintained so as not to generate dust from
the haul roads.
x) Dewatering Controls - Every excavation project shall
install and maintain monitoring wells as designated by the
City, having electronic controls capable of constant water
level monitoring. Prior to commencing any dewatering
activity, the Developer shall conduct such baseline studies of
existing private wells and ponds as directed by the City
through development agreement. Private wells within a
radius determined by the City’s engineer shall be tested for
water quality prior to any dewatering activity, and shall be
retested annually during the course of the project, or more
frequently at the direction of the City’s Engineer if complaints
are registered that justify such re-testing, in the sole
judgment of the City’s Engineer. Private well testing shall
not be required if the owner of the well refuses to allow
testing, provided that the Developer furnish satisfactory
evidence to the City staff of such refusal, and subject to
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
41
verification by City staff of such refusal. In verifying such
refusal, City staff shall make at least one attempt to
communicate by U.S. mail, at least one attempt to
communicate by telephone, and shall prepare a written
report to the City Council detailing the attempts to contact
the refusing party.
xi) Traffic Control - turn lanes shall be constructed at the
entrance/exit points of all excavation projects with Access
Roads to specifications to be established by the jurisdiction
having control of the Access Road, but at a minimum,
including the following:
aa) For vehicles entering with a right-hand turning
movement, a deceleration lane of not less than 300
feet in length;
bb) For vehicles exiting with a right-hand turning
movement, an acceleration lane of not less than 600
feet in length;
cc) For vehicles entering with a left-hand turning
movement, a separate left-turn lane on the Access
Road of not less than 200 feet in length, or a bypass
lane of not less than 400 feet in length;
The City may also at any time require the installation of
temporary signal lights, and may direct either a cessation of
hauling activity using the Access Roads during peak traffic
hours or direct such other traffic safety measures to be
implemented as are necessary to enhance traffic safety
during such periods of time.
It shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant to obtain
the necessary approvals of the construction of turn lanes
from the entity having jurisdiction over the Access Road.
xii) Maximum Annual Volume - The City shall, by
development agreement, establish the annual maximum
number of cubic yards of material that can be removed from
a given site during a single calendar year.
xiii) Muffling of Generator or Pump Noise - If the project
involves the use of generators or pumps that operate
outside of the normal hours of operation, all such pumps
shall be enclosed by wooden structures that muffle the
sound of the pumps to the point where pump noise is
minimally audible from nearby residences during night time
hours. To this end, all such enclosures shall be engineered
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
42
to include proper insulation, and detailed plans for the
housings shall be submitted for approval by the City’s
engineer prior to the time that any such pumps or generators
commence operation.
xiv) Water Table Recharge Methods – All excavation
projects shall include as a part of the operation a plan for
diverting water removed in the dewatering process to
locations where the pumped water will be able to recharge
any lowered water tables in the most expeditious manner
that is practical.
xv) Additional Dust Control Measures – In addition to
dust control measures on haul roads, the Developer shall
implement dust control measures within all other areas of
the project that may be conducive to the creation of dust.
Such measures shall be as directed by the City’s Engineer
from time to time, and may include, without limitation, the
following:
aa) Watering of exposed areas;
bb) The placement of straw, sod or other cover
material on exposed areas;
cc) Restrictions on the size and location of stockpiles
of material awaiting transport;
dd) Covering stockpiles of material awaiting
transport.
ee) Creating seeded berms with material eventually
intended for use in restoration work.
xvi) Surveillance - The Developer shall be required to
install television monitoring cameras to record all traffic
entering and leaving the site from the Access Roads, and at
other locations that may be directed by the City’s Engineer,
to capture in sufficient detail any failures of vehicles to
observe traffic control devices and to verify that hours of
operation are being observed at all times. Tapes or discs of
each 24-hour daily monitoring shall be preserved by the
Developer and available to City staff for thirty days after
recording.
xvii) Sureties - The City shall require financial guarantees
for the prompt completion of each project, for road repair
costs, well replacement and other hydrologic damage,
restoration costs on non-renewal of permit, revocation of
permit, abandonment, and general performance and
indemnity of the City.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
43
xviii) Hours - The City shall regulate time of operation,
including different phases of operation, but shall not permit
any construction activity (except pumping) or hauling outside
of the hours of 7 am to 7 pm on Monday through Friday
(excluding holidays that fall on those days). The City may,
by development agreement, allow construction activity and
hauling between the hours of 8am and 5pm on Saturdays,
subject to the right of the City to alter or eliminate Saturday
work in its sole discretion. The foregoing prohibition on
hauling times includes the practice of trucks queuing and/or
waiting either at or near the entrance gate or on the grounds
of the project prior to the start time each morning, or running
vehicle engines in any form on or near the grounds after the
finishing time each evening.
xix) Size - The City may limit the amount of the land area,
setback, depth and slope ratios for Regulated Excavations.
xx) Neighborhood Liaison - The City may require a
developer to cooperate with a neighborhood liaison group
where circumstances are appropriate, for the purpose of
reviewing and acting upon complaints, receiving
suggestions, and the like.
xxi) Security - The City may require the construction of
security fencing or other devices, including the installation of
additional security cameras and tapes, to monitor both
public safety and compliance issues.
xxii) Noise Control - The City may regulate the volume of
noise and require additional noise abatement measures
where appropriate;
xxiii) Studies - Prior to completing the approval process,
the City may engage professional consultants, at Developer
expense, to give recommendations as to conditions to be
attached to a given permit.
xxiv) Deposit - The City Council may require an advance
cash deposit sufficient to defray the City’s review and
monitoring costs in administering the permit.
xxv) Prior History - The City Council may deny the
application of any applicant who is found to have a previous
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
44
history of non-compliance with the provisions of previously
issued excavation permits in the City.
c) Public Hearing - Prior to acting on any request for permit, a
public hearing shall be conducted by the Planning Commission.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the same manner
as for notices of zoning amendments, with notice given to all
owners of lands which abut the parcel or parcels upon which the
excavation activity is to occur, as well as to the owners of all
occupied structures within one thousand five hundred feet of the
property line perimeter of the parcel or parcels of land upon which
the excavation activity is to occur. Notice of the public hearing shall
also be given to all residences that abut the Access Roads to be
used for the project within a distance of one mile from the outside
perimeter of the parcel or parcels upon which the excavation
activity is to occur. “Excavation activity” includes the actual
excavation pit, all haul roads, storage areas, equipment staging
areas, pump locations and parking areas for cars or construction
offices.
d) Denial of Permit - The City may deny the issuance of a permit
if, following submission of the appropriate data, the City Council
finds that the proposed activity:
i) Poses a significant threat of adverse environmental
impact; or
ii) Creates potential traffic safety hazards; or
iii) Cannot meet the conditions of permit approval; or
iv) Is fundamentally incompatible with nearby land uses, by
reason of a tendency to interfere with the quiet enjoyment of
those land uses, lower property values or to remove natural
vegetative screening.
11-650 Permit Application
The application for the permit required in Article 11-630 hereof shall
be made in writing signed by both the owner and the applicant, to
the City Administrator on such form as the Administrator may, from
time to time, designate, and shall include such information as may
be required by the Administrator and shall contain among other
things:
a) The correct legal description of the premises where the storage,
filling, removal, or excavation of rock, sand, gravel, clay, peat or
other like materials shall occur.
b) The name and address of both the applicant and owner of the
land.
c) The purpose of the removal, storage, fill or excavation.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
45
d) The estimated time required to complete the removal, storage,
fill or excavation.
e) The highways, streets or other public ways within the City upon
and along which the material introduced or removed shall be
transported.
f) A map or plat of the proposed pit or excavation to be made
showing the confines or limits thereof together with the proposed
finished elevations based on sea level readings, and a notation
indicating high water levels and boundaries of flood plains.
g) Any other information deemed necessary by the City Council.
h) An application fee to be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
11-651 Initial Mining Precincts and Access Roads
The following Mining Precincts and Access Roads serving those Mining
Precincts are hereby established:
A. Precinct 1: All of those portions of Sections 5, 8, 17, 20 and the north
half of Section 29 that lie westerly of TH 65; also all of Sections 6,7,18,
19 and the north half of Section 30. Access Roads: CSAH 18 (Crosstown
Boulevard) west of TH 65; County Road 60 (Constance) west of TH 65;
Andover Boulevard west of TH 65; and all of TH 65.
B. Precinct 2: All of those portions of Sections 5, 8, 17, 20 and the north
half of Section 29 that lie easterly of TH 65; also all of Sections 9,10,15,
16, 21, and 22, and the north half of Sections 27 and 28; also the west
half of Sections 2,11,14,and 23; also the northwest quarter or Section 26.
Access Roads: CSAH 20 (Crosstown Boulevard) west of the north-south
extension of Durant Street; all of TH 65. County Road 60 (Constance)
west of the north-south extension of Durant Street; 149th Avenue NE west
of Naples; all of TH 65.
C. Precinct 3: All of Sections 1 and 12; the east half of Sections 2 and
11; the north one-quarter of Section 13; the north half of the east half of
Section 14. Access Roads: CSAH 20 (Crosstown Boulevard) east of the
north-south extension of Durant Street and CSAH 17 (Lexington Avenue)
north of its intersection with CSAH 20 (Crosstown Boulevard).
D. Precinct 4: All of Sections 24, 24 and 36; the south one half of the
northeast quarter of Section 14; the southeast quarter of Section 14; the
south three quarters of Section 13; the east half of Sections 23, 26 and
35. Access Roads: County Road 60 (Constance) east of the north-south
extension of Durant Street; CSAH 17 (Lexington Avenue) only.
E. Precinct 5: All of Sections 31, 32, 33 and 34; the south half of
Sections 27, 28, 29 and 30; the west half of Section 35; the southwest
quarter of Section 26. Access Roads: CSAH 116 (Bunker Lake Road)
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
46
west of Naples Street; Radisson Road south of 141st Avenue NE; All of
TH 65.
11-652 Variances
Notwithstanding the foregoing language of this Article 11-600, and except for the
public hearing requirement of Article 11-640(c), the City Council shall retain the
right to grant variances from the strict enforcement of the terms and conditions of
this Article for good cause shown, including, without limitation, for any of the
following reasons:
a) Existing drainage conditions on or near the proposed project are in
need of correction for the benefit of public health, safety or welfare;
b) The proposed project is in a location having a substantial spatial
separation form nearby active land uses;
c) There are stockpiling conditions present on the property housing the
proposed project that predated the effective date of the 2007
amendments to this code, and the scope of the proposed project is limited
to removal of the stockpiled materials only;
d) There are on file previous studies, reports or plans that, in the sole
discretion of the City Council, remain valid and current for the proposed
project;
e) The scope of the proposed project is otherwise sufficiently limited in
size, duration, and impact on surrounding property to justify the granting
of a variance.
11-700 Roads and Streets
11-710 Physical Standards
No roadway shall be accepted in the future for city maintenance before
same shall conform to the following:
A. The minimum right of way shall be sixty-six (66) feet, with a cul-de-sac of
at least one hundred twenty (120) feet provided at the end of all dead
end streets. Right of way widths for service roads along main arterial
highways may be a minimum of 50 feet, including those designated
MSA.
B. The typical cross-section may be of either a rural design, with
roadside ditches, or of an urban design, with boulevards, whichever is
recommended by the City engineer subject to City Council approval.
A rural section will typically be allowed only in wetland impact areas
when an urban section would result in greater wetland impact. An
urban section with 3:1 (horizontal:vertical) slopes will be allowed in
wetland impact areas. All streets shall have adequate sub-base and
shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards filed in
the office of the City Engineer. Roadside ditch slopes shall not exceed
a ratio of 4:1 (horizontal:vertical).
C. The centerline grades of all roads shall be a minimum of six tenths
(.60) percent, but shall not exceed a maximum of six (6%) percent.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
47
D. All streets shall have a 3-foot plus separation from highest annual
ground water. If less separation is proposed, the project proposer
and/or engineer shall obtain a soils report recommending the street
design section to the approval of the City Engineer.
E. The plans shall indicate how all drainage from the roadway, from the
abutting parcels, and through drainage from other parcels is being
handled. The roadway and drainage facilities shall then be
constructed in accordance with the approved plan.
F. Storm sewer and culverts required to carry surface run-off shall be
sized to carry the anticipated flows for a 10-year, 24 hour event, with
minimum diameters of fifteen (15) inches for storm sewers and twelve
(12) inches for individual driveway culverts and catch basin leads less
than 40 feet in length. The drainage systems shall be designed per the
Watershed District, Watershed Management Organization and Local
Watershed standards, in addition to those design requirements on file
in the office of the City Engineer.
G. All rubbish or trees dug out in the building of roads shall be disposed of
immediately upon completion of the road by the contractor.
H. The residential roadway surfaces shall be stabilized by one of the
following methods or an acceptable equivalent.
1. The base shall consist of a minimum of four (4) inch thick
compacted layer of Class 5 aggregate base, constructed in
accordance with Section 2211 of the latest edition of the
Minnesota Department of Transportation “Standard
Specification for Construction”. Other base designs, with a
granular equivalent of at least 4.0, may be presented to the
City for consideration. Sufficient technical detail shall be
presented so as to provide a complete basis for comparison
of the proposed alternate design to those specified.
2. The wearing surface shall consist of a minimum 1 inch thick
bituminous, wear course, constructed in accordance with
Section 2350, LVWE45030B or MVWE45035B over 2 inch
thick bituminous base nonwear course constructed in
accordance with Section 2350, LVNW35030B or
MVNW35035B of the latest edition of the Minnesota
Department of Transportation “Standard Specification for
Construction”.
3. All new streets shall have modified D312, D412, B612 or
B618 concrete curb and gutter installed in accordance with
Section 2531 of the latest edition of the Minnesota
Department of Transportation “Standard Specification for
Construction” and standards on file in the office of the City
Engineer. Valley gutter is not allowed.
4. Adequate financial security in favor of the City of Ham Lake,
in a form acceptable to the City Council, shall be furnished by
the developer to insure that any defects in the road occurring
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
48
within a period of one (1) or two (two) years after completion,
will be repaired and paid for by the developer, and such
security shall be in the sum and format as set by the City
Council. A two year security will be required when any of the
density test requirements are not met.
I. All roadside areas whose surface vegetation was disturbed during the
construction of the roadway, shall be reseeded with a blend of grain,
such as rye or oats, and permanent grasses. Where concentrations of
run-off will cause erosion problems, the installation of sod with topsoil
may be required at the discretion of the City Council.
J. An easement for said roadway right-of-way as a public right-of-way
shall be granted to the City by proper conveyance or dedication and
accepted by the City Council, if the roadway is otherwise in
compliance with requirements of this Code.
K. Street signs shall be erected at all intersections and elsewhere as
required by the City Council and such signs and the poles to which
same are attached shall meet the construction and design
requirements of the City Council.
L. Table 11-4 shall, subject to the design standards filed in the office of
the City Engineer and review by the City Engineer, govern other
physical standards for roadways:
M. A 2% minimum cross slope shall be required on all cul-de-sacs.
N. Vertical curves are required if the algebraic difference of the curves is
greater than 1%. The Rate of Vertical Curvature, K, is to meet
MnDOT Design Policy and Criteria for sag and crest vertical curves.
Sag curves required to have a minimum K of 37 and crest curves
required to have a minimum K of 30 for a 30 mph design speed.
11-720 Special Standards for MSA and CSAH Roads
A. Excluding main arterial highway service roads, all roads and streets
designated or hereafter designated as Municipal State Aid roads, the
minimum right-of-way required shall be 66 feet, for County State Aid
Highway roads 120 feet.
11-730 Residential Driveway Widths (also see Article 10-430)
A. Maximum width of a driveway at the curb to the right-of-way line to
be 30 feet.
B. Driveways on cul-de-sacs to be a maximum width of 24 feet from
the curb to the right-of-way line. All properties on cul-de-sacs will
be allowed only one driveway from the street.
C. For parcels not on a cul-de-sac, a secondary driveway may be
constructed with a maximum width of 24 feet at the curb to the
right-of-way line.
11-800 Building Numbering System
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
49
11-810 Uniform Numbering System
A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings is hereby
adopted for use in the City of Ham Lake, as indicated on the certain map or
maps identified as the City of Ham Lake Number index on file in the office of
the City Clerk. Said index and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made
a part of this Code.
11-820 Assignment of Numbers
All properties or parcels of land within the City of Ham Lake shall hereafter be
identified by reference to the Uniform Numbering System adopted herein.
Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage on
which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied
by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front
entrance of such building shall bear a separate number.
11-830 Display of Numbers
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessor or occupant of every house, industrial,
commercial or other building, to have proper house or building numbers
either by affixing such number assigned in metal, glass, plastic or other
curable material. The number shall be not less than 12 inches in height on
all commercial/industrial buildings and a minimum of 4 inches in height
on residential buildings, and in a contrasting color to the building. Said
numbers are to be placed on structures, not garage doors, and to be easily
seen from the street fronting the building. Said numbers are also to be
placed on both sides of mailboxes, except where mailboxes are in a group,
the numbers shall be placed on the front and on the side of each end
mailbox. All auxiliary buildings within a unit having an assigned number, such
as a garage, barn and buildings of the like nature, are not affected by the
code.
11-840 Administration
The Building Inspector shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering
system and shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this Code. The
Building Inspector shall issue to any property owner upon request and without
charge a number for each principal building or separate front entrance to
such building. The Building Inspector shall issue only the number assigned
to such building under the provisions of the Code, provided, however, that the
Building Inspector may issue additional numerals in accordance with the
official numbering system whenever a property has been subdivided, a new
front entrance opened, or undue hardship has resulted to any property owner.
The property owner shall be responsible for obtaining suitable numbers for
property identification.
11-900 Demolition and Moving-In of Buildings
11-910 Definitions
11-911 Building
Building shall mean a structure supported by three or more walls, covered
by a roof supported by said walls. This definition shall exclude any metal
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
50
or wooden shed which contains less than 120 square feet of available
floor space, and shall exclude manufactured mobile homes as that term is
governed and defined in Article 9-340.2 of this Code.
11-912 Moving-In
Moving-In means the transporting of any building to any designation in the
City, regardless of the point of origin.
11-913 Demolition
“Demolition” – means the razing or other destruction or partial destruction
of any structure which, if being constructed anew, would require the
issuance of a building permit. For structures located on agriculturally
used lands that do not require building permits, the term “structure” shall
include any barn, shed, or other facility containing walls and a roof, and
having 120 square feet or more in area.
11-920 Permit Required for Moving In Buildings
No person shall move in any building to the City of Ham Lake without first
obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer. Only buildings which are intended
to be placed upon permanent foundation, for permanent usage as an
occupied structure at that location shall be eligible for a permit. The moving
in of buildings to serve as inventory for resale, temporary usage, or other
storage is prohibited. No permit for a building which is eligible for a permit
shall be issued unless the following are complied with:
A. The applicant shall furnish to the Zoning Officer a drawing of the lot upon
which the building is to be placed. Said drawing shall be at a scale of not
less than 1 = 100 feet, and shall include the following:
1. Distances from lot lines to the foundation of the proposed location.
2. Acres on the lot containing highest known ground water elevations
not less than five and one-half feet from the land surface.
B. The applicant shall furnish to the Zoning Officer such plans or
photographs of the building as the Zoning Officer desires, and shall, if
requested by the Zoning Officer, permit inspection of the building.
C. The Zoning Officer shall verify, by inspection if necessary, that the
building site upon which it will be occupied, and the usage of the building
will meet all applicable State and City Codes including but not limited to
building construction, lot size, frontage, setbacks, liability, zoning and
access to public roads. If any of said codes are not satisfied, or cannot be
satisfied, no permit shall be issued.
D. The applicant shall have paid a fee required by City Council Resolution.
E. The applicant shall post cash security in an amount to be established by
the Building Official sufficient to pay for 150% of the Building Official’s
estimate of the cost of remediating any condition created by the failure of the
applicant to properly install the moved-in building on the site intended. In
addition, the applicant shall sign a “Right-of-Trespass” granting to the City or
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
51
its agents the right to enter the property and to complete all remediation
activity if the applicant shall fail to do so in a timely manner. The Right-of-
Trespass shall contain a clause allowing the City to reimburse itself for the
actual costs thereof from the applicant’s cash deposit, refunding the balance,
if any, to the applicant when the activity is completed.
11-930 Permit for Demolition
Prior to commencing any demolition activity, the applicant shall first apply for
and obtain a Demolition Permit from the City’s Building Official. Fees for
such permits shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. It shall be a violation of this ordinance to conduct any demolition
activity without first having obtained a permit, or to fail to observe any
condition of issuance of the permit.
A. Information Required In making application for the permit, the
applicant shall provide the following information:
1) The street address where the proposed demolition will occur;
2) A photograph of the structure to be demolished;
3) The existence, if known, of any asbestos or other hazardous
material on the site, together with a disposal plan for such materials
in accord with applicable laws and regulations of all agencies
having jurisdiction over such matters;
4) A disposal plan listing the manner of disposal and destination
sites of all other materials created by the demolition.
5) A restoration plan showing the topography, landscaping and
ground cover to be established following the demolition. If a new
structure is to be immediately commenced replacing the
demolished structure, and if a building permit for the new structure
is applied for at the time of the application for the demolition permit,
then no restoration plan shall be required.
B. Required Elements of Permit Every Demolition Permit issued by the
City’s Building Official shall contain the following elements, each of which
is to be a condition of issuance of the permit.
1) A time limit in which the demolition, removal of all materials
created by the demolition, and restoration plan completion (if
required) shall occur;
2) A requirement that the applicant post cash security in an
amount to be established by the Building Official sufficient to pay
for 150% of the Building Official’s estimate of the cost of
demolition, transporting all materials created by the demolition to
an approved disposal site, and restoration in accord with the
restoration plan, if a restoration plan is needed.
3) A requirement that the applicant sign a “Right-of-Trespass”
granting to the City or its agents the right to enter the property and
to complete all demolition or disposal activity if the applicant shall
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
52
fail to do so in a timely manner; the Right-of-Trespass shall contain
a clause allowing the City to reimburse itself for the actual costs
thereof from the applicant’s cash deposit, refunding the balance, if
any, to the applicant when the activity is completed.
4) A requirement that the demolition include removal of all
foundation material, and the filling of all sub-surface cavities
created by the demolition, to match existing grades;
5) A requirement that the demolition include the removal of all
paved surfaces unless these surfaces are to be re-used in
connection with a replacement structure.
6) A requirement that all abandoned Wells, abandoned Individual
Sewage Treatment Systems, abandoned Fuel Oil Tanks or other
abandoned underground construction be properly capped,
removed, treated or disposed of in accord with the regulations of
any agency having jurisdiction over such features.
11-1000 Solid Fuel Burning Appliances
11-1001 Adoption by Reference
Certain portions of that certain document entitled “Installation and Operation
of Solid Fuel Burning Appliances” prepared by the International Conference
of Building Officials, Copyright 1981, are hereby adopted by reference.
Hereinafter, in this ordinance, all references to page numbers, figures or
tables, are to the page numbers, figures or table numbers found in said
document.
11-1002 Definitions
The definitions as found on page 9 and page 10 are hereby adopted by
reference.
11-1003 Permit Required
No chimney, fireplace, fireplace stove or other device designed or intended
for usage for the combustion of any solid fuel in any such device located
within a dwelling or other building shall be installed unless a permit shall first
have been obtained for such installation and unless a Certificate of
Compliance with specifications for installation shall have been obtained as
hereafter provided. Permit forms shall be prepared by the zoning officer.
There shall be a fee for any such permit, which fee shall be set from time to
time by the City Council, and which permit shall be known as a Solid Fuel
Burning Appliance Permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing language, any such
device which is included with the plans and specifications for any new
construction of any building, and which is subsequently inspected by the
zoning officer in the same manner as provided in Article VII hereof in
connections with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for completion of
said building shall be excepted from the requirements of obtaining a solid fuel
burning appliance permit. Any such devices installed in connection with
building construction shall, however, be subject to the same requirements of
installation and materials as is found in this ordinance.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
53
11-1004 Standards for Installation
The following standards for installation are hereby adopted by reference.
A. Requirements for masonry fireplaces, figure No. 4 and
accompanying table, pages 14 and 15.
B. Separation of flues in masonry fireplaces, figure 5 (page 16)
C. Clearances to combustibles (masonry fireplaces and chimneys,)
Figure No. 6 (page 16)
D. Change in size or shape of masonry chimneys, Figure No. 7 (page
17)
E. Corbeling (masonry chimneys), Figure No. 8 (page 17)
F. Factory built chimneys and accessories, Figure No. 11 (page 25);
Figure No. 12 (page 26); Figure No. 13 (page 27); Figure No. 14
(page 28); Figure No. 15 (page 29).
11-1005 Identification Labels
Every manufactured heating appliance shall bear a permanent and legible
nameplate, factory applied, and bearing the Manufacturer’s name and
address, model number, serial number, clearances to combustibles, details of
hearth extension, and chimney, research report number and name of
inspection agency. Operation of warnings such as type of fuel, manner of
burning, cleaning, use of doors and other accessories are to be included as
necessary on said labels. Said labels should, as closely as possible, be
similar to those examples noted on Figure No. 19, page 33, Figures Nos. 20
and 21 on page 34, and figure No. 22 on page 35, all of which are adopted by
reference.
11-1006 Inspection and Installation and Certificate of Compliance
Following installation of any solid fuel burning appliance, the zoning officer
shall inspect the installation thereof, and if found to be in conformance with
the requirements of this ordinance a Certificate of Compliance shall be
issued. Hereafter, in addition to such criminal sanctions as may be imposed
for the violations of this ordinance, in the event that any fire call is
necessitated as a result of a fire in connection with a solid fuel burning
appliance installed after the effective date of this ordinance, and for which no
permit was obtained or for which no Certificate of Compliance was obtained,
then in that event, the actual cost to the City of Ham Lake of answering any
such fire call shall be the responsibility of the building owner. All Certificates
of Compliance shall bear the following disclaimer:
NOTICE: THE CITY OF HAM LAKE HAS ADOPTED CERTAIN
STANDARDS FOR THE INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF SOLID
FUEL BURNING APPLIANCES, WHICH STANDARDS WERE PREPARED
BY THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF BUILDING OFFICIALS. THE
CITY OF HAM LAKE WILL ENDEAVOR TO INSPECT ALL NEW
INSTALLATIONS OF SUCH DEVICES TO INSURE COMPLIANCE, BUT
CANNOT GUARANTEE TO ANY INDIVIDUAL BUILDING OWNER THAT
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
54
SUCH INSPECTIONS WILL BE SUCCESSFUL AT DETECTING ERRORS
IN CONSTRUCTION, MANUFACTURE, OR THE LIKE. THE CITY OF HAM
LAKE DISCLAIMS ANY LIABILITY TO ANY BUILDING OWNER FOR ANY
INJURY OR DAMAGE ARISING OUT OF THE USAGE OF ANY SOLID
FUEL BURNING APPLIANCE BY ANY APPLICANT, AND ADVISES ALL
APPLICANTS THAT THE USAGE OF SAID DEVICES ARE DONE AT THE
RISK OF THE APPLICANT.
11-1007 Miscellaneous
A. The standards and specifications contained within this ordinance are
supplementary to, and not in place of any portion of the Uniform Building
Code or the Minnesota State Building Code, also adopted by reference by
the City of Ham Lake. All provisions of said building codes remain in full
force and effect.
B. One copy of the document entitled “Installation and Operation of Solid
Fuel Burning Appliances”, prepared by the International Conference of
Building Officials, Copyright 1981, and any supplements thereto, shall be
kept at all times at City Hall, and maintained by the Zoning Officer for
inspection by members of the public. The City shall also endeavor to
obtain copies of said documents for purchase by members of the public.
11-1100 Hotels, Motels and Lodging Houses
The City Council of the City of Ham Lake finds that there is a need to protect
the safety and welfare of those members of the public utilizing the services of
hotels, motels or lodging houses with the City. As a result of the high
turnover rate for guests in such facilities, complaints about unsafe or
unsanitary conditions are often not made to municipal authorities; however,
as a result of the disproportionately high number of police calls to such
facilities responding to problems and complaints, the City is aware that such
complaints do exist. As a result of these public safety concerns, it is the
intention of the City to enforce the licensing and regulatory provisions of the
ordinance against existing as well as future hotels, motels and lodging
houses.
11-1101 Definitions
11-1101.1 Hotel/Motel
A hotel or motel refers to a business in which one or more units are rented
out to persons for stays generally less than one month’s duration, but
which do not contain housekeeping facilities such as stoves or
refrigerators, and which are not intended to serve as a temporary dwelling,
but merely to provide temporary lodging.
11-1101.2 Lodging House
A Lodging House is a business engaged in the rental of dwelling units
containing housekeeping facilities, including stoves, refrigerators and
other food storage or preparation facilities to provide all of the basic
habitation needs for occupancy thereof as a self-contained dwelling unit.
Buildings that otherwise meet this definition, but which contain four or
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
55
fewer dwelling units shall be exempt from this definition. In addition, a
facility that would otherwise meet the definition of a Lodging House, but
which is owned and/or operated by a government entity subject to
operational and other standards promulgated by the federal housing
administration, any state agency, or any local housing and redevelopment
authority shall be exempt from this definition.
11-1102 License Required
11-1102.1 Annual license
Every hotel, motel or lodging house shall be required to secure a license
from the City of Ham Lake. Licenses, when issued, shall be issued for
one (1) year and a fee to be established from time to time by the City
Council shall be charged for the issuance of the license.
11-1102.2 Procedure for Issuance
Applications for issuance shall be prepared by the City Administrator. All
applicants shall complete the application and present it to the City
Administrator along with the required license fee. The application shall be
referred to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations,
and final action shall be taken by the City Council after review by the
Planning Commission.
11-1102.3 Additional Conditions
In addition to the conditions imposed by the terms of this ordinance, the
City Council may, in its discretion, impose such additional conditions as
may be necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare in any
given case.
11-1102.4 Existing Facilities
All existing hotels, motels and lodging houses shall be required to
complete the above licensing procedure, but shall be entitled to the
presumption that the usage of the property upon which the existing facility
sits is appropriate and within the zoning codes. In addition, existing
facilities shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this
ordinance to apply for a license, and after the date of issuance, shall have
twelve (12) months in which to come into compliance with all of the
conditions imposed by this ordinance, and any other conditions which may
be imposed as a condition of issuance of the license.
11-1102.5 Violation of Terms
In the event that a violation of any of the terms of this ordinance or any of
the conditions of an issued license are found to exist, the zoning officer
shall issue a DEFICIENCY REPORT which shall be a written advisory to
the licensee specifying the conditions which were found to be in violation.
In the event the deficiency requires time to correct, the zoning officer shall
also state in the deficiency report a reasonable period of time in which the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
56
licensee is to complete corrective action. If the deficiency report refers to
only one or more certain individual rental units, then, as to those units, the
licensee shall not rent them to any person until the corrective action has
been taken. If the deficiency report refers to conditions which are general
to the business, then the following shall apply:
a. If the deficiency is physical in nature, requiring repair or other
physical activity, then the licensee shall not be permitted to rent
out any units to new customers until the corrective action has
been completed;
b. If the deficiency refers to a behavioral aspect such as failure to
control noise or illegal activity, then the deficiency report shall
advise the licensee that the license has been given probationary
status, and that unless the behavioral deficiencies are found to
be corrected in the ensuing ninety (90) days, that the City may
take action to revoke the license. The zoning officer shall
monitor the progress of the licensee, and if no further
complaints are received in the ensuing ninety (90) days, the
licensee shall be deemed to have corrected the deficiency. If,
however, complaints continue to be received, the zoning officer
shall refer the matter to the City Council for possible revocation.
11-1102.6 Revocation
The following conditions shall be grounds for revocation of a license:
a. Failure to correct a deficiency report within the prescribed
timeframe;
b. Chronic or repeated deficiency reports, whether or not
corrected, covering the same subject matter.
The issuance of six or more deficiency reports within any twelve
(12) month period shall be deemed to be chronic and repeated
violations. If the zoning officer or City Council feels that
revocation of a license is warranted, the City Council shall notify
the licensee in writing, and provide a public hearing at a regular
or special City Council meeting at which the licensee may
appear to show cause why the license should not be
suspended. At such a hearing, the Zoning Officer shall present
to the City Council justification for revocation, and the licensee
may present such evidence to the City Council as the licensee
deems appropriate. The licensee is entitled to be represented
by legal counsel and a written transcript shall be made.
Following the hearing, the City Council shall take action by
majority vote and if a majority of the City Council members
voting determine to revoke the license, written notice of the
reasons for the revocation, together with a notice of revocation,
will be issued to the licensee. Upon revocation, the licensee
shall be given thirty (30) days in which to cause all occupants of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
57
the facility to vacate the premises, after which time any usage of
the premises as a hotel, motel or lodging house shall be
prohibited unless a new license is obtained. The operation of
any premise as a hotel, motel or lodging house without a valid
license in place, shall be a misdemeanor.
11-1103 Standards of Operation
11-1103.1 Sanitation
a. Septic Systems
All septic systems located upon the premises of any hotel, motel or
lodging house shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building
and health codes. In addition, the Zoning Officer shall inspect on an
annual basis the septic system at each hotel, motel or lodging house.
b. Bathrooms
Group or shared bathrooms shall be prohibited. Each individual rental unit
shall be provided with a separate and enclosed bathroom, including sink,
toilet and shower.
c. Washing Facilities
Lodging houses must provide facilities for washing and drying clothes and
linens. Outside clothes lines shall be prohibited. Clothes washing
facilities may be shared by occupants but at least one washing machine
and dryer shall be provided for each six units.
d. Cooking Facilities
For lodging houses, where cooking and food storage facilities are
provided, stoves and refrigerators shall meet all applicable codes
pertaining to electrical and gas connections; in addition, when occupancy
of a particular unit changes, food storage in it shall be thoroughly emptied
and disinfected prior to occupancy by another tenant.
e. Recreation Facilities
Any outside cooking facilities, such as barbecues, picnic tables or the like,
shall be cleaned on a regular basis and be kept free of grease or
accumulated grime. All recreation areas or picnic areas shall be fenced
and shall not be open to the general public.
f. Trash Storage
All trash for pick-up by a sanitation service shall be stored in a single
location, outside of the buildings in a container capable of being
completely closed which container itself be enclosed in a fenced area
made up of opaque material.
g. Painting and Peeling
All exterior surfaces of the buildings comprising the business operation
shall be maintained as follows:
i. Wood Surfaces
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
58
For wood surfaces, all such surfaces shall be stained or painted, and
maintained in such a manner as to prevent mildew, warping, rot, or
other conditions which might tend to harbor or permit access to the
building by vermin or rodents. All peeling paint surfaces shall be
promptly scraped and repainted so as to prevent the possibility of
ingestion by infant children.
ii. Metallic Surfaces
All metallic surfaces shall be kept painted or otherwise treated in such
a manner as to prevent rust, and to prevent deterioration which would
attract nesting places or access points for vermin or rodents. As for
wood, surfaces containing peeling paint shall be promptly scraped and
repainted.
iii. Concrete or Masonry Surfaces
Concrete or masonry surfaces shall be painted or otherwise treated so
as to completely seal said surfaces to prevent nesting places or
access points for vermin and rodents and any peeling paint shall be
treated as for wood and metal surfaces.
iv. Asphalt and Concrete Pavements
All asphalt and concrete surfaces shall be maintained so as to prevent
cracks and holes, and all cracks and holes appearing shall be promptly
filled or sealed. Parking lots shall be striped, and all parking lots shall
be in sufficient size to provide for one parking stall for each rental unit,
one parking stall for each employee, and one additional parking stall
for every five (5) rental units.
v. Roof Surfaces
All roofing surfaces shall be maintained in good repair, completely
covered by shingles or other suitable roofing materials so as to prevent
leakage of water or melting snow into any of the buildings.
11-1103.2 Health, Fire and Building Codes
a. Observance
The licensee shall observe all health, fire, and building codes which
apply to any aspect of the licensee’s operation. In particular, for
lodging houses, individual rental units shall meet the same standards
for construction, wiring, plumbing and the like as are found for
permanent residential dwellings.
b. Sprinkler Systems
All new hotels, motels or lodging houses shall be equipped with a fire
control sprinkler system or automatic sprinkler system meeting
applicable fire codes.
11-1103.3 Quiet Enjoyment and Safety
a. Security
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
59
Every hotel, motel or lodging house shall have a designated security
person on duty twenty-four (24) hours per day. The security person
may be the desk clerk. The security person shall be available by
telephone, or when on patrol, by a paging device. Commencing at
10:00 p.m. each day and every hour thereafter until sunrise, the
security person shall make an hourly patrol of the premises, touring
each and every corridor, inspect each and every entrance and exit,
and tour the outside perimeter of the buildings and parking lot. This
requirement may also be satisfied by the installation of a closed- circuit
television monitoring system which provides constant surveillance of
all such areas on a scanning basis, observable from the desk clerk’s
location, and capable of picking up sound.
b. Disturbances
Every hotel, motel and lodging house shall post rules prohibiting
excessive noise, disturbances and illegal activity of any kind from
taking place within any rental unit. The security person shall be
responsible to enforce these rules.
c. Telephones
Every rental unit shall be equipped with a working telephone, capable
of dialing outside the hotel, motel or lodging house, as well as capable
of connecting to the security person, and capable of being separately
traced by all operators to identify the source of any 911 call by unit
number.
d. Lighting
All entrances, exits, hallways and parking lots shall be sufficiently
illuminated to prevent the concealment of persons or the placement of
obstructions to pedestrian traffic.
e. Tenant or Guest Complaints
All complaints received by the licensee from any guest or tenant
regarding any physical condition or behavioral aspect found within or
about the licensed premises, shall be reported to the Zoning Officer on
forms to be prescribed by the Zoning Officer, within twenty-four (24)
hours after the complaint is received. The report shall contain the
description of the complaint, the name of the complaining party, and
the remedial action, if any taken by the licensee.
11-1103.4 Compliance with Zoning Code
It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to ensure that all aspects of
the City’s zoning code are observed by occupants of its rental units. If the
licensee is aware of any zoning violation, such as the carrying on of a
business from a hotel, motel or lodging house unit, or if the licensee is
aware of any illegal activity, such as the sale or usage of controlled
substances, it shall not only be the responsibility of the licensee to report
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
60
such activity to the Zoning Officer, but it shall also be the responsibility of
the licensee to evict occupants engaging in such activities. Failure by the
licensee to control such activities shall be grounds for the issuance of a
deficiency report and may be grounds for the eventual revocation of the
license.
11-1103.5 Nuisances
The following are declared to be public nuisances, and are the
responsibility of the licensee to control. The failure on the part of the
licensee to abate any of the following nuisances, after notification of their
existence through a deficiency report, may be grounds for revocation of
the license.
a. The interior or exterior piling or storage of trash, debris, discarded
property or the like;
b. Loud noise or disturbances which interfere with the quiet enjoyment
of the premises by other tenants or occupants;
c. Illegal activities including but not limited to the usage or distribution
of illegal drugs or controlled substances, the illegal or unlicensed
sale of alcoholic beverages, acts of prostitution, or the commission
of acts of domestic violence;
d. Storage of unlicensed motor vehicles;
e. Unrepaired conditions, including but not limited to windows, window
screens, doors, locks, appliances, heating systems, air conditioning
systems or electrical systems;
f. Obstructions to pedestrian traffic in corridors, hallways, or other
areas of pedestrian traffic;
g. Exterior areas of bare ground;
To this end, all licensees shall be required to pave all surfaces
upon which automobiles are stored or driven, provide paved
sidewalks from the parking lots to all entrances and exits, and for
all areas not paved, the licensee shall be required to maintain
grass cover which is free of noxious weeds or heavy pollen
producing vegetation.
h. The storage of any rubbish or trash for pick-up in containers which
are not completely closed and which are not completely enclosed
by an opaque fence.
i. Failure to promptly repair or repaint any deteriorating exterior
surface of the building, roof, parking lot, or sidewalks.
j. Maintenance of conditions which attracts, harbors or provides
access points for vermin or rodents.
k. The usage of any trailer or vehicle for storage of any stock in trade
or item which would constitute a nuisance.
11-1104 – LOCAL LODGING TAX
11-104.1 Definitions: As used in this Article, the following words and
terms shall have meanings given to them by this section.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
61
A. ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the City.
B. CITY. The City of Ham Lake.
C. LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of lodging by a
hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court, or resort, except
where such lodging shall be for a continuous period of thirty (30)
days or more to the same lodger.
D. OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others, or any
officer, agent of employee of such person.
E. PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee,
syndicate or any other combination of individuals.
Whenever the term “person” is used in any provision of this
Article prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to a corporation, association, or partnership, shall
mean the officers, or partners thereof as the case may be.
F. RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for
lodging whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not
include any charges for services rendered in connection with
furnishing lodging other than the room charge itself.
G. LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
11-1104.2 Imposition of Tax. There is hereby imposed a tax of three
percent (3%) on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person. The tax shall be stated and
charged separately and shall be collected by the operator
from the lodger. The tax collected by the operator shall be a
debt owed by the operator to the City and shall be
extinguished only by payment to the City. In no case shall
the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the
amount of tax which the operator authorized and required by
this Article to collect from a lodger.
11-1104.3 Collections. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by
this Article at the time rent is paid. The tax collections shall
be held in trust by the operator for the City. The amount of
tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the
lodging.
11-1104.4 Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person
as to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of
the City to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a
claim therefore made at the time the rent is collected and
such a claim shall be made in writing under penalty of
perjury on forms provided by the City. All such claims shall
be forwarded to the City when the returns and collections
are submitted as required by this Article.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
62
11-1104.5 Advertising No Tax. It shall be unlawful for any operator to
advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer,
directly or indirectly, that the tax or any party thereof will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will
be refunded. In computing the tax to be collected, amounts
of tax less than one cent shall be considered an additional
cent.
11-1104.6 Payments and Returns. The taxes imposed by this Article
shall be paid by the operator to the City not later than
twenty-five (25) days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator
shall submit a return upon such forms and containing such
information as the City may require. The return shall contain
the following minimum information:
A. The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period
covered by the return.
B. The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
C. The signature of the person filing the return or that of an agent duly
authorized in writing.
D. The period covered by the return.
E. The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging
tax.
F. A copy of the Minnesota State Sales and Use Tax Return
submitted by the operator for the period covered by the return.
The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any
reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this Article
previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which
became uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion
to the portion of such consideration which became uncollectible.
11-1104.7 Examination of Return, Adjustments, Notices and
Demands.
The Administrator may rely upon the Minnesota State Sales
and Use Tax Return filed by the operator with the State of
Minnesota in determining the accuracy of a return filed
under this Article. However, the Administrator shall be
authorized to make any investigation or examination of the
records and accounts of the person making the return, if the
Administrator reasonably determines that such steps are
necessary for determining the correctness of the return. The
tax computed on the basis of such examination shall be the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
63
tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that
paid, such excess shall be paid to the City within ten (10)
days after receipt of a notice thereof, given either personally
or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the
return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be
due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid
the tax to the City within ten (10) days after determination of
such refund.
11-1104.8 Refunds. Any person may apply to the Administrator for a
refund of taxes paid for a prescribed period in excess of the
amount legally due for that period, provided that no
application for refund shall be considered unless filed within
one year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the
filing of the return, whichever period is the longer. The
Administrator shall examine the claim and make and file
written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in
whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered
mail to such person at the address stated upon the return. If
such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the Administrator
shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes
due under this Article from the claimant and the balance of
said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Administrator to
the claimant.
11-1104.9 Failure to File a Return.
A. If any operator required by this Article to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make,
willfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return,
the operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file such
return or corrected return within five (5) days of receipt of
such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax
due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such
return or corrected return, the Administrator shall make a
return or corrected return, for such person from such
knowledge and information as the Administrator can obtain,
and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax, less any
payments theretofore made on account of the tax for the
taxable period covered by such return shall be paid within
five (5) days of the receipt of written notice and demand for
such payment. Any such return or assessment made by the
Administrator shall be prima facie correct and valid, and
such person shall have the burden of establishing its
incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding in
respect thereto.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
64
B. If any portion of a tax imposed by this Article,
including penalties thereon, is not paid within thirty (30) days
after it is required to be paid, the City may institute such
legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due
plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any
action.
C. Upon a showing of good cause, the Administrator
may grant an operator one thirty (30) day extension of time
within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as
required by this Article provided that interest during such
period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the
rate of ten percent (10%) per annum.
11-1104.11 Penalties. If any tax imposed by this Article is not paid
within the time herein specified for the payment, or an extension thereof,
there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to ten percent (10%)
of the amount remaining unpaid. The amount of tax not timely paid,
together with any penalty provided by this section, shall bear interest at
the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the time such tax should
have been paid until it is paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added to
the tax and be collected as part thereof.
11-1104.12 Administration of Tax. The Administrator shall administer
and enforce the assessment and collection of taxes imposed by this
Article. The Administrator shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the
returns and other documents required by this Article and shall distribute
the same throughout the City and furnish them on application, but failure
to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation
required of him or her under this Article.
11-1104.13 Examination of Records. The Administrator and those
persons acting on behalf of the Administrator, authorized in writing by the
Administrator, may examine the books, papers and records of any
operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this Article. Every such
operator is directed and required to give to the Administrator, or such
other authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity
for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
11-1104.14 Violations. Any person who shall willfully fail to make a
return required by this Article; or who shall fail to pay the tax after written
demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any
penalty or interest imposed by this Article, after written demand for such
payment, or who shall refuse to permit the City to examine the books,
records and papers under his or her control, or who shall willfully make
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
65
any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
11-1104.15 Use of Proceeds. Ninety-five percent (95%) of the
proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this Article
shall be used in accordance with Minnesota Statutes §469.190, as the
same may be amended from time to time, to fund a local convention or
tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the City as a
tourist or convention center.
11-1104.16 Appeals.
A. Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made
by the Administrator under this Article may file a petition for review
of such notice, order or determination detailing the operator’s
reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The
petition shall contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner’s
address and the location of the lodging subject to the order, notice
or determination.
B. The petition for review shall be filed with the City within ten (10)
days after the notice, order or determination for which review is
sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting
review.
C. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Administrator, or the
Administrator’s designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the
petitioner at least five (5) days prior written notice of the date, time
and place of the hearing.
D. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or
withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of
petitioner’s choosing at petitioner’s own expense.
E. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council.
F. The City Council shall make written findings of fact and conclusion
based upon the applicable sections of this Article and evidence
presented. The City Council may affirm, reverse or modify the
notice, order or determination made by the Administrator.
11-1200 Natural Gas Pipelines and Installers.
11-1201 Legislative Purpose.
The City Council of the City of Ham Lake, after study by a qualified
consultant, finds that a potentially serious public safety hazard exists where
natural gas pipelines from competing suppliers are charged with natural gas
in locations in close proximity to charged lines of other natural gas suppliers.
Specifically, the public safety hazards are:
A. A loss of ability to identify the source of a leak or explosion, and a
concomitant loss of ability to effect immediate repair;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
66
B. The danger of an explosion causing a nearby pipeline to rupture, thereby
increasing the potential intensity of accidental leaks or explosions;
C. Increased danger or ruptures where other underground construction is
taking place;
D. Increased congestion where emergency repair work is necessitated;
The purpose of this Ordinance is, therefore, to protect public safety by
prohibiting the charging of natural gas pipelines in close proximity to charged
pipelines which exist as of the effective date of the Ordinance.
11-1202 Prohibited Activity
A. Definitions.
1. Natural Gas - a product in gaseous form designed and used for
the purpose of incineration in furnaces and appliances, to supply
energy for public or private consumption, and which is sold by utility
companies subject to the regulatory authority of the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission;
2. Pipeline - any pipeline, above or underground, which has been
installed by any party for the purpose of transmitting natural gas,
including mains and lines connecting mains to individual buildings;
3. Charged Pipeline - any pipeline which is filled with natural gas.
B. Conduct Prohibited
1. Crossing Charged Pipeline. No person, corporation or other entity
shall cause or permit a pipeline to become a charged pipeline
where the pipeline to be charged is within 100 feet of another
charged pipeline which exists as of August 21, 1989.
2. Exception.
a. Mains. A charged pipeline may exist within 100 feet of another
charged pipeline where both charged pipelines are mains, and
neither is a connection to a building, and only where the existence
of the second pipeline to be charged is necessary to extend the
delivery of natural gas to customers located outside of the
corporate limits of the City of Ham Lake.
b. Common Ownership. Exceptions may also be granted in
circumstances where two proposed charged pipelines meet the
following criteria:
i. Both pipelines are owned and maintained by the same
company;
ii. The owner is able to demonstrate that there is no significant
public safety problem inherent in the proposal;
c. Permits Required. Prior to charging the second pipeline to be
charged, under either a or b above, the owner thereof shall first
obtain a permit from the City Clerk-Treasurer, after completion of
application forms to be supplied by the Clerk-Treasurer. No permit
shall be issued until the Clerk-Treasurer shall have received a set
of written recommendations and construction specifications from a
professional consultant conversant in the field of pipeline safety, to
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
67
be selected by the Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk- Treasurer shall
charge a fee of $200.00 plus an amount equal to the actual
expense incurred by the City in reviewing the application, including
all professional and consulting fees charged to the City.
Exceptions granted under this section shall be extremely limited,
and economic considerations alone shall not justify the issuance of
a permit where another practical means of delivering natural gas is
available without creating a situation in which two charged pipelines
exist within 100 feet of each other.
11-1203 Service Areas.
Where the City has granted a franchise to any utility to deliver natural gas
within the City, and has reserved the right to designate specific service areas
for such delivery, the designation of such service areas shall be by resolution
of a majority of the City Council. Further, this Ordinance shall in all respects
apply to all natural gas pipelines, charged or not charged, which exist in the
City of Ham Lake as of August 21, 1989.
11-1204 Installers
A. Definitions of:
Natural Gas Installer Any person or company engaging in the business
of installing new piping to connect charged gas pipelines to a serviced
location for consumption and combustion of natural gas.
B. License Required
No person or corporation shall perform any work meeting the definition of
a Natural Gas Installer unless they have obtained a license from the City
Building Official.
1. Application shall be made on forms to be prepared by the Building
Official.
2. A fee for a license shall be charged, to be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
3. The Building Official shall review the qualifications of each person
applying for a license, and shall, in his discretion, disapprove any
individual or firm not displaying suitable experience and training in
the various fields of endeavor which are required to insure safe and
efficient installation and working condition of the completed
installation. Such fields include, but are not limited to steam fitting,
plumbing, basic electrical and wiring, excavation and underground
construction.
11-1300 Pawn Shops
11-1310 Legislative Findings of Fact
The City Council of the City of Ham Lake finds as follows:
A. Pawn shops as defined below, create a need for municipal legislation.
There is little, if any, state regulation of the activities of pawn shops, which
are involved in the lending of money and the pledging of property as security
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
68
for the repayment thereof. Pawn shops are not subject to regulation and
examination as are other lending institutions, and the very nature of the
business lends itself to a possibility greater than for other businesses and
lenders, that stolen property may be pledged to secure credit. Additionally,
without regulations, pawn shops present an attractive nuisance to minors
seeking to pledge the property of others. The physical location of pawn
shops must, therefore, be regulated as well. Based upon the foregoing on
the findings of need, and based upon the fact that the Minnesota State
Legislature has also seen fit to regulate many of the above concerns through
criminal statutes, specifically Minnesota Statutes Chapter 609.81, the City
adopts these regulatory provisions.
11-1320 Definitions
A. Pawn Shop
Pawn shop shall be defined as in Minnesota Statutes Chapter
471.925, and any amendments thereto, and in the event of any
repeal of said statute, for the purposes of this ordinance, the
definition of pawn shop shall be as that definition appeared in said
statute on the effective date of this ordinance.
B. Active Participant
An active participant shall be defined to mean the owner of a pawn
shop, any person in responsible control of a pawn shop, the
manager of a pawn shop, or, in the case of a corporation, the
holder of any block of stock comprising ten percent (10%) or more
of the capital stock of the corporation owning the pawn shop. In
the case of a partnership, all partners shall be deemed active
participants.
11-1330License Required
Prior to commencing business activities within the City of Ham Lake,
the owner and/or operator of a pawn shop shall first obtain a license
from the City. The following provisions shall apply to license
applicants:
A. The Application Form
The applicant shall fill out an application form, on forms provided by
the City Clerk/Treasurer, which, at a minimum, shall contain the
following information:
1. Name, address and birthdate of the owner of the pawn shop, and
the person who will be in responsible management control of the
pawn shop. If the pawn shop is a corporation, this information
shall be provided for any person owning ten percent (10%) or
more of the capital stock of the corporation.
2. Complete financial statement for each of the active participants.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
69
3. A complete occupational resume of each active participant,
including all periods of time from the applicant’s 18th birthday
through the date of the application.
4. A complete listing of the adult criminal record of each active
participant, excluding therefrom traffic violations of a
misdemeanor level or less.
5. The residence address of each active participant for the preceding
ten years.
6. A statement as to whether or not any active participant has had
any of the following within the preceding fifteen (15) years:
a. A petition in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy;
b. Civil lawsuits, including a complete summary of the nature of
the proceedings and the outcome;
c. Any business licenses of any kind revoked, suspended, or
otherwise challenged, particularly and licenses to operate
a pawn shop;
7. A complete floor plan of the proposed location of the pawn shop,
together with a site plan of the lot upon which the pawn shop will
be situated. The floor plan will be drawn to the scale of not less
than one inch equals four feet (1” = 4’), and the site plan that a
scale of not less than one inch equals twenty feet 1” = 20’). The
floor plan shall clearly indicate the areas within the pawn shop
designated to contain the requirement elements as found in
Article 11-1350. The site plan shall contain all of the information
normally required for a commercial building permit site plan
review.
B. Application Fee
Along with the application submitted above, the applicant shall
submit a license fee to be determined from time to time by
resolution. If a license is denied, that portion of the application
fee not used for investigation and inspection purposes shall be
refunded.
C. Review Procedure
Upon receiving the application and all required data, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall submit copies of the application to the City
Building Official, and to the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall
conduct an investigation of the background of each active
participant, and shall request a Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
criminal background check from the Office of the Anoka County
Sheriff. The City Building Official shall review the proposed site
plan and building plan to ascertain its conformance with the
building code and the provisions of this ordinance. Such review
shall be complete within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
application, and the City Attorney and Building Official shall each
prepare a written report to be forwarded to the City
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
70
Clerk/Treasurer. Upon receipt of the written report, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall refer the matter to the Planning
Commission, which shall, after notice provided for in the same
manner as conditional use permits, conduct a public hearing on
the proposed pawn shop. Following a public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City
Council, and the City Council shall, within ninety (90) days after
receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission, act
upon the application.
11-1340 Conditions of Every License
As a condition of receiving a license to operate a pawn shop in the
City of Ham Lake, every licensee shall, by its application and
acceptance of the license, consent to the following terms and
conditions:
A. Inspection by Law Enforcement Personnel
The premises of the applicant shall be open for inspection by the City’s
law enforcement personnel at all hours during which the pawn shop is
open for business, and said inspection shall include the right to inspect
any and all objects which have been pledged as security for loans, the
business records of the pawn shop including the names, addresses
and other written information of parties pledging property for loans,
and any other data or information reasonably requested by the law
enforcement personnel.
B. Observances of Ordinances and Regulations
It shall be grounds for revocation of a pawn shop license if the
applicant, or any active participant, does any of the following.
1. Commits any violation of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 609.81.
2. Is convicted of any crime of a level higher than a misdemeanor,
which involves theft, concealment or receiving of stolen
property, fraud, embezzlement, forgery, burglary, robbery, any
form of homicide, arson, trespass, assault, or any other crime
involving damage to persons or property.
3. Fails to observe any condition of this ordinance, or fails to keep the
premises in conformance with the physical requirements of this
ordinance as contained in Article 11-1350.
C. Non-Transferable
The license, when issued, shall be issued only to the person signing
the shall not be transferable to any other person or entity.
11-1350 Physical Requirements
The following physical requirements shall be observed by each pawn
shop:
A. Security
Each pawn shop shall be equipped with fireproof vault for the storage of
valuable papers, records, currency, jewelry, coins, or other items of value
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
71
commonly stored in a vault, of adequate size to meet the needs of the
Pawn Shop, as recommended by the Building Official. The vault shall
have a fire rating of one hour. The vault shall be permanently affixed to
the building in a manner deemed reasonably permanent by the City
Building official. The vault shall be in a location which is non-accessible to
the public.
B. Display items
Items for display, whether for resale or simply for display, shall be in
locked, secure cages or shelves, and not capable of being touched or
handled by persons other than active participants or pawn shop
employees, unless with the consent and under the observation of pawn
shop employees.
C. Minors Prohibited
Minors shall be absolutely prohibited from being inside the pawn shop
premises at any time, for any purpose. The pawn shop owner shall
prominently post a sign on the outside of the building in which the pawn
shop is located, advising of the prohibition of minors.
D. Doors and Windows
Exterior doors and windows shall be of the same quality and shall meet
the same standards as those required for banking houses under
Minnesota Banking Regulations, and under Minnesota Building Code.
E. Sprinkling Systems
All pawn shops shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system
in accordance with standards to be established by the City Building
Official from time to time.
F. Exterior Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided for all employees and customers of all
pawn shops, in accordance with standards as found in the City Zoning
Code.
G. Location
No pawn shop shall be permitted to be located closer than one-half mile
from any public or private high school, junior high school or elementary
school as measured from nearest building corner to building corner.
11-1360 Records Required To Be Kept.
A. Receipt
Every pawnbroker purchasing or receiving on deposit for a loan any article
of personal property shall give to the person selling or depositing such
article a written or printed ticket or receipt for the article so sold or
deposited, showing the terms of such sale or loan.
B. Transaction Record
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
72
Each licensee hereunder shall keep a record of each transaction made in
the course of his business. Such records shall be in a form prescribed by
the City Clerk/Treasurer and shall, in all instances, be legibly made in ink
and be in the English language. The records so kept shall include the
following information about each transaction:
1. The name, address and date of birth of the person pledging or
selling the item;
2. The time and date of the transaction;
3. A complete description of the item pledged or sold, including all
identifying numbers and identifying marks;
4. A physical description of the person pawning or selling the items,
including:
a. Race;
b. Sex;
c. Height;
d. Weight;
e. Color of eyes;
f. Color of hair;
5. The amount of money paid or loaned for the item.
6. The signature of the person pledging or selling the item.
7. The identification number from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
a. Valid driver’s license containing a picture;
b. Picture identification;
c. Medicard
8. Any other information the law enforcement personnel shall require.
Every pawnbroker shall make available to the law enforcement
personnel every day, before the hour of 12:00 noon, a complete,
legible and correct copy of the records required by this Section for
all transactions which occurred on the previous day. The records
required herein shall be kept at the licensee’s place of business for
three years, and shall be available for police inspection at any
reasonable time.
11-1370 Holding of Property
A. Retaining of Property
When the City’s law enforcement personnel notifies any
pawnbroker not to sell any property received on deposit or
purchased by him, or not to permit the same to be redeemed, the
pawnbroker shall not sell nor permit such property to be redeemed
until such property is released in writing by the City’s law
enforcement personnel.
B. Prohibition on Redemption
No personal property deposited with or purchased by any licensee
under this Chapter shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed from
the place of business of licensee until 48 hours after the copy of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
73
the records required by Article 11-1360 have been made available
to the City’s law enforcement personnel, except upon written
permission of the City’s law enforcement personnel.
11-1380 Hours of Operation
No pawn shop shall be open for business after the hour of 10:00 p.m.
on any evening, or before the hour of 8:00 a.m. on any morning, or
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Saturday through 8:00 a.m. on
Monday, nor any time on any legal holiday, including but not limited to
Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, Labor Day, Fourth of July, New
Year’s Day, Memorial Day, President’s Day and Martin Luther King
Day.
11-1390 Surety Bond Required
Prior to opening for business, every licensed pawn shop owner shall
furnish to the City a surety bond, in an amount of not less than
$10,000.00 guaranteeing that the pawn shop and every active
participant therein, shall observe all of the provisions of this ordinance,
all of the provisions of Minnesota State Law regulating pawn shops,
and providing for a penal sum of $10,000.00 in the event of default
thereon.
ARTICLE 11-1400 SHADE TREE DAMAGE
It is the intention of the City of Ham Lake to make reasonable efforts to
preserve and protect certain species of shade trees that are threatened by
various pests or diseases. These species include the Ash Group (Fraxinus
species – White, Black and Green - Ash trees that are affected by the
Emerald Ash Borer); the Elm Group (American Elm, Red Elm, Rock Elm,
Siberian Elm and Chinese Elm); and the Red Oak Group (Red Oak, Pin Oak,
Northern Pin Oak, Scarlet Oak and Black Oak). These three groups may be
collectively referred to herein as the “Target Trees”. The specific tree
damages that are addressed are damage caused by the Emerald Ash Borer;
Dutch Elm Disease, and Oak Wilt, sometimes collectively referred to herein
as “Target Damage”.
11-4000.1 Annual Inspection Period The City shall conduct an annual
inspection in the month of July of each year of the City’s trees from the Ash
Group, the Elm Group and the Oak Group, by drive-by inspections from
public roads. The inspection shall be carried out by a tree inspector or
inspectors certified by the State of Minnesota (the “Inspector”).
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
74
11-1400.2 Inventory of Damaged Trees As inspections are made, the
Inspector shall take note of all Target Trees that show visible evidence of any
Target Damage, recording the street address of such conditions and taking
photographs where feasible.
11-1400.3 Notification to Property Owners
A. Ash Damage or Dutch Elm Disease. Where these types of damages
are observed, the Inspector shall notify the owner of the property on which
the trees are located of the conditions that were observed. Notification shall
be by US Mail, and shall include the following information:
1) A description of the conditions observed;
2) A suggested method of action that may be taken by the owner to treat the
damage or to prevent the spread of the damage, if any such treatment or
protocol is in fact available.
B. Oak Wilt. Where Oak Wilt is observed, the Inspector shall notify the
owner of the property on which the trees are located of the conditions that
were observed. Notification shall be by US Mail, and shall include the
following information:
1) A description of the conditions observed;
2) An offer to make a further inspection of the property, with the owner’s
permission, for the purpose of identifying and marking all trees on the
property that may be infected with Oak Wilt.
3) Educational information about remedial measures, if any, that may be
taken by the owner to treat the disease or to prevent the spread of the
disease, if any such treatment or protocol is in fact available.
4) Educational information about any City programs that are available to
financially assist property owners in treating or removing diseased trees;
5) Educational information about the availability of the use of a City-owned
vibratory plow to prevent the future spread of Oak Wilt;
6) Educational information about the City’s “no-cut” policy as described in
Article 11-1400.4 hereof.
11.1400.4 “No-Cut” Period No person shall cut, trim or otherwise wound
any Red Oak Group tree between April 1 and July 15 of any given year,
unless the person has obtained a Permit from the City.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
75
A. Permit Permits may be issued to any person with approval of a certified
tree inspector engaged or employed by the City where the Inspector, in his or
her sole discretion, deems that the cutting, trimming or wounding of the tree
does not present a significant danger of the spread of Oak Wilt. Permits so
issued may contain specific requirements or conditions to observe in the
activity. The City may impose a fee for such permits, and if so, the permit
fees so collected shall be placed in a dedicated fund to re-forest areas on
public or private property that have been affected by Target Damage.
B. Violation Any person who violates the provisions of the “No-Cut” period
or who violates the conditions a permit issued in connection therewith shall
be guilty of a petty misdemeanor, punishable in the manner prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes for that offense level.
11-1400.5 Other Assistance or Educational Programs
A. Dissemination of Information City staff shall use the City’s website,
any periodical published with civic news or any other media to provide
educational or informative information about Target Damages to the general
public.
B. Financial Assistance Program The City Council may, by resolution,
establish and amend from time to time a financial assistance program to help
property owners in need to deal with Target Damagess. Funds for such a
program may come from any lawful source.
11-1400.6 Tree Commission
The City Council hereby establishes a Tree Commission. The composition
and duties of the Tree Commission may be established and changed from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. Until and unless such a
resolution is adopted, the Tree Commission shall consist of the members of
the City’s Park Commission, and may operate under the name “Park and
Tree Commission”. The Tree Commission shall advise the City Council from
time to time on matters affecting Target Trees, in addition to such other
duties as may be established by resolution.
11-1500 FLEA MARKETS
11-1510 Definitions
A. Flea Market- A location at which space is provided by the owner or lessee
of facilities at which individual vendors may temporarily occupy space in
which to conduct retail or wholesale sales, barter or other exchange of
goods or services. This definition shall apply to this type of activity,
regardless of the name given to the venture. This definition is not
intended to apply to bona fide landlord-tenant relationships between
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
76
building owner and full-time business tenants, such as are commonly
found, but rather to daily or weekly rental arrangements for vendors
operating in booths, tents or other freestanding structures.
B. Vendor- A person or business entity occupying space as an exhibition or
offering goods for sale or barter at a flea market.
C. Exemption - Organizations which are non-profit organizations, and
exempt from federal income taxation by virtue of non-profit and charitable
organization status shall be exempt from the provisions of Article 11-1500
so long as the scope of Flea Market activity engaged in by such
organizations meets the following criteria:
1) The organization shall sponsor no more than three weekend Flea
Markets per year, on non-successive weekends, limited to activity
between Friday and Sunday;
2) At least two weeks prior to conducting the activity, the organization
shall notify the City Administrator of the dates and scope of the activity;
3) The activity shall not generate any hazardous traffic or other public
safety condition, and the sponsor shall provide adequate sanitation
and other public service facilities for patrons.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the City, in its sole discretion,
determines that any particular organization has conducted a Flea
Market without observing the above criteria, the City may, by
resolution, revoke the exempt status of that organization and require
compliance by the organization with the conditions of Article 11-1500
for any subsequent Flea Market activity.
11-1520 Conditional Use Permit Required
No flea market shall be permitted in any district other than in a C-D district,
and then only under Conditional Use Permit. Application for Conditional Use
Permit shall be made under Article 9 of the Ham Lake City Code, but the
following conditions shall apply to all conditional use permits issued for flea
markets:
A. Parking - Adequate off-street parking on paved surfaces shall be
provided in sufficient area to accommodate all vendors and customers of
the flea market.
B. Security - The Conditional Use Permit holder shall be responsible to
provide adequate security to protect the personal safety of all vendors and
customers, and to protect the personal property and stock in trade of all
vendors.
C. Alcohol - No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in the area of the flea
market, including the parking areas.
D. Sanitation- Adequate permanent restroom facilities shall be provided in
sufficient quantities for all vendors and customers. Trash and debris shall
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
77
be stored in enclosed trash containers and picked up at least once
weekly.
E. Codes - All Codes and regulations of all jurisdictions shall be observed at
all times, including Fire Codes, Building Codes, and Health Codes. These
codes shall apply to the individual spaces of all vendors, as well as to the
facilities being provided by the Conditional Use Permit holder, whose
responsibility it shall be to insure code compliance by the individual
vendors.
F. Traffic Control - The Conditional Use Permit holder shall not permit local
traffic hazards to result from patrons exiting and entering the premises,
and shall cooperate with local law enforcement officials in erecting such
temporary traffic control devices as may be necessary during peak hours
to control traffic. If it becomes necessary, in the judgment of the local
police authority, to engage a uniformed officer to direct traffic during peak
hours, it shall be the duty of the Conditional Use Permit holder to
reimburse the City for the labor cost incurred for such traffic direction
personnel.
G. Individual Policies - The Conditional Permit holder shall establish written
internal policies that the holder intends to enforce and shall provide to the
City Administrator a copy of such policies, including any changes made
from time to time.
H. Character of Vendors - The Conditional Use Permit holder shall make
best efforts to screen and monitor the activities of the vendors, and shall
endeavor to require the following standards of performance:
1) No merchandise shall be sold which does not meet the standard of
any agency or institution which has control over product safety,
sanitation or integrity;
2) No vendor shall be permitted to continue to market their wares
who:
(a) Fail to collect and remit all required sales or excise taxes;
(b) Repeatedly or habitually fails to respond to customer complaints
about product quality;
(c) Engages in acts of fraud, theft or swindle;
(d) Meets the definition of a Sexually Oriented Business or Pawn Shop
as found elsewhere in the City Code;
(e) Violates the internal rules of the Flea Market;
(f) Engages in acts of assault; disorderly conduct or breach of the
peace.
(g) Engages in the sale or exchange of stolen goods, or goods
prohibited by law from being sold or exchanged.
11-1600 RADIO SIGNAL TOWERS
11-1610 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to this Article:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
78
11-1611 ANTENNA - A device used to transmit or receive radio, television,
electromagnetic or other waves used in connection with communication
devices including but not limited to radios, television, cellular or digital
personal telephones, pagers, or the like.
11-1612 TOWER - A freestanding structure constructed for the purpose of
mounting antennae, exceeding fifteen feet in height, and intended for or
actually used for the mounting of antennae owned, used, leased or operated
by one or more commercial ventures engaged in the pursuit of mercantile
trade in communications technology, apparatus or peripheral fields. The
existence of non-commercial antennae on a tower is not intended to change
or alter the character of this definition. Structures such as Ham Radio towers
which are used solely for the personal hobby use of the owner shall not be
considered “towers”.
11-1613 TOWER USER - Any entity which owns, operates, leases or uses
any antenna affixed to any tower.
11-1620 TOWER LOCATIONS
No Tower shall be located on any land within the City except land which
owned by the City of Ham Lake, or upon which the City of Ham Lake holds an
easement for road or utility purposes.
11-1630 PHYSICAL STANDARDS
11-1631 Height - No tower shall exceed a height which is reasonable
for the area in which it is proposed to be located, as
determined by the City at the time of license application.
11-1632 Construction Standards - All towers shall be constructed in
accord with the regulations of any governmental agency
having jurisdiction over the activities of Tower Users.
11-1634 Number of Tower Users - No tower shall be constructed
which cannot accommodate the affixation of the equipment
for at least four Tower Users.
11-1635 Aesthetics and Landscaping - The City shall review each
proposed tower plan, and may require architectural
treatment, screening and landscaping for aesthetic
purposes.
11-1640 LICENSE
Any entity seeking to erect or maintain a Tower within the City of
Ham Lake, and any Tower User shall be required to obtain a
License from the City.
11-1641 Term of License
11-1641.1 Tower Owner License - A license issued to an entity
desiring to construct and maintain a tower shall be
issued for period of five years.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
79
11-1641.2 Tower Use License - A license issued to a Tower
User shall be issued for a period of one year.
11-1642 License Fee - The Ham Lake City Council shall from time to
time establish a fee schedule for licensing of all Tower Owners and Tower
Users. The City may, in its discretion, establish a different fee schedule
for different classes of Tower Users, charging a lower license fee for
public entities such as police, fire or public works departments, than for
commercial users.
11-1650 Conditions of Issuance
11-1651 Maintenance - The owner of every tower shall maintain the
structural integrity of the tower, and all components thereof,
in strict conformance with the regulatory codes and rules of
any agency having jurisdiction over the activities thereof. In
addition, the City may require, as a condition of issuance of
any license for a tower owner, that additional safety
measures, fencing, prevention of attractive nuisance, and
the like, be taken at or after the time of issuance of the
license.
11-1652 Security - In the discretion of the City Council, the operator
of a tower may be required to post adequate security to
guarantee compliance with City codes and regulations
pertaining to the particular tower operation, maintenance
and the like.
11-1653 Priority of Tower Users - The City may, in its discretion, by
resolution establish a priority for licensing of Tower Users,
giving preference to governmental agencies for usage of any
tower space not used directly by the tower owner. In
addition, the City may require that one antenna space be
provided on each tower for exclusive use by the City.
11-1654 Violation of License Terms - In addition to taking corrective
action as may be required for a violation of any license term,
the City may revoke the license of any Tower User or Tower
Owner, after affording a reasonable opportunity to correct
deficiencies, for repeated violation of license terms.
11-1660 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
11-1661 Eminent Domain - The City may, in its discretion, use the power
of eminent domain to acquire the site for a proposed tower,
where all statutory elements regarding the usage of the
power of eminent domain are met.
11-1662 - Termination of License - Upon the termination or expiration of
the license of any Tower Owner, the owner shall remove all tower
components and restore the premises upon which the tower and its
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
80
components were located to the condition of the land at the time of
construction of the tower.
11-1663 Existing Towers - Existing structures which meet the
definition of “tower” including poles housing siren warning systems, shall
be exempt from the provisions of this Article 11-1600.
11-1664 Conflict of Law - If any of the foregoing municipal
regulation is found by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction to conflict with,
be superseded, or be preempted by the laws, regulations or codes of any
other entity having regulatory authority over the activities of tower owners
or Tower Users, such finding shall effect only those portions of this code
found to be incapable of municipal enforcement, and the remainder of this
Article shall remain in full force and effect.
Article 11-1700 Right-of-Way Ordinance
Sec. 1.01. Findings, Purpose, and Intent.
To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the
integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights of way, the city
strives to keep its rights of way in a state of good repair and free from
unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this chapter of this code relating to right of
way permits and administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on
the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its
rights of way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to
complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this
chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights of way will bear financial
responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for recovery of out-ofpocket
and projected costs from persons using the public rights of way.
This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter
123, substantially codified in Minn. Stat. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79,
237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and 2017 Minn. Laws, ch. 94, art. 9, amending
the Act, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of
the right of way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. R.
7819.0050–7819.9950 and Minn. R., ch. 7560 where possible. To the extent
any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the
Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other
applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the public.
Sec. 1.02. Election to Manage the Public Rights of Way
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
81
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
Minn. Stat. 237.163 subd. 2(b), to manage rights of way within its jurisdiction.
Sec. 1.03. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter of this code. References
hereafter to “sections” are, unless otherwise specified, references to
sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or
not capitalized.
Abandoned Facility. A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected
from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or
still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right of
way user.
Applicant. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right
of way.
City. The City of Ham Lake, Minnesota. For purposes of section 1.29, city also
means the City’s elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.
Collocate or Collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the city or
other governmental unit.
Commission. The State Public Utilities Commission.
Congested Right of Way. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right of way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities in
conformance with Minn. Stat. § 216D.04, subd. 3, over a continuous length in
excess of 500 feet.
Construction Performance Bond. Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:
• Individual project bond;
• Cash deposit;
• Security of a form listed or approved under Minn. Stat. § 15.73,
subd. 3;
• Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
• Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
• A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction
bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
82
Degradation. A decrease in the useful life of the right of way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right of way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right of way earlier than would be required if the excavation or
disturbance did not occur.
Degradation Cost. Subject to Minn. R. 7819.1100, means the cost to achieve a
level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not
to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minn. R.,
parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
Degradation Fee. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the
city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right of
way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
Department. The department of public works of the city.
Director. The director or superintendent of the department of public works of
the city, or her or his designee.
Delay Penalty. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right
of way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
Emergency. A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
Equipment. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in
any right of way.
Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate
any part of a right of way.
Excavation permit. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right of way. An Excavation permit
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right of way described in such
permit.
Excavation Permit Fee. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in Section 1.13.
Facility or Facilities. Any tangible asset in the right of way required to
provide Utility Service.
Five-Year Project Plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
83
High Density Corridor. A designated portion of the public right of way within
which telecommunications right of way users having multiple and competing
facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit
system or other common structure.
Hole. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less
than the width of the pavement.
Local Representative. A local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions
for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
Management Costs. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights of
way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right of way or small wireless
facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right of way
work; determining the adequacy of right of way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the
work; and revoking right of way or small wireless facility permits. Management
costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right of way user for the
use of the right of way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the
city including fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or
revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of
litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter
123; Minn. Stat. §§ 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those
sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section
1.31 of this chapter.
Obstruct. To place any tangible object in a right of way so as to hinder free and
open passage over that or any part of the right of way.
Obstruction Permit. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right of way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right of way, for
the duration specified therein.
Obstruction Permit Fee. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in Section 1.13.
Patch or Patching. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate
base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city’s fiveyear
project plan.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
84
Pavement. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right of way
and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate, or gravel.
Permit. Has the meaning given “right of way permit” in Minn. Stat. § 237.162.
Permittee. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right of way
has been granted by the city under this chapter.
Person. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign,
whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
Probation. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of
this chapter.
Probationary Period. One year from the date that a person has been notified in
writing that they have been put on probation.
Registrant. Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities
located in any right of way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right of way or place its facilities or equipment in the right of
way.
Restore or Restoration. The process by which an excavated right of way and
surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
Restoration Cost. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to
achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.
Public Right of Way or Right of Way. The area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in
which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights of way for
travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right of way does not
include the airwaves above a right of way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
Right of Way Permit. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or
both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
Right of Way User. (1) A telecommunications right of way user as defined by
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
85
Minn. Stat., § 237.162, subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility
in the right of way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right of way.
Service or Utility Service. Includes (1) those services provided by a public
utility as defined in Minn. Stat. 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a
telecommunications right of way user, including transporting of voice or data
information; (3) services of a cable communications systems as defined in
Minn. Stat. ch. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric
association organized under Minn. Stat., ch. 308A; and (6) water, and sewer,
including service laterals, steam, cooling, or heating services.
Service Lateral. An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute or
furnish ‘gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to
an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is
used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
Small Wireless Facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
(i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and
(ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility
provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet
in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power
systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff
switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of
power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public
view within or behind an existing structure or concealment.
Supplementary Application. An application made to excavate or obstruct
more of the right of way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had
already been issued.
Temporary Surface. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered full
restoration.
Trench. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
86
Telecommunications Right of Way User. A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right of way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right of
way that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or
transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes
of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under
Minn. Stat. ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural
gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. §
216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under
Minn. Stat. ch. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized
under Minn. Stat. ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right of way users for
purposes of this chapter except to the extent such entity is offering wireless
service.
Two Year Project Plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
Utility Pole. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
Wireless Facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline
backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless support
structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly associated
with a specific antenna.
Wireless Service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not
include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934,
as amended, including cable service.
Wireless Support Structure. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the city.
Sec. 1.04 Administration.
The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the
rights of way, right of way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The
director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
Sec. 1.05. Reserved
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
87
Sec. 1.06. Registration and Right of Way Occupancy.
Subd. 1. Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy
or use, the right of way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right of
way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by
lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will
consist of providing application information.
Subd. 2. Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or
any part thereof, in any right of way without first being registered with the city.
Subd. 3. Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard
plantings or gardens in the area of the right of way between their property and
the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens
shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right of way, and shall not be required
to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or
maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter. However,
nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the Minn.
Stat. ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law.
Sec. 1.07. Registration Information.
Subd. 1. Information Required. The information provided to the city at the
time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number,
address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
(b) The name, address, and email address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding
how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of registration.
(c) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the
city;
(2) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal
injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage
arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right of way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and (ii)
placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right of way by
the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees,
including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and
collapse of property;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
88
(3) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for
whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages;
(4) Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance of
cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage
term; and
(5) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers’ compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and
the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this
chapter.
(6) The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
(7) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is required to
be filed under state law as recorded and certified to by the
secretary of state.
(8) A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority from
the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or
approval from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully
operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval from said commission or other state or
federal agency.
Subd. 2. Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information
listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to
changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on which the registrant has
knowledge of any change.
Sec. 1.08. Reporting Obligations.
Subd. 1. Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by
December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for
underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to
be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of
excavations and obstructions of rights of way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a)The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all
projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a
“next-year project”); and
(b)To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and
ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years following the next
calendar year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year projects and
five-year projects.
By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for inspection in the city’s
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
89
office a composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the
annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of
the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list
of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other registrants of all
such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at
any time join in a next-year project of another registrant listed by the other
registrant.
Subd. 2. Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
city will not deny an application for a right of way permit for failure to include
a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used
commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
Sec. 1.09. Permit Requirement.
Subd. 1. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may obstruct or excavate any right of way, or install or place facilities in
the right of way, without first having obtained the appropriate right of way permit
from the city to do so.
(a) Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to
excavate that part of the right of way described in such permit and to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right of
way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein.
(b) Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right of way
by placing equipment described therein on the right of way, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is
not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for
the same project.
(c) Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion or the right of way, to the extent specified
therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
Subd. 2. Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right of
way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person
makes a supplementary application for another right of way permit before the
expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
Subd. 3. Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3 and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
90
notwithstanding subd. 2 of this Section, the city shall establish and impose a
delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right of way excavation, obstruction,
patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time
by City Council resolution.
Subd. 4. Permit Display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work
site and shall be available for inspection by the city.
Sec. 1.10. Permit Applications.
Application for a permit is made to the city. Right of way permit applications shall
contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with, the
requirements of the following provisions:
(a) Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter.
(b) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required
attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities.
(c) Payment of money due the city for:
(1) permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management
costs;
(2) prior obstructions or excavations;
(3) any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city
because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the rights
of way or any emergency actions taken by the city;
(4) franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
(d) Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110
percent of the amount owing.
(e) Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for
additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to
install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.
Sec. 1.11. Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
Subd. 1. Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this
chapter, the city shall issue a permit.
Subd. 2. Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right of
way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to Minn.
Stat. §§ 216D.01 - .09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn.
R., ch. 7560.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
91
Subd. 3. Small Wireless Facility Conditions. In addition to subdivision 2, the
erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small
wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way,
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless
support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the
height indicated in the applicable permit application.
(b) No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall
exceed 50 feet in height without the city’s written authorization, provided
that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to
protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way
and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an
existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a
structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as
may be imposed in the applicable permit.
(c) No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its wireless
support structure.
(d) Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in
the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements between
such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
(e) Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support
structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless
facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
(f) Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the
city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation
requirements on the replacement of such structure.
Subd. 4. Small Wireless Facility Agreement. A small wireless facility shall
only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by
the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has
executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city.
The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
(a) Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
(b) $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
(c) A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
1. $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
2. $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
3. The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the
required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall
not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate.
Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect
any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
92
Sec. 1.12 Action on Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications.
Subd. 1. Deadline for Action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small
wireless facility permit, and any associated building permit application, shall be
deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within the
review periods established in this section.
Subd. 2. Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a consolidated
small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of
up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local
government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:
(a) are located within a two-mile radius;
(b) consist of substantially similar equipment; and
(c) are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may
approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of
one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the
application.
Subd. 3. Tolling of Deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
(a) The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking
approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a
seven-day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all
such applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in
writing of such extension.
(b) The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the
city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30
days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents
or information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing
of any still-missing information.
(c) The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the
review period.
Sec. 1.13. Permit Fees.
Subd. 1. Excavation Permit Fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
(a) the city management costs;
(b) degradation costs, if applicable.
Subd. 2. Obstruction Permit Fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
Subd 3. Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The city shall impose a small
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
93
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
(a) management costs, and;
(b) city engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with
collocation of small wireless facilities.
Subd. 4. Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit
shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The
city may allow applicant to pay such fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
Subd. 5. Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city
has revoked for a breach as stated in Section 1.23 are not refundable.
Subd. 6. Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise,
management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the
franchise fees imposed on a right of way user in the franchise.
Sec. 1.14. Right of Way Patching and Restoration.
Subd. 1. Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and restoration of the right of way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as
work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
Section 1.17.
Subd. 2. Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right of way or to
restore the right of way itself.
(a) City Restoration. If the city restores the right of way, permittee shall
pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of
billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
(b) Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right of way
itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit
post a construction performance bond in accordance with the
provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.3000.
(c) Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right of way
restoration, a right of way user may elect to pay a degradation fee.
However, the right of way user shall remain responsible for patching
and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.
Subd. 3. Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling,
patching, and restoration according to the standards and with the materials
specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule 7819.1100.
Subd. 4. Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
94
patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon
notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be completed
within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or
unreasonable under Section 1.17.
Subd. 5. Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right of way in
the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city at its option may do
such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days
of billing, the cost of restoring the right of way. If permittee fails to pay as
required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction performance
bond.
Sec. 1.15. Joint Applications.
Subd. 1. Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate
or obstruct the right of way at the same place and time.
Subd. 2. Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint
permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
Subd. 3. With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction
or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
Sec. 1.16. Supplementary Applications.
Subd. 1. Limitation on Area. A right of way permit is valid only for the area of
the right of way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside
the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which
determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be
obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area (i) make
application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby,
and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
Subd. 2. Limitation on Dates. A right of way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start
date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a
permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a
new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
95
extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous
permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end
date.
Sec. 1.17. Other Obligations.
Subd. 1. Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a right of way permit does
not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses,
and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law
or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and
federal laws, including but not limited to Minn. Stat. §§ 216D.01-.09 (Gopher One
Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. R., ch. 7560. A permittee shall
perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules
and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right of way pursuant
to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
Subd. 2. Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of
the city, no right of way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
Subd. 3. Interference with Right of Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right of way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters
or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work
in the right of way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless
parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of
trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically
authorized by the permit.
Subd. 4. Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited
to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minn.
Stat. ch. 216D and Minn. R., ch. 7560 and shall require potholing or open
cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by
the director.
Sec. 1.18. Denial or Revocation of Permit.
Subd. 1. Reasons for Denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the
denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or
when necessary to protect the right of way and its current use.
Subd. 2. Procedural Requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must
be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must
notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days of
the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the right-ofway
user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and resubmit
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
96
its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the
notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must
approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30 days after submission.
Sec. 1.19. Installation Requirements.
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work
performed in the right of way shall be done in conformance with Minn. R.
7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the Minn. Stat., §§ 237.162 and 237.163.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn. R., ch
7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those
requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or
agreements referenced in Section 1.23 subd. 2 of this ordinance.
Sec. 1.20. Inspection.
Subd. 1. Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance
Minn. Rule 7819.1300.
Subd. 2. Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the
city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.
Subd 3. Authority of City.
(a) At the time of inspection, the City may order the immediate cessation of
any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or wellbeing
of the public.
(b) The City may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not
conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the City
that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been
presented within the required time, the City may revoke the permit
pursuant to Sec. 1.23.
Sec. 1.21. Work Done Without a Permit.
Subd. 1. Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the
director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency.
The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond
to the emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding
an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two (2) business
days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
97
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the
actions it took in response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s facilities, the
city will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever
action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall
be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
Subd. 2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a
right of way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the
normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the city
code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right
of way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
Sec. 1.22. Supplementary Notification.
If the obstruction or excavation of the right of way begins later or ends sooner
than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate
information as soon as this information is known.
Sec. 1.23. Revocation of Permits.
Subd. 1. Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any right of way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation,
or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) The violation of any material provision of the right of way permit.
(b) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right of way
permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens.
(c) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right of way
permit.
(d) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit
extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to
reasons beyond the permittee’s control.
(e) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to
a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to Sec. 1.20.
Subd. 2. Written Notice of Breach. If the city determines that the permittee has
committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance,
rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city shall make a written
demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state
that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place
additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
98
breach.
Subd. 3. Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of
receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee’s failure to so contact
the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permittee’s
failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to so contact the city, or
permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee
on probation for one (1) full year. Icon
Subd. 4. Cause for Probation. From time to time, the city may establish
a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place
the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to,
working out of the allotted time period or working on right of way grossly
outside of the permit authorization.
Subd. 5. Automatic Revocation. If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will
automatically be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further
permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.
Subd. 6. Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs, including restoration
costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in
connection with such revocation.
Sec. 1.24. Mapping Data.
Subd. 1. Information Required. Each registrant and permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn.
R. 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days following completion
of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director
accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all
equipment installed, owned, and maintained by the permittee. Such maps
and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s
electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by
the director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this
subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
Subd. 2. Service Laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair
of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. R.
7560.0150, subp. 2, shall require the permittee’s use of appropriate means
of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the
service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
99
reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to
the director evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service
lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable
Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals
installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval
necessary for:
a) payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project, including those under Minn. Stat. ch. 429, and
b) city approval under development agreements or other subdivision
or site plan approval under Minn. Stat. ch. 462. The director shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such
information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
information on the service laterals installed may result in the
revocation of the permit issued for the work or future permits to the
offending permittee or its subcontractors.
Sec. 1.25. Location and Relocation of Facilities.
Subd. 1. Placement, location, and relocation. Placement, location, and
relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and
with Minn. R. 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do
not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
Subd. 2. Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or other
agreement between the applicable right of way user and the City, Facilities in the right
of way must be located or relocated and maintained underground in accordance with
Section 10-430 of the City Code.
Subd. 3. Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right of way,
or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be
located within the right of way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall
designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right of way in a position at variance with
the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next
reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move
the facilities to the assigned position within the right of way, unless this
requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of
such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs, and hardship to the registrant.
Subd. 4. Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities
found in a right of way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
100
facilities and restoring the right of way to a useable condition.
Subd. 5. Limitation of Space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
public, or when necessary to protect the right of way and its current use, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right of way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to
the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right of
way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public’s needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right of way,
the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing
facilities in the right of way, and future city plans for public improvements and
development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
Sec. 1.26 Pre-Excavation Facilities Location.
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minn. Stat. 216D.01-.09 (“One
Call Excavation Notice System”) before the start date of any right of way
excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be
excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities.
Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty (20) inches below a
concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure
for excavation.
Sec. 1.27. Damage to Other Facilities.
When the city does work in the right of way and finds it necessary to maintain,
support, or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the
local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated
therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within thirty (30) days
from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any facilities in the right of way which it or its facilities damage. Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
Sec. 1.28. Right of Way Vacation.
Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right of way that contains the
facilities of a registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right of way are
governed by Minn. R. 7819.3200.
Sec. 1.29. Indemnification and Liability
By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
101
Sec. 1.30. Abandoned and Unusable Facilities.
Subd. 1. Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information
satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for its facilities in the right
of way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant.
Subd. 2. Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right of
way shall remove it from that right of way if required in conjunction with other
right of way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived
by the city.
Sec. 1.31. Appeal.
A right of way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a
permit; (3) has had a permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are not
in conformity with Minn. Stat. § 237.163, subd. 6; or (5) disputes a determination
of the director regarding Section 1.24, subd.2 of this ordinance may have the
denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by
the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right of way user has submitted its
appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A
decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will
be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness
of the decision.
Sec. 1.32 Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers
A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to
adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the public.
Sec. 1.33. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition
to requirements set forth herein.
11-1800 LANDSCAPING IN COMMERCIALLY ZONED AREAS
In all areas of the City zoned CD-1, CD-2, CD-3 or CD-4, the following conditions
shall apply to landscaping and ground cover.
11-1810 Landscape Plan Required No building permit shall be issued
for construction on a vacant lot, nor for any addition to an existing building
involving the addition of 500 square feet or more of additional building
space, unless the applicant shall have first submitted and obtained
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
102
approval of the City Council, after review by the Planning Commission, of
a landscaping plan meeting the requirements of this code.
11-1820 Installation Required No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any construction which required a landscaping plan unless the
applicant has installed all of the elements of the landscaping plan, or
unless the applicant has posted security acceptable to the City to
guarantee timely installation of all landscaping.
11-1830 Time for Submission The landscaping plan shall be submitted,
whenever possible, at the time of site plan approval. If the landscaping
plan is not submitted at the time of site plan approval, it must be
separately reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the
City Council prior to the issuance of any building permits.
11-1840 Contents and Specifications
The landscaping plan shall be a quality document prepared at a scale of
one-inch equals thirty feet, showing all relevant dimensions. Fifteen
copies of the plan shall be submitted by the applicant. The following data
shall be displayed on the plan, legibly labeled:
A. Perimeter of all buildings, signs or other structures;
B. Parking lots and walkways, identifying pavement material;
C. Areas of decorative rock, identifying type of rock;
D. Areas of lawn;
E. Other areas where other than natural wooded vegetation is to be used
as ground cover, identifying the ground cover to be used;
F. Locations, trunk size, height and species of all trees to be planted;
G. Locations where existing natural wooded vegetation will remain
undisturbed;
H. All other landscaping features to be used.
11-1850 MINIMUM LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
11-1851 Paved Surfaces All surfaces upon which motor vehicles will be
parked or driven, and all areas in which pedestrians will be walking from
point to point shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete, to specifications
established by the City's engineer.
11-1852 Ground Cover On any side of a lot which abuts a public road,
the area from the road right-of-way to the nearest building side shall be
entirely covered with ground cover consisting of pavement, decorative
rock bordered with edging, lawn grass intended for regular mowing,
mulch, bark, wood chips or other commonly used landscaping ground
cover. Shingles, aggregate and clay mixtures such as Class V material,
recycled concrete or asphalt, and other non-conventional ground covers
shall not be permitted. Loose ground cover shall be installed to a depth of
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
103
at least three inches. Any area which is covered by landscaping ground
cover (not lawn or pavement) shall also include one decorative shrub for
each ten square feet of ground cover.
Side yards and rear yards which do not contain existing natural wooded
vegetation shall either be covered with ground cover in the manner stated
above for front yards, or shall be planted so as to encourage the
emergence of natural wooded vegetation, through the planting of tree
species expected to reach a height of at least twenty five feet. Areas so
prepared shall not be required to have mown lawn areas, but may be
allowed to return to a natural state.
11-1853 Tree Plantings Trees which are planted outside of areas
intended to return to a natural wooded state shall be of a variety
indigenous to the local climate. Deciduous trees shall, when planted,
have a trunk size of at least one and one half inches at a height of four
feet from ground level. Conifers shall have a height of at least five feet.
Tree locations are subject to review and approval of the City in the
landscaping plan review process, and while no specific number of trees
are required, the following general principles shall be observed;
A. Where property lines are adjacent to residential areas, a planting
screen of conifers shall be required, of sufficient size and proximity to
provide an intermingled screen within five years;
B. Decorative trees shall be planted along the right of way lines of
adjacent public roadways;
C. The use of conifers shall be encouraged and preferred.
D. Whenever possible, an attempt will be made to preserve stands of
existing vegetation, particularly treed or wooded areas.
11-1860 Case by Case Evaluation
Recognizing that the City contains a wide variety of commercial land, the
landscape approval process shall be on a case by case basis. Where wetlands
are present, or where large distances separate a commercial lot from adjacent
lands, for example, strict adherence to screening requirements may be
unnecessary. Likewise, strict adherence to the remaining provisions of Article
11-1800 may be unnecessary where size, spatial relationships, topography or
other physical features render a given landscaping plan aesthetically acceptable,
and departures from the strict observance of the elements of Article 11-1800
shall not be considered variances requiring a showing of physical hardship.
Conversely, an applicant shall be expected to meet the general spirit of this
article in establishing an aesthetically pleasing landscaping plan.
11-1900 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS TO STORM DRAINAGE
SYSTEM
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Ham Lake through the regulation of nonHam
Lake City Code
Article 11
104
storm water discharges to the storm sewer drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) in
order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this
ordinance are:
1. To regulate and minimize the contribution of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater
discharges by any user.
2. To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this ordinance.
11-1900.10 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Code, the following shall mean:
a) Authorized Enforcement Agency: employees or designees of the
Administrator of the City of Ham Lake designated to enforce this
Ordinance.
b) Best Management Practices (BMPs): schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving
waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
c) Clean Water Act: The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
d) Construction Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Construction
Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of 1 acre or more. Such activities include but are not
limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
e) Hazardous Materials: Any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
f) Illegal Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 11-1900.31
of this Ordinance.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
105
g) Illicit Connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
i) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstorm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and
wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to
the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of
whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
ii) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by
an authorized enforcement agency.
h) Industrial Activity: Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits
as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b) (14).
i) Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): A system of
conveyances, owned and operated by the City, and designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
j) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Storm Water Discharge Permit: a permit issued by EPA (or by a
State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342 (b)) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
k) Non-Storm Water Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
l) Person: any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner's agent.
m) Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and
solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so
that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage,
fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
n) Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and
parking strips.
o) Storm Drainage System: Publicly-owned facilities by which storm
water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
106
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and
other drainage structures.
p) Storm Water: Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting
from such precipitation.
q) Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan: A document which
describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be
implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to Storm water, Storm Water Conveyance Systems and/or
Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
r) Wastewater: any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility.
s) Watercourse: A ditch, stream, creek, or other defined channel
intended for the conveyance of water, runoff, groundwater discharge
or similar hydraulic or hydrologic purpose.
11-1900.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This Code shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on
any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
11-1900.21 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
The City of Ham Lake shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
the Authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the
City Administrator to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of
or in the employ of the Authorized enforcement agency.
11-1900.22 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
Ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this Ordinance does not
intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will
be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
11-1900.23 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
DISCHARGES
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable
to the City of Ham Lake prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
11-1900.24 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
107
Nothing in this Article 11-1900 shall be deemed a waiver or abrogation of
the right of the City to seek criminal prosecution under its general code
enforcement authority.
11-1900.30 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS AND CERTAIN REMEDIES
11-1900.31 PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not
limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as
follows:
a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this Ordinance: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or
footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated -
typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities and
any other water source not containing Pollutants.
b) Discharges specified in writing by the Authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Authorized enforcement agency prior to the time
of the test.
d) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
11-1900.32 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the
past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law
or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A
person is considered to be in violation of this Code if the person
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
108
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
11-1900.33 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In
addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures
will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of
the watercourse.
11-1900.34 SUSPENSION DUE TO ILLICIT DISCHARGES IN
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
The City may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to
a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
Authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
11-1900.35 SUSPENSION DUE TO THE DETECTION OF ILLICIT
DISCHARGE
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Code may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City for a
reconsideration and hearing.
11-1900.40 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES
11-1900.41 APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all facilities that have storm water
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
11-1900.42 ACCESS TO FACILITIES
a) The City and its authorized agents shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this Code as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this Code. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
109
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency.
b) Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge storm water and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
c) The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such
devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement
agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm
water discharge.
d) The City of Ham Lake has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
e) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this
Code. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit
to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this Code.
11-1900.50 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
The City will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any
activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The
owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at
their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of
an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of the Storm Water
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
110
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
11-1900.60 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which
are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into
storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take
all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous
materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person
or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the City of Ham Lake within three business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
11-1900.70 ENFORCEMENT
11-1900.71 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed
to meet a requirement of this Code, the City staff may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require without limitation:
a) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
d) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
e) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed.
11-1900.72 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEEDING
If an ordered abatement or correction has not been implemented by the
deadline for compliance, the condition shall be considered a public
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
111
nuisance and subject to abatement under the City’s nuisance abatement
codes.
11-1900.73 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the situation meets the criteria for
emergency abatement under the City’s nuisance code, the City may
proceed under the emergency provisions thereof.
11-2000 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
INTRODUCTION/PURPOSE:
During the construction process, soil and debris is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil and debris endangers water
resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic
habitat or fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil and debris also
necessitates cleaning sewers and ditches.
The purpose of this Code is to control and eliminate, to the greatest extent
possible, storm water pollution and soil erosion and sedimentation in order to
protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public. It
establishes standards and specifications for development and conservation
practices and planning activities designed to:
1) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any new
development or redevelopment in order to reduce flooding,
siltation, streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream
and ditch channels;
2) Minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by
stormwater runoff from new development or redevelopment which
would otherwise degrade local water quality;
3) Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which
flows from any specific site during and following development to
not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the
maximum extent practicable.
4) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
non-point source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management controls and to ensure that these management
controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public
safety.
The information in this Code is supplemental to language in other City
Code, ordinances, plans, policies, guidelines and contracts included but not
limited to the following:
1) City of Ham Lake Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP);
2) Building Rules and Guidelines; and
3) Development contracts.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
112
11-2000.10 DEFINITIONS
Best Management Practices (BMP’S): Technique or series of
techniques, which are proven to be effective in controlling runoff, erosion,
and sedimentation and construction debris confinement.
City: City of Ham Lake.
City Engineer: Ham Lake City Engineer or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code.
Clearing and Grubbing: The cutting and removal of trees, shrubs, bushes,
windfalls and other vegetation including removal of stumps, roots and other
remains in the designated areas.
Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different
times, or on different schedules, but under one proposed plan. This item is
broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical
demarcation indicating that land-disturbing activities may occur.
Construction Debris: Any waste generated as a result of construction
including but not limited to discarded building materials, concrete truck
washout, chemicals, litter or refuse and sanitary waste.
Contractor: Any person who’s responsible for abiding by the applicable
requirements set forth in this Code.
Detention facility: A temporary or permanent natural or man-made structure
that provides for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
Discharge: The release, conveyance, channeling, runoff or drainage of
stormwater, including snowmelt, from a construction or development site.
Disturbed ground: Any clearing, grading, excavating or other activity that
removes vegetation and/or exposes or loosens the soil making it susceptible to
erosion by wind, water, vehicular traffic or man-made activity.
DNR: Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Erosion: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind, water, ice and/or land disturbance activities.
Erosion Control: A measure that prevents erosion. Examples include soil
stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover,
and construction phasing.
Established Yard: A yard that has permanent ground cover established
suitable for long-term erosion control including but not limited to seed, sod,
native plants, shrubbery, trees, rock or mulch.
Exposed soil areas: Areas of the construction site where the vegetation
(trees, shrubs, brush, grasses, etc.) or impervious surfaces have been removed,
thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. This includes topsoil stockpile
areas; borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site. It does not
include temporary stockpiles or surcharge areas of clean sand, gravel, concrete
or bituminous, which have less stringent protection requirements. Once soil is
exposed, it is considered “exposed soil”, until it meets the definition of “final
stabilization”.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
113
Fill: A deposit of soil or other earth materials placed by artificial means.
Final Stabilization: Requires that all soil disturbing activities at the site have
been completed and all soils must be stabilized by a uniform perennial
vegetative cover with a minimum density of 70% over the entire pervious
surface area, or other equivalent means necessary to prevent soil failure under
erosive conditions.
Floodplain: The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland,
lake or watercourse that have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
Final Stabilization: Requires that all soil disturbing activities at the site have
been completed and all soils must be stabilized by a uniform perennial
vegetative cover with a minimum density of 70% over the entire pervious
surface area, or other equivalent means necessary to prevent soil failure under
erosive conditions.
Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: A City and local watershed
approved plan required prior to commencement of any site grading, which
details grading requirements, drainage characteristics and erosion control
methods.
Impaired Waters: Water bodies that do not meet water quality standards and
designated uses because of pollutant(s), pollution, or unknown causes of
impairment.
Impervious surface: A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater
quantities and at an increased rate of flow than existed prior to development.
Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage
areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads. Class 5 gravel surfaces are
considered to be impervious surfaces.
Land disturbance activity: Any land change that may result in soil erosion
from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands
within this government’s jurisdiction, including, but not limited to construction,
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land.
Within the context of this ordinance, land disturbance activity does not mean:
1) Minor land disturbance activities including, but not limited to,
underground utility repairs, home gardens, home landscaping,
minor repairs and maintenance work which do not disturb more
than two thousand (2,000) square feet of land or exceed one
hundred (100) cubic yards of earthwork provided work does not
obstruct or modify a watercourse or storm sewer system and is not
located in a floodplain
2) Installation and maintenance of fences, signs, posts, poles, electric,
telephone, cable television, utility lines or individual service
connections to these utilities; or
3) General farming practices, or
4) Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency
repairs, unless the land disturbing activity would have otherwise
required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, except for
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
114
the emergency. If such a plan would have been required, then the
disturbed land area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance
with the City’s requirements as soon as possible.
Local Watershed: The local regulating authority for watershed
management; the three servicing Ham Lake include the Coon Creek
Watershed District (CCWD), Sunrise River Watershed Management
Organization (SRWMO) and Upper Rum River Watershed Management
Organization (URRWMO).
MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Ordinary High Water Level (OHW): The boundary of water basins,
watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands, and:
1) the ordinary high water level is an elevation delineating the highest
water level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to
leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly the point where the
natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
predominantly terrestrial;
2) for watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the
top of the bank of the channel; and
3) for reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Outfall: The point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or private
stormwater drainage system.
Permanent cover: Means “final stabilization”. Examples include grass, gravel,
asphalt and concrete. See also the definition of “final stabilization”.
Person: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
Public Waters: Waters of the state as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section
103G.005, Subdivision 15.
Retention facility: A temporary or permanent natural or manmade structure
that provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent
pool of water.
Rough Grade: The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the
approved plan.
Runoff: Rainfall, snowmelt, dewatering discharge, irrigation or any man-made
sources of water flowing over the ground surface.
Sediment: The product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and
organic, which is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by
water, wind, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or
below water level.
Site: Any real property upon which improvements are to be made.
Site Grading: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions
thereof.
Special Water: Surface water or receiving water that is of a high quality or is
deemed worthy to receive extra protection.
Stormwater: Under Minnesota Rule 7077.0105, Subpart 41b, storm water,
“means precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff and any other
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
115
surface runoff and drainage”. According to the Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR), under 40 CFR 122.26 [b][13], “Stormwater means storm water runoff,
snow melt runoff and surface and drainage”. Stormwater does not include
construction site dewatering.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan: Joint stormwater, erosion prevention
and sediment control plan that is a document containing the requirements of 11-
2000.51. When implemented, the plan will define the methods to be used to
reduce soil erosion on a parcel of land and off-site non-point pollution. The plan
involves both temporary and permanent controls.
Stormwater pond: (also referred to as wet sedimentation basin, wet retention
basin, or simply wet pond) is a man-made or modified natural basin constructed
to capture and retain stormwater runoff for the purpose of removing pollutants
and mitigating downstream water quantity impacts.
Storm sewer system: Includes but is not limited to, the combination of
roadway gutters, roadway section ditches, culverts, storm sewer piping,
overflow channels, infiltration trenches, detention and retention water quality
treatment basins and other methods or devices used for capturing, conveying,
controlling and treating stormwater and snow melt runoff.
Surface Waters: All streams, ponds, lakes, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs,
springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and irrigation
systems, whether natural or artificial, public or private.
Suspended Solids: Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in water and/or other liquids.
Temporary Erosion Protection: Short-term methods installed to prevent
erosion. Examples include: silt fence, straw mulch, wood fiber blanket, wood
chips and erosion netting.
Vegetated (Grassy) swale: A vegetated earthen channel that conveys storm
water while treating the stormwater by biofiltration. Such swales aid in the
removal of pollutants by both filtration and infiltration.
Waters of the State: As defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 115.01,
Subdivision 22, the term, “ . . . waters of the state means all streams, lakes,
ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof”.
Commentary: According to Minnesota Rules 7050.0130, Subpart A, disposal
systems or treatment works operated under either a Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency (MPCA) permit or an agency certificate of compliance are not
considered “waters of the state.” Under Minnesota Rules 7050.0130, Subpart
F, constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not “waters of
the state.” Also see the definition of “Wetlands”.
Wetlands: Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by
shallow water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following
three attributes:
1) have a predominance of hydric soils;
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
116
2) are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and
3) under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such
vegetation (MN Statutes 103.G.005).
11-2000.20 APPLICATION AND SWPPP REQUIREMENTS FOR
CONTRACTOR:
It is the responsibility of the Contractor to obtain all the necessary permits from
The MPCA, City and local watersheds and abide by all the requirements set
forth in the General Stormwater Permit for Construction Activity (Permit
Number: MN R100001).
In order to achieve compliance with the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) permit coverage extended to the City by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MPCA), and to be consistent with the Local Surface Water
Management Plan adopted by the City of Ham Lake, all public and private
development and redevelopment projects, alterations, or improvements shall
meet the requirements of this ordinance, the NPDES Construction Stormwater
Permit (if applicable) and the rules of whichever Water Management
Organization has jurisdiction on the subject property. Except where a variance
is granted or ordinance does not require, any person, firm, sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, state agency, or political subdivision proposing a land
disturbance activity within the City shall apply to the City for project approval
which shall include one or more of the following:
1) Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan,
2) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and
3) Stormwater Management Plan.
No land shall be disturbed until the project is approved by the City, has received
a watershed permit, any other applicable permits, and conforms to the
standards set forth herein.
112000.21 GENERAL CRITERIA
The Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control plan shall be required for any
land disturbance activity or project disturbing more than 10,000 square
feet and shall minimize exposed soil and unstable soil conditions in area
and duration, disturbance of natural soil cover and vegetation, work in and
adjacent to water bodies and wetlands, off-site sediment transport by
trucks and equipment, and disturbance to the surrounding soils, root
systems and trunks of trees adjacent to site activity that are intended to be
left standing. The Plan shall also protect receiving water bodies,
wetlands, storm sewer inlets and adjacent properties from sediment
deposition. It shall provide a plan for minimal compaction of site soils.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
117
11-2000.30 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION PROVISION:
1) Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, or
properly designated officer or employee of the City to enter,
inspect, and search the grounds of the licensee at reasonable
hours without a warrant for the purpose of obtaining information,
examination of records, conducting investigations or surveys. The
authorized representatives may bring in such equipment upon
the permitted development as is necessary to conduct surveys
and investigations, may examine and copy and books, papers,
records or memoranda pertaining to activities or records
required to be kept under the terms and conditions of this
permitted site.
11-2000.40 ONSITE ACTIVITY REQUIREMENTS:
1) Debris Storage: All construction debris shall be kept in an
enclosed building or properly contained in a covered container
designed for such purposes throughout the construction
process.
2) Waste Disposal: It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor
to dispose of all construction debris in a manner approved by
the City.
3) Construction Entrance Criteria: The Contractor shall take
all the necessary measures to prevent sediment from
entering the City streets during the construction process. Such
practices shall occur in the manner as prescribed in the Ham
Lake Construction Requirements.
4) Site Dewatering: Water pumped from the site shall be treated
prior to entering a wetland, lake, river or stream to meet
requirements set forth by DNR, MPCA and local watershed rules
and regulations.
11-2000-50 SUBMITTAL COMPONENTS
An acceptable application for construction will include the following
requirements and contain the components detailed in the following sections.
11-2000-51 GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS
The Grading Plan Checklist should be used as a reference. These can be
obtained from the City of Ham Lake. All grading and erosion and
sediment control plans shall include the following items:
a) Plans for existing and proposed conditions. A complete site plan
and specifications, signed by the person who designed the plan
shall be in compliance with the City Engineer’s requirements, shall
be clearly labeled with a north arrow and a date of preparation, and
shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
i)Project map indicating site boundaries and existing elevations,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
118
property lines and lot dimensions in relation to surrounding
roads, buildings and other structures, and other significant
geographic features
ii)Identification of all surface waters, on and adjacent to the site
and within 1/2 mile of project boundary, including, but not
limited to lakes, ponds, streams (including intermittent
streams), wetlands, natural or artificial water diversion or
detention areas, public and private ditches, subsurface
drainage facility (including drain tile), stormwater conveyance,
and storm sewer catch basins. Show ordinary high water
marks of all navigable waters, 100-year flood elevations,
normal and high water elevations of ponds, and delineated
wetland boundaries, if any. If not available, appropriate flood
zone determination or wetland delineation, or both, maybe
required at the applicant’s expense.
iii)For projects that have a discharge point on the project that is
within one mile of, and flows to, an impaired water, the
applicant must identify the impaired water(s) in the SWPPP,
and whether there is a USEPA approved TMDL for the
pollutant(s) or stressor(s) identified in this part. Unless
otherwise notified by the MPCA in writing, the applicant’s
identification of impaired waters must be based on the most
recent USEPA approved section 303(d) Clean Water Act list of
impaired waters and USEPA approved TMDLs at the time a
complete permit application is submitted. The applicant’s
identification must include those TMDLs applicable to the
project’s stormwater discharge that were approved at any time
prior to permit application submittal and are still in effect.
iv) Map of watershed drainage areas showing direction of flow for
pre and post construction drainage, soil types, infiltration rates,
and depth to seasonal high water table.
v) Existing and proposed grades showing drainage on and
adjacent to the site using 2 foot contours or less
vi) Existing and proposed impervious surfaces.
vii) Steep slopes of 12% or more existing over a distance for 50
feet or more.
viii)Location of all areas not to be disturbed during construction
including trees, vegetation, and designated areas for
infiltration.
ix) Proposed grading or other land-disturbing activity; areas of soil
or earth material storage; quantities of soil or earth material to
be removed, placed, stored or otherwise moved on site, and
delineated limits of disturbance.
x) Locations of proposed runoff control, temporary and
permanent erosion and sediment control, and temporary and
permanent soil stabilization measures.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
119
xi) If more than 10 acres are disturbed and drained to a single
point of discharge temporary sediment basins must be
installed, however, if the site has special waters as defined by
the NPDES Construction Permit requirements, then temporary
sediment basins must be installed where 5 or more acres are
disturbed. When site restrictions do not allow for a temporary
sediment basin, equivalent measures as approved by the City
may be used.
xii) Any mitigation measures required as a result of any review
conducted for the project (e.g. wetland mitigation, etc.).
b) A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) specific to the
conditions and site.
11-2000-52 SWPPP DESIGN COMPONENTS
The SWPPP Review Checklist should be used as a reference. All
SWPPPs shall be reviewed by the City for effectiveness of erosion and
sediment control measures in the context of the site topography and
drainage, proposed design, suggested location and phased
implementation of effective practicable stormwater pollution prevention
measures.
1) General Criteria. Design, engineering and implementation of these
measures shall use the following performance standards, BMPs,
and design criteria:
a) Project Compliance – Statement of how the project will
comply with all requirements of the NPDES Phase II
regulations.
b) Description – Explanation of the project and associated
construction activity.
c) Contact information for the on-site individual responsible for
implementation of the SWPPP; and for the project manager
and contractor.
d) Training - The applicant must identify a person
knowledgeable and experienced in the application of erosion
prevention and sediment control BMPs who will oversee the
implementation of the SWPPP, and the installation,
inspection and maintenance of the erosion prevention and
sediment control BMPs before and during construction.
Name of person(s) trained, proof of training, date and course
name/provider must be on record and made available as part
of the permit application.
e) Runoff easements - If a stormwater management plan
involves directing some or all runoff from the site, the
applicant shall obtain from adjacent property owners any
necessary easements or other property interests concerning
flowage of water.
f) Scheduling site activities – The applicant shall schedule site
activities to lessen their impact on erosion and sediment
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
120
creation. A detailed schedule indicating dates and sequence
of land alteration activities; implementation, maintenance and
removal of erosion and sedimentation control measures; and
permanent site stabilization measures shall be provided.
2) Best Management Practices Implementation. All erosion and
sediment control and water quality BMP’s must be constructed and
or installed prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities.
These measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of
development.
3) Monitoring and inspection. The trained person identified in the
SWPPP or their assigned designee must routinely inspect the
entire construction site at least once every seven (7) days during
active construction and within 24 hours after a rainfall event greater
than 0.5 inches in 24 hours. Following an inspection which occurs
within 24 hours after a rainfall event, the next inspection must be
conducted within seven (7) days after that. All inspections and
maintenance conducted during construction must be recorded in
writing and these records must be retained with the SWPPP in
accordance with the NPDES Construction Site Permit.
4) Other information. The City will require additional or modified
information as warranted.
a) The City may require soil borings or other site investigation
to be conducted and may require submission of a soils
engineering or geology report. The report shall include
information as requested by the City.
b) The City may require a stormwater runoff volume and rate
analysis report or other hydrologic, water quality and
hydraulic computations to be submitted.
c) The SWPPP shall be modified when there is a change in
design, operation, maintenance, weather or seasonal
conditions that have a significant effect on discharge and/or
inspections indicate that the plan is not effective and existing
BMP’s are not controlling pollutants and discharges from the
site.
5) Contractor/Owner inspections and maintenance - The contractor or
owner shall be responsible for inspections and maintenance on the
site.
a) Inspections and maintenance must be documented and
readily available for review on-site. Inspections are required
as follows:
i) Once every 7 days on exposed soil areas.
ii) Within 24 hours after a 0.5 inch rain event over 24
hours.
iii) Once every 30 days on stabilized areas.
iv) As soon as runoff occurs or prior to resuming
construction on frozen ground.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
121
a) Maintenance is required as follows:
i) When sediment reaches 1/3 the height of the BMP on
perimeter control devices, sediment must be removed
within 24 hours.
ii) If the perimeter control device is not functional it
must be repaired or replaced within 24 hours.
iii) Temporary sediment basins shall be maintained when
sediment reaches ½ the outlet height or ½ the basin
storage volume. Basin must be drained or sediment
removed within 72 hours.
iv) Sediment tracked from construction site vehicle
entrance and exit locations must be removed from
paved surfaces within 24 hours of discovery.
v) Inlet protection devices must be cleaned weekly or
more frequently as necessary. Sediment and other
debris captured in these devices must be deposited in
appropriate locations or containers.
11-2000-53 SWPPP IMPLEMENTATION COMPONENTS
1) Minimize exposed soil – Land shall be developed in increments of
workable size such that adequate erosion and sedimentation
control can be provided as construction progresses. At no time
shall more than 20 acres be exposed. Special consideration shall
be given to the stabilization of steep slopes. Development shall be
carefully reviewed to insure adequate measures have been taken
to prevent erosion, sedimentation and structural damage.
2) Restabilization - The area exposed shall be covered by an
approved ground cover within fourteen (14) days after work is
completed. When construction work is completed, a minimum
depth of four (4) inches of topsoil meeting current MnDOT
specifications shall be spread over the developed area and turf
establishment started
3) Reduce Compaction – To reduce soil compaction and enhance
vegetation establishment all compacted soil shall be tilled to a
depth of at least six inches before revegetation.
4) Perimeter sediment controls - Perimeter sediment control
measures shall be properly installed before construction activity
begins. These control measures shall be designed to contain
sediment on site and control the quality and quantity of stormwater
leaving a site before, during, and after construction. Control
measures may include sit fence, compost logs, berms, or other
approved methods.
5) Channel protection - Channels shall be diverted around disturbed
areas if practical, or other channel protection measures will be
required. The normal wetted perimeter of any temporary or
permanent drainage channel must be stabilized within 200 lineal
feet of the property edge, or from a point of discharge to any
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
122
surface water. Stabilization must be completed within 24 hours of
connecting to surface water. Sediment control is required along
channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel.
Stabilization of all waterways and outlets shall conform with the
stipulations of this ordinance.
6) Outlet Protection - Pipe outlets must have approved energy
dissipation measures installed within 24 hours of connection to a
surface water.
7) Slope Protection - The following control measures shall be taken to
control erosion during construction.
a) No exposed slopes shall be steeper in grade than four (4)
feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical.
b) Exposed slopes steeper than ten (10) feet horizontal to one
(1) foot vertical shall be stabilized to minimize erosion.
c) At the foot of exposed slopes or slopes with long runs a
channel and berm may be required to be constructed to
control erosion. The channeled water shall be diverted to the
sedimentation basin (debris basin, sediment basin, or silt
trap) before being allowed to enter the natural drainage
system.
d) At the foot of exposed slopes or slopes with long runs a
channel and berm may be required to be constructed to
control erosion. The channeled water shall be diverted to the
sedimentation basin (debris basin, sediment basin, or silt
trap) before being allowed to enter the natural drainage
system.
e) Exposed slopes shall be protected by whatever means will
effectively prevent erosion considering the degree of slope,
soils materials, and expected length of exposure. Slope
protection shall consist of mulch, burlap, jute netting, sod
blankets, fast growing seeds, temporary plantings or annual
grasses. Mulch shall consist of hay, straw, or other approved
protective materials. Mulch must be anchored to the slopes
by an approved method to provide additional slope stability.
f) Control measures, other than those specifically stated
above, may be used in place of the above measures if it can
be demonstrated that they will effectively protect exposed
slopes and are approved by the Engineering Department.
g) Wind Erosion. Snow fences or other wind reducing means
shall be employed during construction on-site to reduce wind
erosion of the soil. These measures shall be employed as
soon as construction has started and shall be extended as
needed throughout the development.
h) All exposed soil areas with a continuous positive slope that
are within 200 lineal feet of any surface water, or any
conveyance (curb, gutter, storm sewer inlet, drainage ditch,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
123
etc.) to a surface water, must have temporary or permanent
cover year around. The area shall be stabilized if it has not
been worked for seven (7) days on slopes greater than three
feet horizontal to one foot vertical (3:1), fourteen (14) days on
slopes ranging from 3:1 to 10:1 and twenty-one (21) days for
flatter slopes. On sensitive sites or sites with special waters,
exposed soil areas with a greater than three feet horizontal to
one foot vertical (3:1) must be stabilized within three (3) days
and slopes flatter than 3:1 must be stabilized within seven(7)
days. All exposed soil areas must have temporary erosion
protection or permanent cover no later than November 1st
regardless of the stabilization requirements listed above. All
exposed soils from construction activities taking place after
November 1st must provide temporary erosion protection or
permanent cover by the end of the work day if conditions
warrant.
i) If more than 10 acres are disturbed and drained to a single
point of discharge temporary sediment basins must be
installed. When site restrictions do not allow for a temporary
sediment basin, equivalent measures such as smaller basins,
check dams, and vegetated buffer strips can be included.
j) For disturbed areas less than ten (10) acres, temporary
sedimentation basins are encouraged, but not required. The
applicant shall install erosion and sediment controls at
locations that result in maximum protection and sediment
capture. Minimum requirements include silt fences, rock
check dams, or other equivalent control measures along
slopes. Silt fences, rock check dams, etc. must be regularly
inspected and maintained.
8) Silt fence – Silt fence shall be properly installed by being trenched
and buried at least six inches into the soil. Generally, sufficient silt
fence will be required to contain sheet flow runoff generated at an
individual site. This method is used to prevent sediment damage to
adjacent properties and sensitive environmental areas such as
water bodies, plant communities, rare, threatened and/or
endangered species habitat, wildlife corridors, greenways,
wetlands, etc. Provide that all silt fences used for erosion and
sedimentation control and all other temporary controls shall not be
removed until the City and other permitting agencies have
determined that the site has been permanently stabilized and shall
be removed within 30 days thereafter.
9) Soil stockpiling - Temporary stockpiling of one hundred (100) cubic
yards or more of excess soil on any lot or other vacant area will not
be allowed without issuance of a permit for the earth moving
activity in question. Stockpiles of soil or other materials subject to
erosion by wind or water shall be covered, vegetated, enclosed,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
124
fenced on the down gradient side or otherwise effectively protected
from erosion in accordance with the amount of time the material will
be on site and the manner of its proposed use. No stockpiling is
allowed in the street.
10) Stockpile protections - For soil stockpiles greater than ten (10)
cubic yards the toe of the pile must be more than twenty-five (25)
feet from a road, drainage channel or stormwater inlet. If left for
more than seven (7) days, they must be stabilized with mulch,
vegetation, tarps or other means. If left for less than seven (7)
days, erosion from stockpiles must be controlled with perimeter
control devices such as silt fence. If for any reason a soil stockpile
is located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a road, drainage
channel or stormwater inlet, it must be covered with tarps or a more
permanent protection and controlled with perimeter control devices
immediately.
11) Vehicle exits/entrances - Vehicle tracking of sediment from
the construction site must be minimized by BMPs such as stone
pads, concrete or steel wash racks, or equivalent systems. Street
sweeping must be used if such BMPs are not adequate to prevent
sediment from being tracked onto the street. The exit must be at
least 50 feet long, and the exit must be graded so runoff does not
enter the adjacent street. Place a geotextile fabric under a layer of
aggregate at least 6 inches thick. The aggregate size must be a
minimum of 1 to 3 inches or an approved equal. Direction should
be given to use the designated construction exits.
12) Street cleaning - Streets and outlying roads shall be cleaned and
swept within 24 hours whenever tracking of sediments occurs and
before sites are left idle for weekends and holidays.
13) Dewatering treatment required – Sediment laden water that is
being removed from the site by pumping or trenching shall be
treated to remove a minimum of 80 percent of suspended solids
before discharge. Water may not be discharged in a manner that
causes erosion to receiving channels or flooding of the discharge
site.
14) Storm drain protection - All storm drain inlets shall be protected
during construction with control measures as approved by the City.
These devices shall remain in place until final stabilization of the
site. A regular inspection and maintenance plan shall be
developed and implemented to assure these devices are
operational at all times, providing protection of storm sewer
infrastructure from sediment loading/plugging. Silt fence fabric
under catch basin grates will not be considered appropriate
protection. Protective devices shall be removed prior to freeze up
and replaced when temperature permits.
15) Waste Containment – Appropriate on-site containment must be
provided for all trash, solid waste, construction debris, floating
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
125
debris, and hazardous materials. Disposal of collected sediment
shall be deposited only in approved locations.
16) Special Precautions – Extra precautions must be taken to contain
sediment when working in or crossing water bodies.
11-2000-54 REVIEW
The City shall complete a review of the SWPPP concurrent with other
submittals. City approval is contingent on issuance of all other permits
required by other agencies having jurisdiction on the project. There shall
be no work on the site until the requirements are met and approval has
been granted.
1) Compliance – A SWPPP will be considered compliant when the
City determines that the SWPPP meets the requirements of this
ordinance and all other requirements for project approval.
Compliance assumes implementation and maintenance of the
SWPPP components.
2) Non-compliance - If the City determines that the SWPPP does not
meet the requirements of this ordinance the City shall not issue
approval for the land disturbance activity. The SWPPP must be
resubmitted for approval before the land disturbance activity
begins.
3) City inspections and enforcement - Inspections are required before
any land disturbing activity begins, at the completion of the project
and prior to the release of financial securities. The City shall also
conduct inspections on a regular basis during the course of
construction to ensure that erosion and sediment control measures
are properly installed and maintained. In all cases the inspectors
will attempt to work with the applicant to maintain proper erosion
and sediment control at all sites. In cases where cooperation is
withheld or applicant fails to achieve compliance, enforcement
proceedings will be applied as outlined in 11-2000.58 below. An
inspection must be conducted before any work is allowed to restart.
11-2000-55 MODIFICATION OF PLAN
The applicant must amend the SWPPP as necessary to include additional
requirements such as additional or modified BMPs designed to correct
problems identified or address situations whenever:
1) A change in design, construction, operation, maintenance,
weather, or seasonal conditions that has a significant effect on the
discharge of pollutants to surface waters or underground waters.
2) Inspections indicate the SWPPP is not effective in eliminating or
significantly minimizing the discharge of pollutants to surface
waters or underground waters or that the discharges are causing
water quality standard exceedences.
3) The SWPPP is not achieving the general objectives of controlling
pollutants and sediments or is not consistent with the terms and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
126
conditions of the approved project plans.
11-2000-56 FINANCIAL SECURITIES
The applicant shall be subject to the financial security provisions of the
Development Agreement or other Agreements.
11-2000-57 EMERGENCY ACTION
If circumstances exist such that non-compliance with this ordinance poses
an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, as
determined by the City, the City may take emergency preventative action.
The City shall also take every reasonable action possible to contact and
direct the applicant to take any necessary action. Any cost to the City
may be recovered from the applicant’s financial security.
11-2000-58 NOTIFICATION OF FAILURE OF THE SWPPP
The City shall notify the project contact of the failure of the SWPPP’s
measures.
1) Initial contact. The initial contact will be to the party or parties
listed on the application and/or the SWPPP as contacts. Except
during an emergency action, forty-eight (48) hours after notification
by the City or seventy-two (72) hours after the failure of erosion
control measures, whichever is less, the City at its discretion, may
begin corrective work. Such notification should be in writing, but if
it is verbal, a written notification should follow as quickly as
practical. If after making a good faith effort to notify the responsible
party or parties, the City has been unable to establish contact, the
City may proceed with corrective work. If there are conditions
when time is of the essence in controlling erosion, the City may
take immediate action, and then notify the applicant as soon as
possible. Any cost incurred by the City may be recovered from the
applicant’s financial security.
2) Erosion off-site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the
applicant shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan,
obtain the right-of entry from the adjoining property owner, and
implement the cleanup and restoration plan within forty-eight (48)
hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner’s permission. In no
case, unless written approval is received from the City, may more
than seven (7) calendar days go by without corrective action being
taken. If in the discretion of the City, the permit holder does not
repair the damage caused by the erosion, the City may do the
remedial work required. Any cost incurred by the City may be
recovered from the applicant’s financial security. When restoration
to wetlands and other resources are required, the applicant will be
required to work with the appropriate agency to ensure that the
work is done properly.
3) Erosion into streets, wetlands or water bodies. If eroded soils
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
127
(including tracked soils from construction activities) enter or appear
likely to enter streets, wetlands, or other water bodies, cleanup and
repair shall be immediate. The applicant shall provide all traffic
control and flagging required to protect the traveling public during
the cleanup operations.
4) Failure to do corrective work. When an applicant fails to conform
to any provision of this policy within the time stipulated, the City
may take one or more of the following actions:
a) Issue a stop work order, withhold the scheduling of
inspections, and/or the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy
b) Correct the deficiency or hire a contractor to correct the
deficiency. Project approval constitutes a right-of-entry for
the City or its contractor to enter upon the construction site
for the purpose of correcting deficiencies in erosion control.
c) Require reimbursement to the City for all costs incurred in
correcting stormwater pollution control deficiencies. If
payment is not made within thirty (30) days after costs are
incurred by the City, payment will be made from the
applicant’s financial securities.
11-2000.60 SANCTIONS FOR COMPLIANCE:
1) Violations Declared: A case where a BMP has failed, was
removed, was not properly installed, was not installed or was
not managed properly, which increases the potential for
pollutants to waters of the state includes but is not limited to the
following:
a) Silt fence failure or improper installation;
b) Non-storm water discharges on impervious surfaces;
c) Garbage, refuse, construction debris; and
d) The presence of barren soils for an extended period of
time.
2) Corrective Measures: The following are corrective
measures that shall be taken, as directed by the City:
a) Repairing and/or adding silt fence;
b) Removing pollutants from impervious surfaces including
streets and gutters not limited to sand or other sediment,
brush, garbage, refuse, construction debris, oils and
concrete washout by an effective means;
c) Picking up garbage, refuse or construction debris in and
amongst the grounds of the development and/or adjacent
properties; and
d) Stabilizing the site by furnishing adequate ground cover to
lessen wind and water erosion as prescribed in the Ham
Lake Construction Requirements.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
128
3) Procedure for Correction: Upon the determination of a
violation, a deadline for correction shall be given with notification
of penalties for failing to comply. The Contractor shall be
notified both orally and in writing, and will be given a reasonable
timeframe for correcting the violation.
4) Penalties for Non-compliance: Failure to meet the deadline
will result in one or more of the following penalties:
a) The City performing the necessary work or contracting for
the completion of the work and billing the contractor for
said services and/or using escrow funds;
b) Discontinuing the issuance of any permits or Certificate of
Occupancies development or for the individual lot;
c) Stop work orders; and
d) Discontinuing scheduled inspections.
Violation; Misdemeanor: Any person who is found to
violate any section of this Code shall be charged with a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to a misdemeanor penalty as then defined by Minnesota law.
Additionally, the City may exercise any civil remedy available
under Minnesota law for enforcement of this Code including
civil action, mandamus, injunctive relief, declaratory action, or
the levying of assessments.
11-2100 SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM (SSTS) AND
WELL WATER LOAN PROGRAM
Pursuant to the authority of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 115.57, the City of Ham
Lake hereby establishes the following SSTS and Well Loan Program. The
program is intended to offer loans to eligible parties to repair or replace existing
SSTS or water wells. The program is to be funded from monies made available
from the Anoka County Housing and Redevelopment Authority (HRA) out of a
special tax levy that has been and is being imposed on Ham Lake properties for
the benefit of Ham Lake housing issues.
11-2110 Eligibility: Conditions
The conditions that are eligible for consideration for repair and/or
replacement under this program include SSTS that have failed or which
consist of leaking holding tanks, holding tanks which can be replaced by
a conventional or “other” SSTS”, privy vaults and straight pipe systems.
An SSTS is a “failed” SSTS” if it is discharging effluent above ground
level. These criteria shall be used in place of any other criteria that may
be found in State or County health codes, and regardless of terminology
as may be found therein.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
129
The conditions that are eligible for consideration for repair and/or
replacement of water wells are:
a. contamination making the water unfit for human consumption; or
b. lack of water pressure caused by a lack of well depth, a insufficient
groundwater elevation or pipe sedimentation; or
c. mechanical or electrical failure of or in the pump apparatus; or
d. a well that needs to be abandoned and capped.
The City’s designated officials shall be the sole judge of whether or not
the qualifying criteria are met.
11-2120 Eligibility: Financial
In order to qualify for the program, the property owner must be a natural
person or persons, named in the title to the property as joint tenants or
tenants in common, and meeting the following financial criteria.
a. The applicant(s) must meet the qualifying income limits as published
by the United States Housing and Urban Development Department (HUD)
as stated in the most current eligibility tabulations by HUD for qualification
for Section 8 housing, according to household size, for the Minneapolis St.
Paul Statistical Area.
b. Aggregate net worth of all of the owners must be less than $50,000.00
as disclosed on signed Financial Statements. Financial Statements must
be in a form acceptable to persons designated by the City Administrator to
review same.
c. A Title search must be prepared or reviewed by the City Attorney, and
the property cannot be in foreclosure or encumbered by tax liens or
mechanics liens. Real estate taxes must be current.
d. There must be reasonable positive equity in the property, meaning that
the City staff’s estimate of fair market value must exceed the apparent
amount of debt encumbering the property, and the decision as to whether
or not to approve the application may be based on the City’s evaluation of
the likelihood that the assessments will in fact be paid in full. No credit
check of the applicant(s) shall be required. The City may require a fee
appraisal, the cost of which can be included in the loan, at the City’s
option, prior to making a decision on the application.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
130
The applicant(s) shall furnish whatever financial information is requested
of the City, including tax returns. Financial data will be considered private
data to the extent permitted by law.
11-2130 Assistance and Assessments
a. Loan. Assistance to the property owner shall be in the form of a loan
to the property owner(s) in an amount necessary to effect the replacement
or repairs, not to exceed a total of $25,000.00. The loan shall become an
assessment against the property on which the repair/replacement occurs
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 115.57 (Subd. 6). At the time of
issuing the loan, the City shall provide the notices required by said statute.
The assessment shall be certified for collection with real estate taxes on
November 15 of the year in which the loan is made, and shall be payable
over a ten year period, together with interest accruing at a rate established
by City Council resolution at the time that the loan is made.
b. Prerequisites to Loan. Prior to closing the loan, the applicant(s) shall
supply information satisfactory to the City documenting the need for the
repair/replacement, and provide a quote or quotes from licensed and
qualified septic and/or well installers documenting the cost of
repair/replacement, and in the case of SSTS, providing a design plan for
the new or repaired SSTS that meets City codes. The applicant(s) shall
also provide evidence satisfactory to the City that they meet the financial
eligibility requirements as contained in item 11-2120 above.
11-2140 Procedure for Approval
a. Submissions. Applicant(s) shall complete such forms as the City staff
prepares in application for approval, and staff shall complete a report to
the City Council for review when all application material is complete. The
report shall not include the actual financial data provided by the
applicant(s). Staff shall not forward an application to the City Council
unless all eligibility and submission requirements are complete, and Staff
shall have the authority to summarily reject an application for noncompliance
with eligibility or submission requirements, provided that the
applicant(s) receive written notice from Staff as to the reasons for
rejection.
b. City Council Approval. The City Council shall review the staff report
and shall act on the application by resolution. If disapproved, the
resolution shall contain findings of fact supporting the disapproval. If
approved, the resolution shall include an interest rate and such other
matters as the City Council deems appropriate.
c. Appeal of Staff Decision. If Staff has summarily rejected an
application, the applicant(s) may appeal the decision by requesting an
appearance before the City Council.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
131
d. Variances. The City Council may grant reasonable variances to the
eligibility requirements if there are special circumstances which justify
such variances. Special circumstances may include, without limitation, the
use of shared SSTS systems or wells, unusual sub-surface conditions, or
net worth affected by non-liquid assets.
11-2150 Closing
At the time that the loan is closed, the applicant(s) shall execute any and
all documents deemed necessary and appropriate by the City in
connection with the loan.
11-2200 Transport of Fill to Lands
No person shall transport or deposit any type of soil, gravel, rock, sand or other
fill (hereafter, collectively referred to as “fill”) on any parcel of land in the City of
Ham Lake except in conformance with this Article 11-2200.
11-2210 – Permit Required
The transport of fill on to any parcel other than under the exceptions listed
in Article 11-2220 below shall require a permit to be issued as provided in this
Code.
11-2220 – Exceptions - the following activities shall not require a permit:
a) The transport of fill intended to be used as topsoil for the
establishment of turf by sodding or seeding, intended to create a
topsoil layer of not more than a depth of six inches over existing
grade;
b) The transport of fill as needed to create a separation to mottled
soils in the construction of any Subsurface Sewage Treatment
System.
c) The transport of decorative rock, sand or gravel as a component of
a bona fide landscaping project or driveway on a residential or
commercial lot housing an existing building or a building under
construction.
d) Fill activity carried on as a part of a City-approved Grading Plan in
conjunction with a residential or commercial subdivision.
e) Fill activity carried on as a part of a City-approved Excavation
Permit.
f) Fill activity involving the transport of less than 1200 cubic yards of
fill within any given 36 month period.
11-2230 – Procedure
a) Application -Application for a Fill Permit shall be made to the City’s
Building Official. The Building Official may issue the permit for projects
involving the transport of less than 1,200 cubic yards of fill. For permits
involving greater than 1,200 cubic yards of fill, the permit shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission with recommendations from the
Building Official and Engineer, and acted upon by the City Council for final
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
132
decision. The Building Official may, in his or her discretion, require a
public hearing with such notice to nearby properties as is deemed
reasonable by the Building Official.
b) Conditions of Permit – all Permits shall contain, at a minimum,
conditions that regulate the routes and times of delivery, the frequency of
delivery, the quantity of fill, and erosion or silt control deemed appropriate
by the City, and a requirement that the applicant observe all of the
regulations or rules of any other agency having jurisdiction over the
activity, including, without limitation, the local watershed district.
c) Development Agreement and Security for Performance and/or
Maintenance – on all Permits reviewed by the Planning Commission, it
shall be a condition of issuance that the City and the applicant enter into a
Development Agreement to enforce conditions, which may require the
posting of adequate security by the Applicant to guarantee performance
and maintenance, and reimbursement to the City for costs incurred in the
review process.
d) Fees – Fees for Fill Permits shall be established by ordinance.
11-2300 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
This Code shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless
eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the City under the
specifications of Article 11-2300.50 of this Code. This Code also applies to
land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability
criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that
meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by local
environmental protection officials to ensure that established water quality
standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that
post construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional
watershed plans. Projects disturbing more than one acre shall follow the most
current General Permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Construction
Activity under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State
Disposal System permit program (the Permit) issued by the MPCA, as
amended, and shall take the necessary precautions to prevent soil erosion,
damage to adjacent property and control runoff to surface water.
11-2300.10 Definitions
Accelerated Erosion: erosion caused by development activities that exceeds
the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the
action of water, wind, or chemical action.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
133
Applicant: a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a storm water management permit.
Building: any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a
roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying
more than 100 square feet of area.
Best Management Practices (BMPs): erosion and sediment control and water
quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means
of controlling, preventing and minimizing degradation of waters of the state,
including avoidance of impacts, prohibitions of practices, general housekeeping
practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, operating and
maintenance procedures, and other applicable management practices.
Channel: a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that
conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
Common Plan of Development: a contiguous area where multiple separate
and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on
different schedules, but under one proposed plan. One plan is broadly defined
to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical demarcation
indicating that land disturbing activities may occur.
Construction Activity: a land disturbing activity where one half (1/2) acre or
more new impervious surfaces is created and/or developed, or one (1) acre of
land disturbance occurs. Construction activity includes land disturbing activities
that are part of a large common plan of development.
Dedication: the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general
public use.
Detention: the temporary storage of storm runoff in a storm water
management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
Detention Facility: a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the
purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual
release of stored water at controlled rates.
Developer: a person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
Drainage Easement: a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for storm water management purposes.
Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Plan: a plan that is designed to
minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during
construction activities.
Green Infrastructure: a wide array of practices at multiple scales that manage
wet weather and that maintains or restores natural hydrology by infiltrating,
evapotranspiration, or harvesting and using stormwater. On a regional scale,
green infrastructure is the preservation or restoration of natural landscape
features, such as forests, floodplains and wetlands, coupled with policies such
as infill and redevelopment that reduce the overall imperviousness in a
watershed. On a local scale, green infrastructure consists of the site and
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
134
neighborhood-specific practices such as bioretention, trees, green roofs,
permeable pavements and cisterns.
Hotspot: an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated
runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in
storm water.
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG): a Natural Resource Conservation Service
classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential
groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff
production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much
more runoff.
Impervious Surface: a constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater
quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to the development.
Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage
areas, compacted gravel, concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
Industrial Storm Water Permit: a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which
regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial storm water discharges
or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
Infiltration: the process of percolating storm water into the subsoil.
Infiltration Facility: any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained
water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade.
Jurisdictional Wetland: an area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Land Disturbance Activity: any activity which changes the volume or peak
flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include
the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any
activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural
or man-made watercourse.
Landowner: the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the
right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary
rights in the land
New Development: all construction activity that is not defined as
redevelopment.
Nonpoint Source Pollution: pollution from any source other than from any
discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be
limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction,
subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
135
Off-Site Facility: a storm water management measure located outside the
subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
On-Site Facility: a storm water management measure located within the
subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement: a legally recorded document
that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term
maintenance of storm water management practices.
Recharge: the replenishment of underground water reserves.
Redevelopment: any construction activity where, prior to the start of
construction, the areas to be disturbed have 15 percent or more of impervious
surface(s).
Stop Work Order: an order issued which requires that all construction activity
on a site be stopped.
Storm Water Management: the use of structural or non-structural practices
that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge
volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream
temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
Storm Water Retrofit: a storm water management practice designed for an
existing development site that previously had either no storm water
management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the storm water
management requirements of the site.
Storm Water Runoff: rain water runoff, snow melt and subsurface runoff and
drainage.
Storm Water Treatment Practices (STPs): measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of
preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to storm
water runoff and water bodies.
Structural Stormwater BMPs: stationary and permanent BMPs designed,
constructed and operated to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in
stormwater.
Water Quality Volume (WQv): the storage needed to capture and treat 90% of
the average annual storm water runoff volume. Numerically (WQv) will vary as
a function of long term rainfall statistical data.
Watercourse: a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
11-2300.20 Applicability
To prevent the adverse impacts of storm water runoff, the City has developed a
set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites.
These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing 10,000 or more
square feet of land.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
136
11-2300.21 Exemptions
The following activities may be exempt from these storm water
performance criteria:
a) Any agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved
localized or City-wide soil conservation plan or stormwater
management plan prepared or approved by the City, and is
consistent with the rules and regulations of other agencies having
jurisdiction over such activities a
b) Additions or modifications to existing single family structures.
c) Repairs to any storm water treatment practice deemed necessary
by the City.
d) Projects that are covered by other portions of this Code, which
require City permits or other City approvals, and which contain
requirements for dealing with stormwater runoff that are of equal or
better effectiveness than the requirements of Article 11-2300, or
which may be duplicitous of the requirements of Article 11-2300.
Such portions of the City Code include, but are not limited to the
Subdivision Code and portions of the Code dealing with
excavations and land reclamation projects.
11-2300.22 Redevelopment Projects
When a Site Plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project
as defined in Article 11-2300.30 of this Code, decisions on permitting
and on-site storm water requirements shall be governed by special storm
water sizing criteria found in the current Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (see Article 11-2300.20 below). This criteria is
dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the
redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all
redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the City of
Ham Lake.
11-2300.23 Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance
Requirements
This Code is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this Code should be considered minimum requirements,
and where any provision of this Code imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be
considered to take precedence.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
137
11-2300.30 Post-Construction Stormwater Standards
1) The following volume control standards shall be met as described
below for all construction activities. Construction activities are land
disturbing activities where one half (1/2) acre or more of new
impervious surfaces are created and/or redeveloped, or one (1)
acre of land disturbance occurs. Construction activity includes
land disturbing activities that are part of a larger common plan of
development.
a) All new development projects shall retain, on-site (i.e. infiltration or
other volume reduction practices) and not discharge off-site, a
runoff volume equal to 1 inch from the proposed increase of
impervious surfaces.
b) All redevelopment projects, shall retain, on-site (i.e. infiltration or
other volume reduction practices) and not discharge off-site, a
runoff volume equal to 1 inch from the proposed increase of
impervious surfaces.
c) To the maximum extent practicable, volume control measures
should be distributed evenly throughout the development areas.
d)Green infrastructure techniques and practices (including, but not
limited to, infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting,
conservation design, urban forestry, green roofs), shall be given
preference as design options consistent with zoning, subdivision
and PUD requirements.
e) Best management practices must meet design specifications as
outlined and incorporated in 11-2300.30.
f) For linear projects, a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain
right-of-way during the project planning process for volume control
practices. For linear projects where the lack of right-of-way
precludes the installation of volume control practices, exceptions,
as described 11-2300.30 can be applied.
g)Wetlands/ponds are considered to be an impervious surface.
While subject to rate control requirements, rainfall on
wetlands/ponds is not subject to volume control standards.
h) As sites redevelop, the proposed site modifications must meet or
exceed the stormwater volume standards that were previously
achieved.
2) Infiltration techniques are restricted, without detailed engineering
review, when the infiltration device will receive discharges from , or
be constructed in:
a) Areas of predominately Hydrologic Soils Group D (clay) soils.
b) Areas within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or within 100 feet downgradient
of active karst features.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
138
c) Areas within a Drinking Water Supply Management Area
(DWSMA) as defined in subpart 13 of Minnesota Rules
4720.5100.
d) Areas where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per
hour.
3) Infiltration treatment methods are prohibited in the following areas:
a)Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial
stormwater under an NDPES/SDS Industrial Stormwater Permit
issued by the Agency.
b)Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.
c)With less than three (3) feet of separation distance from the
bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally
saturated soils or the top of bedrock.
d)Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be
mobilized by the infiltrating stormwater.
4) The following rate control standards shall be met as described
below:
a) Discharge rates shall be derived using the standards methods of
the Natural Resources Conservation Service TR-55 or TR-20 as
defined in the current Hydrology Guide for Minnesota.
b) In cases where the downstream conveyance system is a clearly
defined manmade system of limited capacity, the allowable
discharge will be limited to the prorated share of the property to
the overall service area. Typically, this type of system will require
the 100-year post-development rate of discharge to be equal or
less than the 5-year post-development rate of discharge, but it
may be considerably less with no correlation to a given rainfall
event frequency.
c) In cases where the downstream conveyance system is a natural
system, features shall be incorporated into the stormwater
management plan to meet the following requirements: 100-year
post-development rate of discharge to be equal or less than the
10-year pre-development rate of discharge.
d) For receiving systems where rates are of limited concern, the rate
of discharge after development/redevelopment must be equal or
less than the existing rate of discharge for the following rainfall
events: 2-year, 10-year and 100-year.
5) All stormwater design calculations, specifications, site plans and
supporting hydraulic modeling are subject to the review and
approval of the City Engineer or its designee.
6) Property owner shall maintain all stormwater facilities in proper
condition Consistent
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
139
11-2300.40 Post-Construction Stormwater Standards Exceptions and
Mitigation
1) Projects shall fully attempt to comply with the volume control
requirements in 11-2300.30. A reduced volume control on the site
of the original construction activity may be applied, at the
discretion of the City, under the following circumstances:
a) The owner and/or operator of the construction activity is precluded
from infiltrating stormwater through a designed system due to
limitations as specified and incorporated in 11-2300.30(3).
b) The owner and/or operator of the construction activity implements
to the maximum extent practicable volume reduction techniques,
other than infiltration, on the site of the original construction
activity that reduces stormwater discharge volumes.
2) If the owner and/or operator of a construction activity is granted a
volume control exception, alternatives 1, 2 and 3 below are
required to be followed. This process includes mitigation provisions
for requirements that cannot be met on the site of the original
construction activity.
a) Alternative #1: Applicant attempts to comply with the following
conditions:
i) Achieve at least half of the volume reduction required.
ii) Remove 75% of the annual TP load from the increase in
impervious surfaces if the
iii) site is new development or from the new and/or fully
reconstructed impervious
iv) surfaces for a redevelopment site.
v) Options considered and presented shall examine the merits
of relocating project
vi) Elements to address varying soil conditions and other
constraints across the site.
b) Alternative #2: Applicant attempts to comply with the following
conditions:
i) Achieve volume reduction to the maximum extent
practicable.
ii) Remove 60% of the annual TP load from the increase in
impervious surfaces if
iii) The site is new development or from the new and/or fully
reconstructed
iv) Impervious surfaces for a redevelopment site.
v) Options considered and presented shall examine the merits
of relocating project
vi) Elements to address varying soil conditions and other
constraints across the site.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
140
c) Alternative #3: Off-site mitigation, as approved by the City
Engineer, equivalent to the volume reduction requirement for the
construction activity, can be used in areas selected in the below
order of preference. Off-site mitigation projects shall be completed
within 24 months after the start of the original construction activity.
i) Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that
receives runoff
ii) From the original construction activity.
iii) Locations within the same Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) catchment
iv) Area as the original construction activity.
v) Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area upstream.
vi) Locations anywhere within the City.
3) The owner and/or operator of a construction activity must provide
appropriate documentation to the City as support for volume
control exceptions and/or mitigation provisions above.
11-2300.50 Post Construction Maintenance and Inspections of Structural
Stormwater BMPs
Any structural stormwater BMP that the City determines to be private shall meet
the following requirements:
1) A permanent public easement shall be provided to the City for access
for inspection and/or maintenance purposes. Costs incurred by the
City for any maintenance of private systems will be billed and/or
assessed to the owner per 11-2300.70.
2) The owner shall enter into a recorded Maintenance Agreement with
the City. The agreement shall include as an attachment an inspection
and maintenance plan. The terms and conditions of the Maintenance
Agreement with attachments shall be binding upon, and shall insure
to the benefit of the parties and their respective successors and
assigns.
3) The permanent public easement and Maintenance Agreement shall
be recorded with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles in the
respective County where the Structural Stormwater BMP is located. A
copy of the recorded permanent public easement and Maintenance
Agreement shall be provided to the City prior to the certificate of
occupancy or one (1) year after the site’s land disturbance permit is
approved, whichever comes later.
4) The inspection and maintenance plan shall be developed, approved,
and included as an attachment with the Maintenance Agreement. At a
minimum, maintenance plans must include the following information:
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
141
a) Responsible person(s) for completing inspections and conducting
maintenance;
b) Frequency of inspections of maintenance; and
c) Inspection checklist and type of maintenance anticipated
5) If site configurations or structural stormwater BMPs change,
decreasing BMP effectiveness, new or improved structural stormwater
BMPs must be designed and implemented to meet the requirements
of this section. New and/or improved BMP plans must be submitted to
the City Engineer for review and approval.
6) The property owner shall maintain all structural stormwater BMPs in
proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which
they were originally designed.
7) The property owner shall keep on file all structural stormwater BMP
annual inspection and maintenance records for 5 years and submit to
the City as requested.
11-2300.60 Public Structural Stormwater BMPs and Drainage Easements
Alterations affecting the function of a public structural BMP, and/or drainage
easement, must be approved by the City Engineer.
11-2300.70 Violations and Enforcement
1) Violation Enforcement
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this Code, Development
Agreements and recorded Operation and Maintenance Agreements.
a) Immediate Danger
Whenever in the judgment of the Public Works Superintendent or
designee charged with enforcement, it is determined upon
investigation the violation constitutes an immediate dance to the
public health or public safety, an administrative citation may
immediately be issued to the property owner. In other instances
where an immediate public health or safety threat does not exist,
the enforcement official may issue a notice and order to correct.
b)Notification
Upon the issuance of an immediate administrative citation, the
Public Works Superintendent or designee will also send written
notification of the violation to the person committing or maintaining
the violation, and require the person to terminate and abate the
violation within 24 hours or such other period specified by the
enforcement official. The written notice will be served upon the
person committing or maintaining the violation in person or by first
class mail, or if unknown, then by posting a copy of the notice on
the site.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
142
2) Abatement of Violation
If the violation is not corrected as described in the notice and order to
correct, the abatement of the violation will be under the direction of
the Public Works Superintendent, or designee. The expenses for the
abatement will include a $75.00 administrative fee in addition to the
actual costs of the abatement. Abatement actions that require the
presence of City staff for more than one hour during the abatement or
other extraordinary coordination efforts will be billed to the property
owner at the rate of $60.00 per hour. If abatement expenses are not
paid, they will be levied against the property as a special assessment
and collected as in the case of other special assessments. A $50.00
charge will be added to all accounts certified to the County Auditor’s
office for collection. This fee is to be considered separate and distinct
from any penalty or interest that may be charged by the County as a
result of the certification.
3) Penalties
Any person who is found to have violated any provision of this Code,
or permits, agreements, and orders issued hereunder, shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each calendar day
on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate distinct violation. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall
constitute a lien against the subject property. Users desiring to
dispute such fines must file a request.
4) Costs
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover
court costs, court reporter’s fees and other expenses of litigation by
an appropriate action against the person found to have violated this
Code shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or
damage. The Public Works Superintendent may add to the violator’s
charges and fees, the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Additional
inspections caused by noncompliance will be billed to the affected
property owner at 2.5 times the base hourly salary of the inspector.
11-2300.80 Development of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
The City of Ham Lake may furnish additional policy, criteria and information
including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the
requirements of this Code and may provide such information in the form of the
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. This Plan will include a list of
acceptable storm water treatment practices, including the specific design
criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each storm water
practice. The Plan may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the
discretion of the local review authority, based on improvements in engineering,
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
143
science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Storm water treatment
practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design
and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality
performance standards.
11-2300.90 Permit Procedures and Requirements
No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or
other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without
first meeting the requirements of this Code prior to commencing the proposed
activity.
11-2300.91 Application Requirements
Unless specifically excluded by this Code, any land owner or operator
desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the City of
Ham Lake a permit application on a form provided for that purpose prior
to the start of construction. Unless otherwise excepted by this Code, a
permit application must be accompanied by the following in a form
established by the City in order that the permit application be
considered:
a) a Site Plan, which includes post-construction stormwater
management BMPs;
b) an operation and maintenance agreement;
c) a non-refundable permit review fee.
11-2300.92 Application Procedure
Applications shall be made on forms and to specifications established by
City staff. All application materials will be forwarded to the City Engineer
for review. Review shall be limited to evaluating compliance with the
provisions of this Code and other regulations or rules of agencies having
jurisdiction of the activities. Upon completion of review, the Engineer
shall forward comments and recommendations to the City Council for
final action. Final review shall not be deemed completed until all aspects
of the review process have been completed. City Council action shall be
completed within Minnesota statutory rules for such approvals, if
applicable. Then Engineer’s recommendations shall include a mandatory
completion date and security requirements, if any.
Prior to making a decision on any application, the City Council may, but
is not required to conduct a public hearing on the project, providing such
published and mailed notice as is deemed appropriate by the City
Council.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
144
11-2300.93 Development Agreement
Projects approved for permits under this Code shall be contingent upon
execution of a written Development Agreement between the City and the
applicant addressing such matters as the City deems appropriate.
11-2300.94 Reimbursement of Costs
All costs incurred by the City in reviewing and inspecting projects covered
by this Code shall be reimbursed by the applicant in the manner provided
by the Development Agreement.
11-2300.95 Inspection
All projects for which a storm water management plan is required shall be
subject to periodic inspections by the City’s agent, as outlined in the
Development Agreement.
11-2300.100 Waivers to Storm Water Management Requirements
In lieu of submitting the application and materials outlined in Article 11-2300.40,
an applicant may submit a written request for a waiver of the requirements of
this Code. The minimum requirements for storm water management may be
waived in whole or in part by the City Council, on recommendation of the City
Engineer, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
a) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this Code;
b) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
storm water discharges have been established in a storm water
management plan that has been approved by the City Engineer
and the implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance.
c) Provisions are made to manage storm water by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of storm water control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the storm water practice.
d) The City Engineer finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
e) The project is covered by another portion of the City Code
providing sufficient attention to stormwater runoff.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
145
11-2300.110 General Performance Criteria for Storm Water Management
Unless judged by the City to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following
performance criteria shall be addressed for storm water management at all
sites:
11-2300.111 Peak Flow Rates
All site designs shall establish storm water management practices to
control the peak flow rates of storm water discharge associated with
specified design storms and reduce the generation of storm water.
These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for storm water
treatment and to infiltrate storm water runoff from driveways, sidewalks,
rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent
practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
11-2300.112 Discharge
Storm water runoff generated from new development shall not discharge
untreated storm water directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water
body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed,
the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be
assessed using a method acceptable to the City Engineer. In no case
shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the
Army Corps of Engineers or the Watershed Management
Organization/Watershed District responsible for natural resources.
11-2300.113 Channel Protection
To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel
protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan.
11-2300.114 Sensitive Areas
Storm water discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e.,
cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas,
water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance
criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain storm water
management practices.
11-2300.115 NPDES Compliance
Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a storm
water pollution prevention plan, and shall file a Notice of Intent (NOI)
under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
146
System (NPDES) general permit. The storm water pollution prevention
plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
11-2300.116 Hotspots
Storm water discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential
pollutant loadings, known as “hotspots”, may require the use of specific
structural STPs and pollution prevention practices.
11-2300.117 Additional Requirements
Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the City Engineer
to determine if they are subject to additional storm water design
requirements.
11-2300.118 Sizing
The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan shall be used for sizing all storm water
management practices.
11-2300.120 Basic Storm Water Management Design Criteria
Stormwater practice plans shall meet the following design criteria.
11-2300.121 Minimum Control Requirements
All storm water management practices will be designed so that the
specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality,
channel protection, 10-year, 100-year) as identified in the current Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan are met, unless the City grants the
applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. In
addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control
than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City
reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed
necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
11-2300.122 Site Design Feasibility
Storm water management practices for a site shall be chosen based on
the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be
considered:
a) Topography
b) Maximum Drainage Area
c) Depth to Water Table
d) Soils
e) Slopes
f) Terrain
g) Head
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
147
h) Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultraurban
areas
Applicants shall consult the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan for
guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when
selecting a storm water management practice.
11-2300.123 Conveyance Issues
All storm water management practices shall be designed to convey
storm water to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and
reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
a) Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points
b) Protection of inlet and outfall structures
c) Elimination of erosive flow velocities
d) Providing of under drain systems, where applicable
The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall provide detailed
guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved
storm water management practices.
11-2300.124 Pretreatment Requirements
Every storm water treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of
water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the pretreatment
requirements found in the current Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan. Certain storm water treatment practices, as specified in the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan, are prohibited even with pretreatment
in the following circumstances:
a) Storm water is generated from highly contaminated source areas
known as “hotspots”.
b) Storm water is carried in a conveyance system that also carries
contaminated, non- storm water discharges.
c) Storm water is being managed in a designated groundwater
recharge area.
d) Certain geologic conditions exist (e.g., karst) that prohibit the
proper pretreatment of storm water.
11-2300.125 Treatment/Geometry Conditions
All storm water management practices shall be designed to capture and
treat storm water runoff according to the specifications outlined in the
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. These specifications will
designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to
an approved storm water management practice.
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
148
11-2300.126 Landscaping Plans Required
All storm water management practices must have a landscaping plan
detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will
manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect or soil conservation district.
11-2300.127 Operation and Maintenance Agreements
All storm water treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation
and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as
designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance
easements required to access and inspect the storm water treatment
practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the storm water treatment practice. In addition, a
legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper
maintenance of all storm water treatment practices shall be secured
prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities.
11-2300.128 Non-Structural Storm Water Practices
The use of non-structural storm water treatment practices is encouraged
in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the
form of reductions in the amount of storm water that must be managed
can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce
the generation of storm water from the site. These non-structural
practices are explained in detail in the current Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented
and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
Updated through Ordinance 18-02
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
149
TABLE NO. 11-4 (Physical Standards for Roadways)
Arterial
Roads
Collector
Roads
Local
Streets
cul-desacs
Alleys
Paving
Width
52’ 48’ 26-28’ 40’ radius 20’
Max. Grade 4% 4% 6% 6% 8%
Min Angle
for
Intersection
in°
90° 80° 70° 70° 70°
Min. Curb
Radius
35’ 25’ 25’ 40’ 5’
Maximum
Grades for
25’ before
Intersection 3% 3% 3% 3% 3%
Sight
Triangles
(distance
along sides
of through
streets)
along Stop
Street
500
500.30
500
500.30
250
250.25
250
250.25
50
50.20
Horizontal
Alignment
(Min. Radii of
Center Line) 600 400 200 100 100
Vertical
Curves (Min.
Sight
Distance)
500 350 200 100 100
Ham Lake City Code
Article 11
150
TABLE NO. 11-5 (Standards for Commercial Parking Lots Physical
Standards)
Class 5 Minimum
Aggregate Thickness
Minimum Bituminous
Thickness
Commercial Driveways
and Truck Parking
6” 3” SPWEB240B
Industrial Driveways and
Truck Parking
6” 3” SPWEB240B
Car Parking 4” 2” SPWEB240B
Dumpster & Loading
Dock Approaches Same as trucks Same as trucks
Minimum reinforced concrete pavement is 6” with 6”x6”, 6/6 welded wire fabric
with 1/8” wide contraction joint depth D/4 filled with hot poured sealer, MnDot
Specification 3720.
UPDATED through Ord 19-11
Page 1
ARTICLE 12: Non-Codified Ordinances
1200 General Provisions.
It is recognized that certain portions of municipal ordinances are amended on
a frequent basis, or are products of other agencies or regulations which may
be subject to changes by implication, rule of law or agency decision,
legislation, or the like. It is the purpose of this Article to recognize the need to
carry certain municipal ordinances outside of the codified documents.
Consequently, the City Council may from time to time adopt ordinances which
do not require codification, are not conducive to codification, or both. Any
such ordinance shall be filed in its original form with this Article Twelve, and
shall be retained in its original form. Any future Ordinance so adopted shall
state in the body of the ordinance that it is not to be codified, but the following
ordinances shall be recognized as valid and enforceable municipal
ordinances, without any need for ratification or enabling language in
subsequent amendments thereof. The fact that these ordinances are not
codified in no way lessen their validity, and their omission from the City Code
is not intended to be a repeal or alteration thereof:
A. Natural Gas Franchise Ordinance 89-05 adopted July 5, 1989 (Midwest
Gas). Amended 7-21-97 by Ordinance 97-17. Ordinance 09-13 Adopted
7/6/09 (CENTERPOINT ENERGY).
B. Natural Gas Franchise Ordinance 89-04 adopted July 5, 1989 (NSP).
Amended 7/21/97 by Ordinance 97-18. Ordinance 09-12 Adopted 7/6/09
(XCEL ENERGY). (Not accepted by Xcel Energy)
C. Cable TV Ordinance 83-19 adopted August 15, 1983 and Cable TV
Ordinance 85-13 amending Ordinance 83-19, adopted June 2, 1985.
Amended with Ordinance 98-12. Ordinance 02-17 adopted10/7/2002.
Ordinance No. 15-05 adopted 1/20/2015.
D. Shoreland Zoning Ordinance No. 92-35 adopted November 16, 1992.
Ordinance 97-25, adopted 12/1/97, amending on-site sewer systems in
areas within 1000 feet of certain public waters. Amended with Ordinance
99-1.
E. All Zoning Ordinance Amendments, past and future, which change the
zoning of any parcel of land.
F. District Floodplain Management Ordinance 15-27 adopted November
16, 2015. (Ordinance 15-27 repeals and replaces Ordinance 91-3.)
Updated through Ordinance 15-27