1
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
11. CITY SEAL
2
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
10.18 Copies of code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
10.20 Enforcement
10.99 General penalty
' 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the City, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the City code, for which designation code of ordinances, codified ordinances, or code may
be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained
in the code.
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the traffic
code. Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation followed by the number, such as 10.01.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed
for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
' 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
3
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this City shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the
context of the same ordinance.
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written and/or, whenever the
context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provision, or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited
to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
' 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted
which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
' 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
' 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Hastings, Minnesota, as presently
established or as amended by ordinance, annexation, or other legal actions at a future time. The term
CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The person duly appointed by the Council and acting in such
capacity.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
4
CITY CLERK. The person duly appointed and acting in such capacity.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This City code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
CONVICTION. Either of the following accepted and recorded by the court:
(a) A plea of guilty; or
(b) A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of guilty by the court.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
COUNCIL and CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Hastings, Minnesota.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
COUNTY. Dakota County and Washington County.
CRIME. Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the actor may be sentenced to
imprisonment or fine or a combination of both.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curbline or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways or streets which join 1 another at, or
approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at
any other angle may come in conflict.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law or city ordinance.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
ORDINANCE. An ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of Hastings, Minnesota.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, keep the peace, and
5
appointed for the purpose of law enforcement.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
PREMISES. Any lot, piece, or parcel of land within a continuous boundary whether publicly or
privately owned, occupied, or possessed.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
In the event a street includes 2 or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall refer
to any such roadway separately, but not to all the roadways collectively.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
STREET. The entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other
conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks,
alleys, and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(Prior Code, ' 1.02)
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
' 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
' 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
6
' 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of
this City exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
' 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word
or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which
no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as
though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made
or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
' 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this City for the transaction of all City business.
' 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
' 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
' 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
7
' 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect 7 days after
publication thereof, unless a later date is otherwise expressly provided.
' 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
ordinance repealing or modifying it becomes effective, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it
is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.
' 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In
addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be
shown in concise form above the ordinance.
' 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted
and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and
imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment, or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this
code had not been enacted.
' 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. The
Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
8
' 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code of ordinances, all future
amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in
this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
' 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any licensed peace officer of the City’s Police Department, or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy
Sheriff, shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.
(B) As permitted by M.S. 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Clerk shall
have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall have the authority to
administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a
citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
(C) The City Clerk and any City official or employee designated by this code who has the
responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or
owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
(D) If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection
of or entrance to the property, the City Clerk, peace officer, or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the
issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search
warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only. No warrant shall be issued unless
there be probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable
cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
(E) Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of property within the City shall
permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other
authorized City officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds
for termination of any and all permits, licenses, or City service to the property. Mailed notice shall be
given to the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of the property shall be given an
opportunity to appear before the City Council to object to the termination before it occurs, at a regularly
scheduled or special meeting.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to enter private
property in emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
9
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution or state
surcharges may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to
comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any City official designated by it may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
1
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
11. CITY SEAL
10
CHAPTER 11: CITY SEAL
Section
11.01 City seal and execution of contracts
' 11.01 CITY SEAL AND EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.
The Official City Seal shall be a circular disc having engraved thereon THE CITY OF HASTINGS
and such other words, figures, or emblems as the Council may, by resolution, designate. All contracts to
which the City is a party shall be signed by the Mayor, or in his or her absence the Acting Mayor, and the
City Clerk or City Administrator. In addition to being signed, the contracts shall be sealed with the City
Seal. The Seal shall be kept in the custody of the Clerk and affixed by him or her.
(Prior Code, ' 2.56)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
31. CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
32. CITY POLICIES
33. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS
34. FEES
30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
30.1 Boards and commissions generally
30.2 Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals
30.3 Board of Design Control
30.4 Reserved
30.5 Planning Commission
30.6 Parks and Recreation Commission
30.7 Public Safety Advisor Commission
30.8 Interim Emergency Succession
30.9 Building Safety Department
30.10 Heritage Preservation Commission
30.11 Public Works Department
30.12 Engineering Department
30.13 Absentee Ballot Board
§ 30.01 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
Unless otherwise provided by charter, ordinance, or statute, all board and commission
appointments shall be made by the Mayor and the appointments confirmed by the Council at the
first regular meeting in January of each year. The term of each appointee shall be established
and stated at the time of his or her appointment, and terms of present board and commission
members may be re-established and changed so as to give effect to this section. No board or
commission member other than a member of the Heritage Preservation Commission shall be
appointed to more than 3 full consecutive terms. Heritage Preservation Commission members
may be appointed to an unlimited number of terms. New appointees shall assume office on
January 1, December 31 being the date of expiration of terms. Provided, that the expiration
shall not be effective until the new appointees have been confirmed and qualified. All vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment shall be only for
the unexpired term. No appointed board or commission member shall be an employee of the
City, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. All appointed board and commission members
shall serve without renumeration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in
performance of their duties when the expenses are authorized by the Council. The chairperson
and secretary shall be chosen from and by the board or commission membership at its first
regular meeting in December of each year to serve for the next calendar year, provided, that no
chairperson shall be elected who has not completed at least 1 year (by the beginning of his or
her term as chairperson) as a member of the board or commission. The chairperson shall be
selected from the members retiring on December 31, next following the year for which the
selection is made. Any board or commission member may be removed by the Council for
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office and that position filled as any other vacancy.
Each board and commission shall hold its regular meetings at a time established and approved
by the Council, and when a member of the Council can be present. The City Administrator shall
be an ex officio member of all boards and commissions; provided, that if the Administrator is
unable to attend a meeting or act in the capaCity of the membership, the Administrator may be
represented by his or her assistant or some person duly authorized by him. Section 30.06 shall
override any inconsistency with this section.
(Prior Code, § 2.01) (Ord. 2008-05, 3rd Series, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 30.02 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.
(A) Establishment. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. Initially, the Council
CHAPTER 30: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
will act as the Board of Adjustment until the time as it feels it is unable to do so due to the
amount of matters before it, at which time it will formally establish a separate Board of
Adjustment. At the time as a second Board of Adjustment is established, the Council shall
establish it in accordance with Minnesota state statutes.
(B) Procedure. So long as the Council is acting as the Board of Adjustment, the Council
shall act under the rules established for its meetings. The Board of Adjustment (when
established as a separate Board) shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in
keeping with the provisions of the City Code. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at the other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or
her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may request the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating
that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the City Administrator.
(C) Hearings, appeals, notice. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning
interpretation or administration of provisions of the City Code may be taken by any person
aggrieved by any decision of the administrative official. The administrative official may refer
requests to the Board when the administrative official is in doubt as to granting a request,
which shall then be considered an appeal. The appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time,
not to exceed 60 days or the lesser period as may be provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the administrative official and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, give public notice
thereof, which need not be published notice, as well as due notice to the parties in interest as
required by the provisions of the City Code, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At
the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
(D) Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
In those cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(E) Powers and duties. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and
duties in addition to other powers if any granted by Minnesota state statute.
(1) Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official,
Public Works Director, or Building Official in the enforcement of Chapter 155.
(2) Special use permits.
(a) Conditions governing applications procedures. To decide the questions as
are involved in determining whether special use permits should be granted, and to grant special
use permits with the conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under Chapter 155, or to
deny special use permits when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of Chapter 155.
The Planning Commission of the City shall hold required public hearings on applications for
special use permits, unless the City Council or the Board of Adjustment order that the required
public hearings be held by the Council or the Board of Adjustment, in which case the Planning
Commission may hold supplemental public hearings in the cases.
(b) Granting permit. A special use permit shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless and until:
1. A written application for a special use permit is submitted indicating the
section of Chapter 155 under which special use permit is sought and stating the grounds on
which it is requested;
2. Published notice shall be given at least 10 days in advance of public
hearing. The owner of the property for which special use permit is sought or his or her agent
shall be notified by mail as well as all owners of property within 350 feet. Notice of the
hearing shall be posted at City Hall at least 10 days prior to the public hearing;
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by
agent or attorney;
4. Prior to any decision made by the Board of Adjustment, the matter shall
be referred to the Planning Commission for review and a report. The Planning Commission
shall review and report to the Board of Adjustment. The Planning Commission shall report in
a timely manner so the Board of Adjustment can act on the application within 60 days of its
receipt. The Board ofAdjustment shall find that it is empowered under the section of Chapter 155
described in theapplication to grant the special use permit and that the granting of a special use
permit will notadversely affect the public interest; and
5. Before any special use permit shall be issued, the Board shall make
written findings, certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special use
permit and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following
where applicable:
a. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with
particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenient traffic flow and
control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe;
b. Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular
attention to division (E)(2)(b)5.a. above, and the economic, noise, glare, or odor effects of the
special use on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district;
c. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to items divisions
(E)(2)(b)5.a. and (E)(2)(b)5.b. above;
d. Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility;
e. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and
character;
f. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare,
traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;
g. Required yards and other open space; and
h. General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in
the district.
6. A certified copy of the special use permit shall be recorded with the county.
(c) Limitations
1. In any case where a special use permit has not been established within one
year from approval by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the permit
shall be null and void.
2. In any case where a use authorized by a special use permit is discontinued
for a period of three years or longer, the permit shall be null and void.
(F) Additional powers and duties; variances. The Board of Adjustment shall have the
following additional powers and duties: to authorize upon appeal in specific cases the variance
from the terms of Chapter 155 as will not be contrary to the public interest where owing to
special conditions, and where a literal enforcement of the provisions of the City Code would
result in practical difficulties. A variance from the terms of Chapter 155 may be granted by
the Board of Adjustment when supporting evidence indicates that:
(1) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographic conditions
of the land involved, a practical difficulty to the owner would result, as distinguished from a
mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
(2) The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is based are unique to the
tract of land for which the variance is sought and one note applicable, generally, to other
property with the same zoning classification;
(3) The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase the
value or income potential of the parcel of land;
(4) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other land or improvements in the vicinity in which the tract of land is located;
(5) The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
property, or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of
fire, or endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within
the vicinity; (Prior Code, §11.08)
(6) The variance is in harmony with the purposes and intent of ordinance;
(7) The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
(8) The proposal puts the property to use in a reasonable manner; and
(9) There are practical difficulties in complying with the official control. “Practical
difficulties,” as used in connection with the granting of a variance means that;
(a) The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not
permitted by an official control;
(b) The practical difficulty is caused by the provisions of this chapter and has not
been created by any persons presently or formerly having an interest in the parcel of land;
1. A practical difficulty is not present if the proposal could be reasonably
accomplished under the current Ordinance requirements,
(c) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
(d) Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
(e) Practical difficulties include inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar
energy systems.
(10) The Council may impose conditions in the granting of a variance provided the
conditions must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact
created by the variance.
(11) Public hearings need not be held by the Council or Board of Adjustment on
applications for variances from Chapter 155 of the City Code. However, the Council or Board
of Adjustment may, in its discretion, hold public hearings on a particular application for a
variance. After any pubic hearing held on a variance request, the body holding the public
hearing shall forward its recommendation on the application to the Council or Board of
Adjustment;
(12) If a public hearing is not to be held by the Planning Commission or the Board of
Adjustment or the Council, owners of property within 350 feet of property involved in the
request shall be notified of the time and place when the application shall be considered by the
Planning Commission or Board of Adjustment or Council, which notification shall advise
adjacent property owners that they may be heard at the time and place;
(13) The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of division
(F)(I) above have been met by the applicant for a variance;
(14) The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth
in the application justify the granting of the variance are reasonable and that the variance is the
minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or
structure; and
(15) The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the
variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of Chapter 155, and will not
be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. In granting
any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with provisions of the City Code which directly relate to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance. Violation of the conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of provisions of the City Code and punishable under §10.99. Under no
circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible
under the terms of Chapter 155 in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication
prohibited by the terms of Chapter 155 in the district. (Ord. No. 2011-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-
05-11)
(G) Power of Board of Adjustment and Appeals; reversing decision of administrative
official. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as
the action is in conformity with the terms of the provisions of the City Code, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from and may make the order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made and
to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
The concerting vote of 75% of the entire Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under provisions of the City Code
including special use permits or to effect any variation in the application of Chapter 155.
(H) Appeals from the Board of Adjustment. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment may seek review by a court of record of the decision.
(I) Duties of administrative official, Board of Adjustment, City Council, and courts on
matters of appeal. It is the intent of this section that all questions of interpretation and
enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that the questions shall
be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the administrative
official, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts
as provided by law. It is further the intent of this section that the duties of the Council in
connection with this section shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation
and enforcement that may arise, unless it so chooses to do so. The procedure for deciding the
questions shall be as stated in this section and other provisions of the City Code. Under this
section, the Council shall have only the duties:
(1) Of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of
Chapter 155, as provided by law; and
(2) Of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in this code. (Prior Code,
§2.04)
§ 30.03 BOARD OF DESIGN CONTROL.
(A) Board of Design Control created. The Planning Commission shall be, and hereby is,
appointed as the Board of Design Control.
(B) Procedure. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall keep
a record of its proceedings, and shall record the vote of each member on its findings and its
determinations. In case of absence or disability of the Chairperson, the Board may elect any
member as Acting Chairperson, who shall serve during the period of absence or disability.
The Board shall meet in the first instance at the call of the Planning Director and thereafter
shall meet as often as necessary to perform its duties.
(C) Referral by Planning Director. Whenever an application is filed with the City for a
zoning or land use permit, building permit, or moving permit for any structure to be built,
enlarged, or altered within, or moved in or into the City, and the Planning Director finds the
application, plans, and specifications, and the certificate of survey or plot plan submitted
therewith, hereinafter termed the application papers, comply with the code of the City except
this section, but that the application papers provide for a structure, the exterior design, color,
exterior building materials, general appearance, and functional plan of which in the opinion of
the Planning Director may be, when erected, so at variance or so dissimilar with the exterior
design, appearance, and functional plan of the structures constructed or in the course of
construction in the neighborhood of the proposed structure which are in the same zoning
district as the proposed structure as to cause a material depreciation generally to property in the
neighborhood, then the Planning Director shall within a reasonable time after the receipt of the
application papers, file the same and the opinion in writing with the Board of Design Control.
(D) Call of hearing. Within 3 days after the receipt of the application papers and opinions
the Chairperson shall give notice to each member of the Board of Design Control to the
applicant, and to any other persons he or she deems advisable, of a hearing to be held by the
Board with respect to the application. The notice shall state the purpose of the hearing and the
location of the property. Notice to the applicant shall be mailed at least 3 days in advance of
the hearing, provided appearance at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of any defect in the
notice thereof. The hearing on the application shall be held not less than 1 week nor more than
2 weeks after receipt of the application by the Secretary of the Board.
(E) Hearing and findings. Before or during the hearing, each member may view the
premises upon which the structure is located or to be located, and at the hearing the Board
shall examine the application papers and hear the applicant. It may also hear any members of a
citizen’s committee and any other persons who request to be heard. The Board may adjourn
from time to time, but within 48 hours of the close of the hearing the Board shall, pursuant to a
majority vote of all the members of the Board, file written findings of the fact that the exterior
design, appearance, and functional plan of the structures constructed or in the course of
construction in the neighborhood of the proposed structure(s), which are in the same zoning
district as the proposed structure, as to cause material depreciation generally to property in the
neighborhood. The Board shall further make a recommendation that the application be
accordingly granted or denied. The finding, determination, and recommendation shall be in
writing. The Planning Director shall file a copy thereof, with the City Clerk and shall mail a
copy thereof to the applicant. The application papers, the written opinions, and findings,
determination and recommendations of the Board shall thereupon be presented by the Planning
Director to the Council at its next regular meeting. Further action with respect to the granting
or refusing of a permit with respect to the application shall be held in abeyance pending order
and direction of the Council. In that case, no permit with respect to the application shall be
issued except upon approval of the Board of Design Control and order and direction of the
Council.
(F) Council action. Upon receipt of the application papers, the written opinion of the
Building Official and the Public Works Director and the findings, determinations, and
recommendations of the Board of Design Control, the Council shall review all of the same.
The Council may upon request of the applicant or any other persons, or in its own discretion,
grant and order a rehearing before the Board of Design Control with or without directions, and
request other or further findings of fact and determinations by the Board as may be deemed by
the Council to be in the best interest of the City. If a rehearing is held, the application papers,
the written opinion and the findings, determinations, and recommendations of the Board of
Design Control upon the rehearing are then again submitted to the Council. Upon completion
of review by the Council, the Council may approve and adopt the findings, determinations, and
recommendations of the Board of Design Control in whole or in part, or may reject all of the
same. The Council may grant or refuse to grant the permit absolutely or in modified form or
may grant it upon conditions. Upon receipt of the order and direction, if any, of the Council,
the Planning Director shall make the same a part of the proceedings of the Board and shall
transmit an authenticated copy thereof to the Building Official and to the applicant. The
Building Official shall thereupon issue or refuse to issue the building permit in accordance with
the order and directions, as the case may be. In those cases, no building or structure shall be
erected, enlarged, altered, or moved into or within the City without a permit being first so
obtained.
(G) Refusal of permit. On hearing before the Board of Design Control and on review by
the Council, in the absence of proof to the contrary, a refusal to grant the building permit is
deemed to be based upon facts supporting the conclusion that the exterior design, appearance,
and functional plan of the structure as noted in the application papers is so at variance or so
dissimilar with the exterior design, appearance, and functional plan of structures constructed or
in the course of construction, in the neighborhood of the proposed structure which are in the
same zoning district as the proposed structure as to cause a material depreciation generally to
property in the neighborhood. (Prior Code, § 2.05)
§ 30.04 FEE SCHEDULE
Sidewalk Cafés
Sidewalk Café Application and License
Initial $50
Renewal No Charge if site plan is not modified.
$50 if site plan is modified
(Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series, passed 6-1-15)
§ 30.05 PLANNING COMMISSION.
(A) Establishment and composition. The Planning Commission of the City is hereby
continued. The Commission shall consist of 7 members, all of whom are non-Council
members. These persons shall be appointed by the City Council.
(1) Staff advisor. The Planning Director shall serve as an advisor to and recorder for
the Planning Commission.
(2) Commission Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be selected from among the
Commission members. Should the Chairperson resign, the vacancy shall be filled by the
Commission for the balance of the term. The Chairperson or another representative shall
report to the Council at each meeting, either orally or in writing.
(B) Term. Members of the Commission appointed by the Council as provided in division
(A) above shall serve for a term of 2 years beginning with the month of January of the year of
appointment. A person appointed to fill a vacancy due to resignation of a member or
otherwise shall complete the term of the person replaced.
(C) Removal. The Commission Chairperson shall notify the Council should any member
of the Commission be absent from 4 consecutive regularly scheduled meetings. The Council
may by majority vote take the action as it deems appropriate. The Council shall appoint a
replacement for any member who misses 6 consecutive regularly scheduled meetings in any 1
calendar year. The replacement shall be made pursuant to division (A) above. A member may
petition the Council to name a replacement for himself or herself due to his or her
unwillingness or inability to continue service on the Commission. The Commission may, by a
2/3 vote of its membership, request the Council to name a replacement for 1 of its members
for reasons other than non-attendance, which reasons shall be made known to the Council with
the request. The Council may then remove the member by a 2/3 vote of its membership.
Replacement shall be made pursuant to division (A) above.
(D) Meetings and expenses. The Commission shall hold at least 1 regular meeting each
month. It shall adopt rules and keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, and findings
along with the vote of each member thereon. This record shall be a public record.
Commission members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for expenses if
authorized by City Council. A majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum. Each member of the Commission shall have 1 vote on each issue.
(E) Preparation of City plan. It shall be the function and duty of the Planning
Commission to review a comprehensive plan for the development of the City, including
proposed public buildings, street arrangements and improvements, public utility services,
parks, playgrounds, and other similar developments, the use of property, the density of
population, subdivision codes and other City codes and matters relating to the development of
the City. The plan may be prepared in sections, each of which shall relate to a major subject of
a plan, as outlined in the Commission’s program of work.
(F) Procedure for adoption of plan. The plan or any amendment thereof shall be adopted
by the City Council. Before the Council adopts the plan, any section of it or any amendment
thereof, the Commission shall hold at least 1 public hearing thereon, notice of the time and
place of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10
days before the day of hearing. The adoption of the City plan, or any section or amendment
thereof, shall be by resolution of the City Council, approved by the affirmative votes of not
less than 2/3 of its total membership. The Council may from time to time amend or add to the
City plan or any section thereof as herein provided for the adoption of the original plan
whenever changed conditions or further studies authorized by the Council indicates that the
amendment or addition is necessary.
(G) Means of executing plan. Upon the adoption of the City plan or any section thereof, it
shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to recommend to the Council reasonable and
practicable means for putting into effect the plan or section thereof in order that the same will
serve as a pattern and guide for the orderly development of the City and as a basis for the
efficient expenditure of the funds thereof relating to the subjects of the City plan. The means
shall consist of a zoning plan, City codes, the control of subdivision plats, a plan of future
streets, coordination of the normal public improvements of the City, a long-term program of
capital expenditures and the other matters as will accomplish the purposes of this section.
(H) Zoning plan. The Planning Commission upon its own motion may and upon
instructions by the Council shall prepare a proposed zoning plan for the City. Before
recommending the plan to the Council, the Planning Commission may and upon request of the
Council shall hold at least 1 public hearing thereon after a notice similar to that required by
division (F) above. The same procedure shall apply for the preparation of any plan of
proposed rights-of-way for future streets or highways, or the future widening of existing streets
or highways, or for the reservation of lands for other public purposes.
(I) Official map of street extensions. The Planning Commission, with the assistance of
the City Engineer, may and upon instruction by the Council shall, prepare an official map of
the platted and unplatted portions of the City and adjoining territory, or portions thereof,
indicating upon the map the proposed future extension or widening of streets of the City within
the existing platted and developed territory or across the unplatted territory. After the map has
been prepared and a hearing on it has been held as provided in division (H) above, it shall be
submitted to the Council, which shall thereupon consider the map and may adopt it or any part
of it with the amendments as it deems advisable. Before the adoption by the Council, a public
hearing may and upon request of the Council shall be held upon the proposal at least 10 days
after a notice thereof has been published in a newspaper published in the City. After the map
has been adopted by the Council and filed with the Register of Deeds, whenever any existing
street or highway is widened or improved, or any new street is opened, or lands for other
public purposes are acquired by action of the City it shall not be required in the proceedings to
pay for
after the filing of such a map within the limits of the mapped street, or outside of any buildings
line that may have been established upon the existing street, or within any area thus reserved
for public purposes.
(J) Procedure for changes. No change shall be made in the zoning plan, future street and
public lands plan, or regulations governing the platting of land after the plans or regulations
have been adopted by the Council, until the proposed change has been referred to the Planning
Commission for report thereon and an attested copy of the report has been filed with the
Council; and no ordinance or resolution establishing any of the plans or specifications shall be
adopted by the Council until the ordinance or resolution has been referred to the Planning
Commission for a report thereon and an attested copy of the report has been filed with the
Council. Failure of the Planning Commission so to report within 30 days or the longer period
as may be designated by the Council after the reference shall be deemed to be approval of the
proposed change.
(K) List of recommended public works. Each officer, department, board, or commission
of or in the City whose functions include recommending, preparing plans for, or constructing
public works shall, at least three months, before the end of each fiscal year, submit to the
Planning Commission a list of the proposed public works recommended by the officer,
department, board or commission for planning, initiation, or constructing during the ensuing
fiscal year. The program shall be recommended by the Commission to the Council and to the
other officer, department, board, or public bodies as have jurisdiction over the recommending,
planning or construction of the public works. A copy of the recommended program of public
works shall be included in the annual report of the Planning Commission provided in division
(D) above. (Prior Code, § 2.10)
(L) Act as Board of Design Control. The Planning Commission shall serve as the Board
of Design pursuant to § 30.03.
§ 30.06 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.
(A) Establishment. The Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby created.
(B) Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the Commission to hold regular meetings to
consider the matters pertaining to land acquisition and other open space system programs and
to park and public recreation programs in the City as shall be referred to the Commission by
the Council or as the members of the Commission deem proper.
(C) Composition. The Commission shall consist of 7 members, all of whom shall be non-
Council persons, plus one additional advisory youth member who shall be a Junior or Senior in
one of the schools serving the Hastings community and who resides within Hastings city limits.
They shall be appointed as follows: When a vacancy occurs or is about to occur, applications
shall be requested from the residents of the City. All applications shall be submitted to the Parks
and Recreation Director. Applicants will participate in an interview with an interview panel
assigned by the Commission, including but not limited to the following persons: Parks &
Recreation Committee of Council Chairperson, Parks & Recreation Commission Chairperson,
City Administrator, and the Parks & Recreation Director. The majority choice of the panel shall
be presented to the City Council for approval. If the Council by a majority of its total
membership is unable to agree upon a person to fill the vacancy, the matter shall be referredback
to the interview panel for a different recommendation. This process shall continue until
the vacancy or vacancies are filled.
(1) Staff advisor. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall serve as an advisor and
recorder to the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(2) Commission Chairperson. The Chairperson and an Acting Chairperson shall be
selected from among themembership. Should the Chairperson resign, the vacancy shall be
filled by the Commission for the balance of the term. The Chairperson, or his or her designee,
shall report to theCouncil orally or in writing at each meeting. In case of absence or disability
of the Chairperson, the Acting Chairperson shall serve during the period of absence or disability.
(3) Term. Members of the Commission appointed by the Council shall serve for a
term of 2 years, beginning January following of the year of appointment.except that the
advisory youth member shall serve a term of one year, with the opportunity to serve one
additional term if desired. A person appointed to fill a vacancy due to resignation of a member
or otherwise shall complete the term of the person replaced.
(4) Meetings and the like. The Commission shall hold at least 1 regular meeting each
month. It shall adopt rules and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, and findings,
along with the vote of each member. This record shall be a public record. A majority of
regular members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. The advisory youth member
shall not impact the number of members needed to establish a quorum and shall not count
toward establishing a quorum. Each regular member of the Commission shall have 1 vote on
each issue. The advisory youth member may contribute to Commission discussions and actions
but shall not have a vote on issues before the Commission.
(D) Expenses of members. The members of the Commission shall serve without pay, but
may be reimbursed for actual expenses if authorized by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.12) (Am. Ord. 2010-06, 3rd Series, passed 4-5-2010)(Ord. 2012-01, 3rd
Series, passed 2-21-12)
§ 30.07 PUBLIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMISSION.
(A) Establishment. The Public Safety Advisory Commission is hereby established.
(B) Powers and Duties. The Commission shall be an advisory commission to the City
Council pertaining to public safety programs of the City as shall be referred to the Commission
by the Council or as the members of the Commission deem appropriate. In addition, the
commission shall:
(a) Carry out their stated mission to enhance the awareness of police and fire
department capabilities and services; provide an opportunity for citizen involvement in police
and fire services and to encourage exchange between the police and fire departments and the
community.
(b) Submit to the City Council annually a report of the activities of the commission
during the previous year; and
(c)Performother functions as needed to carry out these duties and responsibilities as
directed by the City Council and to act in an advisory capacity to the City Council.
(C) Composition. The commission will consist of up to seven regular members all of
whom shall be residents, and non Council members and one youth member 14-18 years old,
who shall attend one of the schools serving the Hastings community. All members are
appointed by the City Council.
(D) Staff Advisor. The Chief of Police and Fire and EMS Director shall serve as advisors
to the commission.
(E) Commission Chair. The Commission shall select a chair from among the
membership. Should the chair resign, the vacancy shall be filled by the commission for the
balance of the incomplete term.
(F) Term. The members of the initial Commission shall serve the following terms:
Up to three shall serve one year terms and up to four shall serve two year terms. Thereafter,
members of the Commission appointed by the Council shall serve for a term of two years,
beginning January following the year of appointment. A person appointed to fill a vacancy
due to resignation of a member or otherwise, shall complete the term of the person replaced.
(G) Meetings. The Commission will hold at least three meetings per year. It may make
rules and guidelines and shall keep a record of its meetings, recommendations, and referrals,
along with the vote of each commissioner. This record shall be a public record. A majority of
appointed commissioners shall constitute a quorum. Each commissioner shall have one vote on
issues before the Commission.
(H) Expenses. Commissioners shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for actual
expenses is authorized by City Council.
§ 30.08 INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
(A) Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear or terrorist attack or a natural
disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to
insure the continuity of duly elected and lawful leadership of the City; to provide for the
continuity of the government and the emergency interim succession of key governmental
officials by providing a method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices.
(B) Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear or terrorist attack upon the
United States or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the City, the Mayor, Council and
City Administrator shall be forthwith notified by any one of the persons and by any means
available to gather at the City Hall. In the event that safety or convenience dictate, an alternate
place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows.
(1) Bymajority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a
Chairperson and Secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively.
(2) They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear or terrorist
attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done, or the
imminence thereof.
(3) They may, based on the facts, declare a state of emergency.
(4) Bymajority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all
positions on the Council, including the office of Mayor, of those persons upon whom notice
could not be served or who are unable to be present. These persons shall constitute the Interim
Emergency Council.
(5) The interim successors shall serve until the time as the duly elected official is
again available and returns to his or her position, or the state or emergency has passed and a
successor is designated and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.
(C) Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency Council shall
exercise the powers and duties of their offices, and appoint other key government
officials to serve during the emergency. (Prior Code, § 2.14)
§ 30.09 BUILDING SAFETY DEPARTMENT.
A Building Department is hereby continued. The Building Department shall be under the
administration of the City Administrator. Under the City Administrator, the head of the
Building Department shall be the Building Official (referred to in the State Building Code as
the Administrative Authority). The Department shall consist of the Building Official, together
with the assistants and staff members as may be authorized from time to time by the Council.
It shall be the duty and power of the Building Official to carry out the provisions of the State
Building Code and the ordinances of the City relating to construction. The Building Official
shall submit a periodic report to the Council covering the work of his or her Department for
intervals required by the Council. (Prior Code, § 2.16)
§ 30.10 HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
(A) Public policy and purpose. The City Council finds that historical, architectural,
archaeological, engineering, and cultural heritage of the City is among its important assets.
Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to establish a municipal program of heritage
preservation, as authorized by M. S. § 471.193, as it may be amended from time to time, to
promote the use and conservation of historic properties for the education, inspiration, pleasure,
and enrichment of the citizens and visitors of Hastings.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALTERATION. Refers to changes and works to Heritage Preservation Sites.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE. An area of land possessing the potential to
reveal information important to historic or pre-historic studies.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE. Possessing distinctive characteristics of a
style, place, period, method, or materials of construction, builder, or architect.
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE. A landmark or setting of manmade or natural
features, or a combination, possessing meaning primarily by long association or identification
with the community and its citizens.
ENGINEERING SIGNIFICANCE. A work demonstrating a technology, design, or
method characteristic of a historic period or activity.
HERITAGE PRESERVATION DISTRICT (DISTRICT). When a concentration of
properties are linked by significance and located in a contiguous area, they may be defined by
a boundary and designated a Heritage Preservation District with the same protection and
meaning as a Historic Preservation Site under this section. Land and structures which do not
contribute to the significance of the district may be included within the boundaries of the
Heritage Preservation District when necessary to protect the significance, integrity and visual
unity of the whole.
HERITAGE PRESERVATION SITE. An area, property, building, structure, or
object, when designated for preservation for reasons of its significance by the City Council.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE. Associated with activities, processes, events, trends,
or persons of importance to the community, state, or nation.
INTEGRITY. The amount and condition of original material and/or design remaining
in the site, property, or district.
SIGNIFICANCE. The quality of the information; example, interest or meaning
represented by the site for understanding and appreciating the past development or culture.
(C) Heritage Preservation Commission established.
(1) Responsibilities. This section establishes the Hastings Heritage Preservation
Commission (hereinafter HPC or Commission) with the following responsibilities:
(a) To continue to survey and research in order to identify properties which have
historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance to the community;
(b) To recommend properties which meet the criteria of significance stated
herein for designation as Heritage Preservation Sites;
(c) To protect Heritage Preservation Sites by public review of all proposed
alterations, relocations, demolitions, or new construction within designed site boundaries;
(d) To advise property owners and educate the public in appropriate
maintenance, rehabilitation or restoration methods. To encourage continued uses, compatible
with their character, of Heritage Preservation Sites;
(e) To hear and decide applications for Certificate of Approval;
(f) To make recommendations to the City Council on proposed amendments to
this chapter; and
(g) To promote public recognition and appreciation for Heritage Preservation
Sites.
(2) Members. The Hastings Heritage Preservation Commission shall consist of 9
voting members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
Members must reside in the municipality.
(a) At least 1 member will be an architect, or if an architect not be available, an
experienced person of the building trades.
(b) At least 1 member will be a professional or experienced person in the areas
of history, architectural history, archaeology, planning, real estate, design, building trades,
landscape architecture, or law.
(c) The other members shall be drawn from persons with a demonstrated interest
and/or expertise in historic preservation.
(d) One Commissioner will be member of and designated as the representative to
the County Historical Society.
(3) Appointment of members. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council, upon recommendation by the Commission. Initial appointments shall
be 2 members for 1 year, 2 members for 2 years, and 3 members for 3 years. Vacancies from
resignation or other causes shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired
term. Near the completion of the last year of an incumbent commission member’s third full
consecutive term appointment, applications shall be requested from the residents of the City of
Hastings. All applications shall be reviewed for recommendation for appointment. Members
shall serve without compensation and continue to hold office until their successors have been
appointed and qualified.
(4) Organization. The Commission, when formed, shall elect from its members, the
officers as it may deem necessary. The Commission shall have the power to designate and
appoint, from its members, various committees with powers and duties of the Commission.
The Commission shall make
the rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs,
for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this section, which are not inconsistent with the
laws of the City and the State of Minnesota.
(5) Annual report. The Commission shall make an annual report by October 31,
containing a statement of its activities and plans to the Mayor, the City Council, the City
Administrator, the Building Official, the Chairperson of the Hastings Housing and
Redevelopment Authority, the Planning Director, and the State Historic Preservation Officer.
(6) Meeting. The Commission shall meet monthly at a regular time and place to
conduct its business. In addition, the Commission will meet at its earliest convenience, when
called by the Chair, to review the building permits or applications as are referred to it by the
City Building Official or Planning Director.
(7) City support. To accomplish the intent and purpose of this section, the City of
Hastings shall provide the Commission with facilities, equipment, supplies, and staff support.
The HPC will submit budget requests in the same manner as other City departments.
(D) Designation of Heritage Preservation Sites.
(1) Designation study. The Commission shall continue to survey properties, conduct
studies, and gather documentation of properties which has reason to believe are significant to
the community. The Commission shall provide procedures for citizens to nominate properties
for consideration as Heritage Preservation Sites. A designation study shall be initiated by
action of the Commission in a public meeting with 10-days’ written notice to the owners of
properties considered for designation.
(2) Proposed designation. The Commission shall recommend properties to the City
Council for designation as Heritage Preservation Sites. In order to be recommended for
designation, the Commission must have completed a study which demonstrates that the
property being considered possesses historic, architectural, cultural, archaeological, or
engineering significance at the local, state, or national level, and in addition that the property
possesses integrity.
(3) Planning Commission review. The Heritage Preservation Commission shall
advise the City Planning Commission of the proposed designation of a Heritage Preservation
Site, including boundaries and secure from City Planning Commission its comments or
recommendations with respect to:
(a) The relationship of Heritage Preservation Site designation to the
comprehensive plan and zoning code of the City of Hastings; and
(b) The consistency of the proposed designation with applicable development
plans or development objectives adopted by the City Council. The Planning Commission shall
respond to the HPC within 30 days of receiving the proposed designation.
(4) Preservation Commission findings and recommendation. The eligibility of a
property for designation as a Heritage Preservation Site shall be determined by the
Commission in an open meeting, notice of which shall have been sent via US mail to all
owners of property considered for designation, with opportunity for public comment. The
Commission shall adopt a resolution of recommendation for each site or for a district as a
whole.
(5) State Historic Preservation Office’s review. Prior to making its recommendation
to the Council, every proposed designation by the Commission shall be sent to the State
Historic Preservation Office for review and comment in writing within 60 days.
(6) Council designation. The Commission shall forward its recommendations,
together with its findings of significance and integrity and with the comments of the Planning
Commission and of the State Historic Preservation Office, to the City Council. The City
Council, upon recommendation of the Commission may, by resolution, designate a Heritage
Preservation Site or District. Prior to the designation, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing, notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation at
least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, and notice of the hearing shall be sent to all
owners of property which is proposed to be designated a Heritage Preservation Site and to all
property owners within the boundary of the area to be designated a Heritage Preservation
District.
(7) Recording of Heritage Preservation Sites. The Commission shall record with the
Dakota County Recorder, the legal description of all buildings, lands, or areas designated as
Heritage Preservation Sites or Heritage Districts by the Council.
(8) Interim protection. Interim protection is established to protect a nominated
property from destruction or inappropriate alteration during the designation process. The
owner shall be notified of the interim protection when a decision has been made about
commencing a designation study. A designated study shall be initiated by action of the
Commission in a public meeting after 10-days’ written notice to the owners of properties
considered for designation. Interim protection shall be in effect from the date of the
Commission’s action to begin a designation study decision regarding the designation of the
property until Council action or for 4 months, whichever comes first. Prior to the expiration
of the 4-month period, the Commission may request Council approval to extend the interim
protection for an additional 4 months, not to exceed a total of 8 months. The Commission
shall provide grounds for the request for an extension of time to decide on the designation.
The owner must be notified of the recommendation to extend the interim protection prior to the
Council meeting to decide on the extension of time. Interim protection means that during the
designation process, the provisions of this section apply to the property as if it were
designated.
(a) The Commission shall keep current and public a list of all properties
designated as Heritage Preservation Sites, or included in the State or the National Register of
Historic Places.
(b) The Commission will provide the Building Official and the Planning Director
with current lists and maps showing Heritage Preservation Sites and Districts for their use in
referring applications to the Commission.
(c) The Commission will conform to the procedures of the Division of Archives
and Manuscripts of the Minnesota Historical Society and to M.S. § 138. 17, as it may be
amended from time to time, on the disposition of records.
(E) Additional powers and duties of the Commission. The Commission shall have the
following powers and duties in addition to those otherwise specified in this chapter.
(1) Any application or plan for a proposed City action or approval that would affect
the appearance of a Heritage Site or District will be referred by the involved Department to the
HPC staff with plans or descriptions for HPC review and comment before final action.
Examples of City actions or approvals include, but are not limited to: the Planning Director
forwarding applications for land use actions including special use permits, variances,
vacations, subdivisions and site plans, street and utility reconstruction plans, building permits,
building violations or maintenance orders. Building, fence, and sign permits for Heritage Sites
or District properties may not be released without a Certificate of Approval from the HPC.
(2) The Commission may request, as needed, that the Department of Building Safety,
Public Works Department, Fire Department, Planning Commission, the Housing and
Redevelopment Authority, or the City Council adopt measures required or appropriate for the
preservation, protection or maintenance of Heritage Preservation Sites such as variances,
amendments, enforcement or alternatives to the City code, building code and fire code
governing construction, demolition,alteration, maintenance, use, or condemnation.
(3) The Commission shall provide general preservation information and guidelines to
owners of Heritage Preservation Sites regarding maintenance, restoration, or renovation of
historic properties.
(4) The Commission shall promote public recognition and appreciation for Heritage
Preservation Sites. It shall periodically publish and provide to property owners a registry of
designated and potential Heritage Preservation Sites and Districts, along with design guidelines
and preservation programs available at that time.
(5) With the prior approval of the City Council, the Commission may contract the
services, on a regular or part-time basis, of technical experts or professional consultants as
may be required to perform its duties.
(6) With the prior approval of the City Council, the Commission may make
application for and accept gifts, grants, and contributions made to the City for the purpose of
Heritage Preservation.
(7) With the approval of the City Council, the Commission may nominate properties
to the National Register of Historic Places or to the State of Minnesota for the designation of a
Historic Site or District.
(F) Certificate of approval.
(1) Purpose. Certificates of approval are established to protect sites, properties in
districts, and nominated properties under interim protection by providing the Commission with
authority to review and approve or deny proposed exterior alterations, new construction,
additions, removals, demolition, or relocation from or into designated sites and districts.
(2) Certificate of approval required. The alteration of a site or property in a district
shall be prohibited except where authorized by a certificate of approval approved by the
Commission. Any City permits and approvals for designated sites and properties within
districts will not be released by City staff without a certificate of approval or by direction of
City Council.
(3) Application for certificate of approval. Application shall be made by the owner
of the designated property on a form provided by the Commission and accompanied by all
required supporting information before review. A complete application shall be accompanied
by the following information, and other information as staff determines necessary:
(a) Accurate scaled and dimensioned site plan of existing conditions;
(b) Photos of existing conditions;
(c) Photos or plans of building elevations;
(d) Photos or plans of proposed alterations and replacement material;
(e) Plans, illustrations, and samples of building materials, windows, roof, doors,
siding, trim, and the like;
(f) Samples of paint colors, when required;
(g) Plan and description of changes to architectural details;
(h) Samples and illustrations of proposed replacement materials;
(i) Description of area proposed to be cleaned and methods, companies, or
chemicals to be used;
(j) Details of signs or awning including lettering, design, size, color, and
materials; and
(k) Statement of how the proposal relates to historic significance of site.
(4) Review of application. The Commission may approve, approve with conditions,
or deny an application. All findings and decisions of the Commission shall be recorded in
Commission minutes, or on the application itself when a Commission meeting is not required.
Decisions are final, subject to appeal to the City Council. The Commission shall designate
types of alterations, such as maintenance activities or minor alterations which can be approved
by the Preservation Staff or referred to a Committee or the whole Commission at a public
meeting. The Commission shall designate types of alterations which can be approved by a
Committee of 3 Commissioners or referred to a whole Commission at a public meeting.
Alterations not designated above will be considered by the whole Commission at a public
meeting. The Commission may call a public hearing for types of alterations that are for, but
not limited to demolition, relocation, major addition or remodeling and infill construction on a
property designated as a Heritage site or within a Heritage Preservation District. Notice of the
public hearing at a meeting during which an application will be reviewed shall be mailed to the
applicant and property owners within 200 feet of the property, at least 10 days prior to the
meeting.
(5) Required findings.
(a) Alteration within a site or district. Before approving a certificate of
approval, the Commission shall make written findings that the alteration will not materially
impair the integrity of the site or district and is consistent with the applicable design guidelines
adopted by the Commission, if design guidelines do not apply, is consistent with the
recommendations contained in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation.
(b) Guidance. The Commission will be guided by the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards for Rehabilitation, as well as by the Design Guidelines adopted by the Commission
for the review of proposed changes within Heritage Preservation Sites and Heritage
Preservation Districts. In all cases, the Commission will give consideration to the significance
and integrity of original material and design remaining in the building when applying criteria,
guidelines, and standards.
(c) Destruction, demolition, or removal. Before approving a certificate that
involvesdestruction or removal, in whole or in part, of any site or property within a district or
nominated property, the Commission shall make findings that the destruction is necessary to
correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the property, or that there are no reasonable
alternatives to the destruction. In determining whether reasonable alternatives exist, the
Commission shall consider the integrity of the property and the economic value or usefulnessof
the existing structure, including its current use, costs of renovation and feasible alternativeuses.
(d) New construction or relocation. Before approving a certificate that involves
new construction on, or the relocation of a building into a site or a district or nominated
property, the Commission shall make findings that the new construction or relocated building
will be compatible with the visual qualities of the historic architecture of the site, the
streetscape or the district, and is consistent with the applicable design guidelines adopted by the
Commission or if the guidelines do not apply, with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for
Rehabilitation.
(6) Certificate of approval conditions. In general, following Commission approval of
an application, the applicant shall receive a signed certificate of approval and stamped plans or
descriptions of the proposed alteration from the preservation staff. The applicant shall provide
the certificate of approval and plans to the Department of Building Safety before a building,
demolition or moving permit may be issued or to the Planning Department before a sign or
fence permit may be issued. Alterations approved as part of the certificate of approval must be
completed within 1 year from the date of approval or a request for extension submitted for a
further 12-month period prior to the expiration of the first 12 months.
(7) Limitations. If, within 40 days from the filing of a complete application, the
Commission has neither approved, denied, nor called a public hearing on the proposed
changes, the certificate of approval shall be deemed to have been approved by the
Commission, and if all other requirements of the City have been met, the appropriate City
department may issue a permit for the proposed work. By vote of the Commission and
notification of the appropriate City department, the first 40-day period may be extended by an
additional 40 days in cases where further information and research is required to make a
determination and the initial 40-day period is not sufficient to do the work. No permit shall be
issued nor work commenced in the event the Commission disapproves the application in
accordance with this section.
(8) Emergency repair. In emergency situations where immediate repair is needed to
protect the safety of the structure or its inhabitants, the Building Official may approve
temporary or limited repair without the consent of the Heritage Preservation Commission. In
cases of a permit issued pursuant to this section, the Building Official shall immediately notify
the Heritage Preservation Commission of its action and specify the facts or conditions
constituting the emergency situation.
(9) Denial of certificate of approval. The Commission shall provide written findings
of facts for the grounds of denial of the application for certificate of approval. The applicant
shall be provided with a written statement of the grounds of denial and be provided with the
procedures for appealing the decision to deny the certificate of approval. The applicant or any
party aggrieved by the decision of the Heritage Preservation Commission shall, within 10
business days of the date of the Heritage Preservation Commission’s order and decision, have a
right to appeal the order and decision to the City Council. The request for an appeal shall be
made by delivering to the City Clerk a notice of appeal and statement of reasons setting forth
the grounds for the appeal. The City Clerk shall transmit the notice of appeal and statement to
the City Council and the Heritage Preservation Commission. The Heritage Preservation
Commission, in any written order denying a permit application, shall advise the applicant of
this right to appeal to the City Council and include this section in all the orders. Appeals on
the grounds of economic hardship will be considered by City Council under the procedures and
guidelines adopted by City Council.
(G) Violations. An owner or occupant of any area, place, building, structure, or other
object within a duly designated Heritage Preservation Site or protected by an Interim Protection
Order who violates the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any architect,
builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation who assists in the commission of a violation
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day an owner or occupant of any area,
place, building, structure, or other object within a duly designated Heritage Preservation Site or
protected by an Interim Protection Order allows any work to be performed on any area, place,
building, structure, or other object in violation of division (F) above, it shall constitute a separate
violation of this section, and it shall be punishable as such. A Heritage Preservation Site on
which there exists any remodeling, repairing, construction, or a building moved in violation of
this section, is hereby declared a nuisance, and the imposition of the penalties herein prescribed
shall not prevent the City of Hastings from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent an unlawful remodeling, repair, construction, building, building moving or demolition,
or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation.
(1) The City Council authorizes the Heritage Preservation staff and the Building
Official or designee to enforce this section. These officials may make inspections and take the
action as may be required to enforce the provisions of this section.
(2) Whenever the official has reasonable cause to believe that there may exist in any
building or on any property any condition that is in violation of this chapter, the official may
enter the area, place, building, structure, or other object within a duly designated site or
protected by an Interim Protection Order at reasonable times to make inspections or to perform
any duty required to administer this section. The official shall first present proper credentials
and request entry. If the property is unoccupied, the official shall mail notice to the owner of
record by certified mail 7 days prior to inspection. If entry is refused, official shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including the right to secure a
proper inspection warrant.
(3) When an area, place, building, structure, or other object within a duly designated
site or protected by an Interim Protection Order is in violation of this section, in addition to
any criminal citation, the property owner of record shall be issued a “Stop Work Order” in
writing to include the following information:
(a) A description of the property sufficient for identification;
violations(s);
(b) Description of the violation(s) and the action required to remedy the
(c) Provision of reasonable time to perform any remedy to be completed;
(d) Notice of any action that may be taken by the City if required action has not
been made within a reasonable time period; and
(e) Notice of any right of appeal.
(4) Whenever a violation of this section occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. The complaints shall state fully the causes and basis
thereof and shall be filed with the Heritage Preservation Commission or designated staff. The
Commission shall record properly the complaint, and immediately direct the official to
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this section.
(5) Any person aggrieved by a violation notice and order to take action as required
by the City shall have the right to appeal. The City Council may uphold the violation, void all
violations, or change any described violation by adding violations, removing violations or
changing the order to take required action.
(6) Any property owner or owner’s agent that has been served with a violation notice
and an order to take required action shall have the right to appeal the order to the City Council
within 30 calendar days after receiving the compliance order. All appeals shall be made to the
Heritage Preservation Commission in writing with any information to substantiate the appeal.
The appeal shall be considered by the City Council under § 30.02.
(H) Repository for documents. The HPC shall retain at least 1 copy of all Commission
minutes, forms, studies, reports, recommendations, and correspondence required under
divisions (D), (E) and (F) above. All minutes and records will be available for public
inspection during normal business hours.
Originals shall be kept in the City’s official records.
(Ord. 533, passed 5-16-2005; Am. Ord. 2008-05, 3rd Series, passed 3-3-2008) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 30.11 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
(A) Establishment of Department. There is established in the City of Hastings a Public
Works Department.
(B) Departments included. The following departments shall be included in the Public
Works Department: Engineering, Utilities, and Streets.
(C) Establishment of Public Works Director position and duties. There is created the
position of Public Works Director who shall be responsible for the Public Works Department.
The Public Works Director shall report directly to the City Administrator. The Public Works
Director shall be responsible for supervising the Engineering Department, Street Department,
and Utility Department.
(D) Appointment and removal. The Public Works Director may be appointed or removed
by the City Administrator only after receiving Council approval. The City Administrator shall
make recommendations for the suspension and termination of the Public Works Director and
may suspend any Public Works Director until the next Council meeting when the Council shall
affirm, modify, or rescind the suspension. (Prior Code, § 2.22)
§ 30.12 ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT.
An Engineering Department is hereby established and shall be composed of the City
Engineer and such (under his or her direct supervision) employees as he or she may be given
supervision of.
(Prior Code, § 2.54)
§ 30.13 ABSENTEE BALLOT BOARD.
Pursuant to the provisions of M. S. § 203B.13, as it may be amended from time to time,
the City Council of the City of Hastings hereby establishes an Absentee Ballot Board in the
City of Hastings. The Absentee Ballot Board will encompass the entire City of Hastings for
the purpose of receiving all absentee ballots for any primary or general election or special
referendum held within the municipality. The Absentee Ballot Board shall be under the direct
charge and supervision of the City Clerk; and the place for receiving, tabulating, and counting
of absentee ballots shall be at the office of the City Clerk in the City Hall. (Prior Code,
§ 2.57)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
31. CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
32. CITY POLICIES
33. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS
34. FEES
Section
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
Section
City Council and Mayor
31.01 Council reorganization
31.02 Council meetings
31.03 Council procedure
31.04 Salaries of Mayor and Councilmembers
City Officials
31.15 City Attorney
31.16 City Administrator
Code of Ethics
31.30 Definition
31.31 Declaration of policy
31.32 Responsibilities of public office
31.33 Dedicated service
31.34 Fair and equal treatment
31.35 Conflict of interest
31.36 Public disclosure
CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR
§ 31.01 COUNCIL REORGANIZATION.
The Council shall at its first regular meeting in January in the order herein stated and prior
to commencing its regular order of business, reorganize by:
(A) Having all new officers and officials take and subscribe their oath of office;
(B) Seat all new members of the Council;
(C) Select an Acting Mayor Pro Tem;
(D) Select a Secretary of the Council; and
(E) Perform the other organizational acts or functions as may be permitted or required.
(Prior Code, § 2.50)
§ 31.02 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of each
month at 7:00 p.m. in the City Hall unless a different time is scheduled by the Council.
Provided that if any regular meeting shall fall on a holiday or if it appears that a quorum of the
Council will not be able to be present for a scheduled meeting, the meeting shall be held on an
evening as close as possible to the regular scheduled meeting date.
(Prior Code, § 2.51)
§ 31.03 COUNCIL PROCEDURE.
(A) Meetings. For any item to be considered at a regular Council Meeting, it must be
submitted to the City Clerk at least 5 days before the regular Council Meeting. No item shall
be considered at a Council Meeting unless it has been submitted as required herein or unless all
Councilmembers present agree to consider it immediately. The City Administrator shall, at
least 3 days prior to each regular meeting of the Council, prepare the following items: an
agenda for the forthcoming meeting and a copy of all minutes to be considered. The City
Administrator shall include the additional items as may be required by the Mayor and Council
from time to time. The City Administrator shall forthwith cause to be delivered or mailed to
the Mayor and each Councilmember, copies of all the documents. Robert’s Rules of Order
(revised) shall govern all Council meetings as to procedural matters not set forth below unless
varied by the Mayor, without objection by the majority of the Council:
(1) Call to order;
(2) Pledge of Allegiance
(3) Roll call;
(4) Determination of quorum;
(5) Reading of minutes (actual reading shall be waived if each member of the Council
was furnished with a copy thereof as hereinbefore set forth);
(6) Comments and suggestions from citizens present, not on the agenda;
(7) Opening of bids, and hearing, if applicable;
(8) Reports from City Administrator, Planning Director, Public Works Director, and
other City staff members;
(9) Unfinished business;
(10) New business;
(11) Reports from City committees, officers, and the like;
(12) Communications and miscellaneous business;
(13) Payment of claims; and
(14) Adjournment.
(B) Committees.
(1) The Mayor shall, at a regular Council meeting in January of each year, present to
the Council in writing a list of proposed committee members, for the following committees,
which committees shall have the responsibility indicated.
(a) 1. Committee name: Finance;
2. Reported to by: Finance Director; and
3. Committee responsibility: Operations and control of the Finance
Department; provides guidance for communication with the City Council
on Finance Department activities, including budget, purchasing,
accounting, audit, financial statement, and other aspects of the City’s
financial operations.
(b) 1. Committee name: Administration;
2. Reported to by: City Clerk/City Administrator; and
3. Committee responsibility: Administrative functions related to general
City administration.
(c) 1. Committee name: Parks and Recreation/Joint Powers;
2. Reported to by: Parks and Recreation Director; and
3. Committee responsibility: Operations and control of the Parks and
Recreation Department; provides guidance for communication with the
Natural Resources and Recreation Commission, Joint Powers Board, and
other parks and recreation activities and programs.
(d) 1. Committee name: Operations;
2. Reported to by: Public Works Director; and
3. Committee responsibility: Operation and control of the Public Works
Department, building permits and street openings; maintenance and
repair of City structures and facilities; preparation of assessments.
(e) 1. Committee name: Planning;
2. Reported to by: Planning Director; and
3. Committee responsibility: Provide guidance for and communications
with the Planning Commission.
(f) 1. Committee name: Public Safety;
2. Reported to by: Fire Chief and Police Chief; and
3. Committee responsibility: Operation and control of the Public Safety
Services.
(g) 1. Committee name: Utility;
2. Reported to by: Public Works Director/City Administrator; and
3. Committee responsibility: Policies, operations, and budgeting relating
to the hydroelectric plant; oversees operation of the City’s franchises;
address solid waste and recycling and telecommunication issues that may
impact the City.
(h) 1. Committee name: Historic Preservation, property maintenance, building
and fire codes;
2. Reported to by: Housing and Redevelopment Authority Director; and
3. Committee responsibility: Provides guidance for and communications
with the Heritage Preservation Commission; considers issues and makes
recommendation to council related to historic preservation.
(i) 1. Committee name: Tourism Committee.
2. Reported to by: City Administrator.
3. Committee responsibility: Work with Chamber of Commerce and other
appropriate groups on tourism matters.
(j) 1. Committee name: Economic Development Committee.
2. Reported to by: Planning Director/City Administrator.
3. Committee responsibility: Provides guidance for and communication
with Economic Development Commission.
(2) The Council shall at the next regular meeting thereof, consider the proposed
committee members and shall have the authority to ratify the committee appointments, by a
majority vote of those present and constituting a quorum. Should the Council not so ratify the
appointments at this meeting, the Mayor shall further study and reconstitute the committees and
present the reconstituted list of proposed committee members at the next regular Council
meeting at which meeting the Council may ratify the reconstituted committee appointments by
majority vote of those present and constituting a quorum. Should the Council not so ratify the
reconstituted committee appointments at this meeting, the Council may, at its next regular
Council meeting, by majority vote of those present and constituting a quorum, make the
committee appointments as it deems appropriate.
(3) Each appointee shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the
members of the Council. Vacancies in committees shall be filled by the Mayor.
(4) The Mayor shall designate the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of each
committee.
(5) Each committee shall consist of 3 Councilmembers.
(6) The committees are encouraged, at their own discretion, to consult with citizens
regarding the activities of the committee, and to obtain expert advice.
(C) Ordinances, resolutions, and the like. All ordinances, resolutions, communications
and other matters submitted to the Council shall be read by title. A majority of the Council
may direct that the same be referred to an appropriate committee. A member of the Council
may require the reading in full of the ordinance, resolution, or communication referred to.
Financial claims against the City may upon receipt thereof be referred by the City
Administrator to the appropriate committee. No ordinance or resolution shall be considered by
the Council unless presented by 1 of the members. Every ordinance shall be in writing.
(D) Council deliberation. The deliberations of the Council shall be conducted in the
following manner.
(1) No member shall address the Council until he or she has been recognized by the
presiding officer. He or she shall thereupon address himself or herself to the
Mayor and confine his or her remarks to the question under discussion and avoid
all personalities.
(2) When 2 or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer
shall name the member who is to speak first.
(3) No person other than a member shall address the Council except by consent of a
majority of the members present.
(4) No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has been seconded,
unless the rules permit 1 member to initiate action. No motion shall be withdrawn without the
consent of the person making the same and the person seconding it.
(5) When a question is under discussion no action shall be in order, except to
adjourn, to lay on the table, to refer previous questions, to postpone to a certain day, to refer
to a committee, to amend, or to postpone indefinitely. These motions shall have precedence in
the order listed.
(6) Any member desirous of terminating the debate may move the previous question,
in which event the Mayor shall announce the question as, “Shall the main question now be
put?” If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall be
taken without further debate, its effect being to put an end to all debate and bring the Council
to a direct vote, first upon any pending amendments, and then upon the main question.
(7) A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, and a motion to adjourn, to lay on
the table, and a call for the previous question shall be decided without debate.
(E) Reconsideration of vote. It shall be in order for any member voting in the majority to
move for a reconsideration of the vote of any question at that meeting or at the succeeding
regular meeting. A member may not change his or her vote on any question after the result
has been announced. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed.
(F) Temporary suspension of rules. These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily
suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 2/3 of
members present.
(Prior Code, § 2.52)
§ 31.04 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCILMEMBERS.
(A) The salaries of the Mayor and City Councilmembers shall be set from
time to time by the City Council.
(B) The compensation paid to the Mayor for servie to the City as Mayor shall
be $9,400 per year, to be paid in 12 equal monthly installments during the time the
person serving as Mayor is in office.
(C) The compensation paid to Councilmembers for service as Councilmembers
shall be $7,200 per year, to be paid in 12 equal monthly installments during the time the
person serving as councilmember is in office.
(D) Any Mayor or councilmember who serves less than a full month shall
receive a pro-rated portion of the monthly installments.
(E) The salaries in effect on the date this ordinance was adopted shall remain in
place until after the regular council meeting held on January 5, 2015, at which time the
new salaries shall become effective.
(Ord. No. 2011-27, passed on 12-5-11)(Ord. No. 2014-17 3rd Series, passed on 10-20-
14)
CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 CITY ATTORNEY.
The Council shall appoint a City Attorney, together with the assistants as may be
necessary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Attorney shall perform the
duties as are required of him or her by law or referred to him or her by the Council or its
agent. It shall be the official duty of the City Attorney to act as Revisor of Ordinances. (Prior
Code, § 2.53)
§ 31.16 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) Office created. The Office of City Administrator is hereby created. The City
Administrator shall be appointed by the Council on the basis of his or her training, experience,
and administrative qualifications.
(B) Duties. The duties of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
(1) Exercise control and supervision over all departments of the City and coordinate
the activities of consultants and advisory bodies.
(2) Exercise control over all departments of the City; appoint and remove all
employees of the City, except department heads, upon the basis of merit and/or fitness alone.
Department heads may be appointed or removed by the City Administrator only after receiving
Council approval. The City Administrator shall make recommendations for the suspension and
termination of department heads, and may suspend any department heads, until the next
Council meeting when the Council shall affirm, modify, or rescind the suspension. The City
Administrator shall act as the personnel officer and shall be responsible for the implementation
of the City’s personnel policy;
(3) Secure the enforcement of all laws, provisions of the City code and resolutions of
the City and of the state as they apply to the City, and make recommendations for changes or
additions to ordinances when necessary;
(4) Attend all special and regular meetings of the Council and actively participate in
the meetings in all respects, except voting;
(5) Prepare and submit to the Council the proposed annual budget, and enforce and
administer all provisions of the adopted budget;
(6) Submit reports to the Council on City finances, budget status, and administrative
activities on a regular basis, as well as submit to the Council and make available to the public a
complete report on a financial and administrative activities of the City at the end of each fiscal
year;
(7) Supervise the preparation and coordination of and submit to the Council the
annual and long-range work programs of the department of the City;
(8) Keep the Council advised as to the future needs of the City, and make
recommendations on long-range promotion of community welfare;
(9) Familiarize himself or herself with alternate and supplemental sources of revenue,
including but not limited to federal and state aids, loans, grants, and other sources of revenue,
and prepare and submit proposals to the Council and other appropriate agencies of the City
recommendations for actions necessary to fully take advantage of the sources;
(10) Personally maintain amicable relations with City employees and the public and
promote the relations between the Council and its employees and constituents and adjoining
and overlapping governmental entities;
(11) Recommend to the Council any other measures required for the efficient
administration of City affairs and promotion of community welfare; and
(12) Any other and further duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to him or her
by the Council, including some of those delegated to the City Clerk under City code
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 2.80)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 31.30 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC OFFICIALS. The following persons:
(1) All persons elected to serve in any public office, or appointed to serve in any
public office for the unexpired term of any person vacating the office;
(2) All appointed Commissioners serving on City commissions;
(3) City Administrator;
(4) City Attorney and Assistant City Attorneys;
(5) All City department heads; and
(6) City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 31.31 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be
independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy
be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, there is hereby established by this subchapter, a code of ethics. The
purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct. The provisions and purpose of
this code are hereby declared to be in the best interest of the City of Hastings, Minnesota.
(Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 31.32 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICE.
Public officials are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public.
They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Minnesota,
and to impartially carry out the laws of the nation, state, and the City of Hastings and thus
foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest
standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. Their
conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach.
(Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 31.33 DEDICATED SERVICE.
(A) All public officials of the City of Hastings should be loyal to the political objectives
expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those objectives.
(B) Public officials should not exceed their authority or break the law, or ask others to do
so. They should work in full cooperation with other public officials unless prohibited from
doing so by law.
(Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 31.34 FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT.
(A) No public official shall request or permit the use of City-owned vehicles, equipment,
materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when the services are
available to the public generally or provided by municipal policy for the use of the public
official in the conduct of official business.
(B) No public official shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any
citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. (Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 31.35 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
(A) No public official shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial
or other personal interest direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of
their duties in the public interest or which impairs their independence of judgment or action in
the performance of their official duties. This includes an interest arising from blood or
marriage relationships, close business, or political association.
(B) The following acts, although not intended to be all inclusive, shall be deemed to be a
conflict of interest:
(1) Incompatible employment as provided by Minnesota Statutes;
(2) Use of confidential information, obtained as a result of public position, for
personal gain;
(3) Soliciting of personal gifts and favors by a public official;
(4) Use of official position for personal gain;
(5) Representation by a public official of private interests before City governmental
agencies and participation in the profits from the representation; and
(6) Contracting with the City by a business in which a public official has a substantial
or controlling interest. (Prior Code, § 2.81)
§ 31.36 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.
(A) Each public official of the City of Hastings shall file for public record in the office of
the City Clerk, a sworn statement in a form approved by the City Council and which must
contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The names of all businesses, corporations, companies, firms, partnerships, or
other business enterprises, doing business with or in the City of Hastings, in which the public
official is connected thereto as an employee, owner, director, officer, adviser, or consultant, or
in which the public official has a continuing financial interest, through ownership of stock or as
a beneficiary of any pension or retirement plan;
(2) A description of all parcels of real property, other than property occupied by the
public official as a personal residence, in which the public official has any interest, including
the right to occupy any such property; and
(3) The interest of a spouse, or minor child or other member of the immediate
household of any public official shall be considered an interest of the public official for
purposes of filing the statement required.
(B) Each person who becomes a public official shall, within 30 days after assuming the
office or position, file a public disclosure required by this section.
(1) Following an initial filing, the information on that filing shall remain in effect and
all public officials will continue to attest to its truth. Within 30 days of any change to the
information on the initial filing and following any reappointment or reelection, all public
officials shall file a new sworn statement with the City Clerk. City staff members covered
under this provision shall fill out an initial filing and
shall thereafter complete any amended filings within 30 days of any change to the information
on the initial filing or at least every 4 years, in the years in which the Mayor and at large
Councilmember seats are up for election, whichever comes first. (Am. Ord. 511, passed 4-5-
2004)
(2) This subchapter shall not be construed to require the filing of any information
relating to any person’s connection with any professional society or any charitable, religious,
social, fraternal, recreational, civil or political organization or any similar organization not
conducted as a business enterprise.
(3) The City Administrator shall inform each person who is required to file a
statement, the time and place for filing, and shall furnish each such person with a copy of this
subchapter and the required statement form. The City Administrator shall inform the City
Council when any person, who is required to file a statement, fails to file the statement in a
timely manner. (Prior Code, § 2.81)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
31. CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
32. CITY POLICIES
33. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS
34. FEES
Section
CHAPTER 32: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
32.01 Facsimile signatures
32.02 Disbursement of funds and allowance of accounts
32.03 Uniform purchasing procedures
32.04 Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, unclaimed property, and excess property
32.05 Commercial building rehabilitation program
32.06 Emergency management
Franchises
32.20 Definition
32.21 Franchise ordinances
32.22 Power of regulation reserved
32.23 Conditions in every franchise
32.24 Further provisions of franchises
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
The signers are hereby authorized to request a depository of City funds to honor an order
for payment when the instrument bears a facsimile of his or her signature, and to charge the
same to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it
were his or her manually written signature. The authority is granted only for the purpose of
permitting the officers an economy of time and effort. (Prior Code, § 2.60)
§ 32.02 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS AND ALLOWANCE OF ACCOUNTS.
(A) All disbursements shall be made by either; a check signed by the Mayor, or in the
Mayor’s absence the Acting Mayor, and the City Administrator or City Clerk duly authorized
by the Council; or by an electronic funds transfer authorized by the officials listed above,
provided that all electronic transfers are made using special codes (changed periodically to
provide maximum security). Every such order shall specify the purpose for which the
disbursement is made, and indicate that it is to be paid out of the proper fund, and specifically
contain the following language “for deposit to the City of Hastings only. ” A written confirmation
of every electronic funds transfer shall be made no later than 1 business day after the transaction.
No check shall be issued or electronic funds transfer made until there is money to the credit of
the fund out of which it is to be paid sufficient to pay the same together with all then outstanding
encumbrances upon the fund.
(B) No claim against the City shall be allowed, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter unless accompanied by an itemized account and voucher, payroll or time sheet signed
by a responsible officer who has personal knowledge of the facts in the case and certified to the
correctness and reasonableness of the claim and that it is a proper claim against the City;
provided, however, that the Council may provide for a regular payment without specific
individual authorization or filing of an itemized account and voucher, payroll or time sheet of
the salaries and wages of regular employees or laborers and any other fixed charges which
have been previously duly and regularly authorized. Filing of separate account verification
may be dispensed with by the Council if appropriately similar wording is printed near the
endorsement space on the order for payment form. (Prior Code, § 2.61)
§ 32.03 UNIFORM PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
It is unlawful for any agent or employee of the City to order the purchase of any supplies
or materials or contract for any services except in accordance with forms and procedures duly
adopted therefore and all purchase orders shall be approved by the department for which the
purchase is being made.
(Prior Code, § 2.62)
§ 32.04 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY, AND
EXCESS PROPERTY.
(A) Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Chapter
169, as it may be amended from time to time, that has remained for a period of more than 48
hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a period
of more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the person in control of the
property, or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial possible further use
consistent with its function, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall
also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the City. A classic car or
pioneer car, shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle. Vehicles on the premises of
junkyards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance with the
City code, shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this section.
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential
to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive
train, and wheels.
(2) Custody. The City may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor
vehicle.
(3) Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than 7 model years
of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in
Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at
public auction, and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation, or title provision of this
division (A).
(4) Notice.
(a) When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of
division (A)(3) above, the City shall give notice of the taking within 10 days. The notice shall
set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model, and serial number of the
abandoned motor vehicle, if the information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where
the vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim
the vehicle under division (A)(5) below, and shall state that failure of the owner or lien holder
to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents be deemed a waiver by them of all
rights, title, and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public
auction pursuant to division (A)(6) below.
(b) The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the
abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders or record. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered
owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper.
Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.
(5) Right to reclaim.
(a) The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a
right to reclaim the vehicle from the City upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice
required by this division (A)(4).
(b) Nothing in this division (A) shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage
keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of the lien holder to foreclose. For the
purposes of this division (A)(5), GARAGE KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or
establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an
establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(6) Public sale.
(a) An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not
reclaimed under division (A)(5) above shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or
sale, following 1 published notice published at least 7 days prior to the auction or sale. The
purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the
purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and
claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a
motor vehicle safety check.
(b) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the City shall
reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all
administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this division (A). Any
remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien
holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the 0General Fund of the City.
(7) Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned
motor vehicle, the City may dispose of it in accordance with this division (A).
(8) Contracts and disposal.
(a) The City may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage,
incineration, volume reduction, transportation, or other services necessary to prepare
abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.
(b) When the City enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to determine
whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so
conform may be approved by the Agency. Where the City enters into a contract with a person
duly authorized by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the
contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid waste disposal for the
purpose of obtaining reimbursement.
(c) If the City utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the
abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with
its other costs as herein provided.
(B) Disposal of unclaimed property.
(1) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED PROPERTY. Tangible or intangible property that has lawfully
come into the possession of the City in the course of municipal operations, remains unclaimed
by the owner, and has been in the possession of the City for at least 60 days and has been
declared such by a resolution of the Council.
(2) Preliminary notice. If the City Administrator knows the identity and whereabouts
of the owner, he or she shall serve written notice upon him or her at least 30 days prior to a
declaration of abandonment by the Council. If the City acquired possession from a prior
holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are known by the City Administrator notice
shall also be served upon him or her. The notice shall describe the property and state that
unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession established, the matter
of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the Council after the
expiration of 30 days from the date of the notice.
(3) Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be
abandoned property, the City Administrator shall publish a notice thereof describing the same,
together with the names (if known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders
thereof, and including a brief description of the property. The text of the notice shall also state
the time, place, and manner of sale of all the property, except cash and negotiables. The
notice shall be published once at least 3 weeks prior to sale. Sale shall be made to the highest
bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the Council in its
resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice.
(4) Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from the sale shall be paid into the
General Fund of the City and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former owner, if he or she
makes claim within 8 months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and
upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash and
negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefore, less a pro rata share
of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale expense, but without interest. The
payment shall also be made from the General Fund.
(C) Disposal of excess property.
(1) Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The City Administrator
may, from time to time, recommend to the Council that certain personal property (chattels)
owned by the City is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action
of the Council, the property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the City
Administrator authorized to dispose of the property in the manner stated herein.
(2) Surplus property worth a total estimated value of less than $100. The City
Administrator may sell surplus property with a total value of less than $100 through negotiated
sale.
(3) Surplus property with a total estimated value between $100 and $500. The City
Administrator shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total
estimated value of from $100 to $500. Notice of the public sale shall be given stating time and
place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least 10 days prior to the date
of sale either by publication once in the official newspaper, or by posting in a conspicuous
place in the City Hall at the City Administrator’s option. The sale shall be by auction.
(4) Surplus property with a total estimated value over $500. The City Administrator
shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property worth a total estimated value
over $500. Notice of the public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally
describing property to be sold at least 10 days prior to the date of sale by publication once in
the official newspaper. The sale shall be to publication once in the official newspaper. The
sale shall be to the person submitting the highest sealed bid.
(5) Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of surplus
property under this section shall be placed in the General Fund, unless the property sold is
dedicated park property, in which event the funds received shall be placed in the Park Fund.
D) Persons who may not purchase.
(1) No full time, part time, paid on-call firefighter or seasonal employee of the city, including
any person who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a member of the Council, or an
adviser serving the city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of property under this section. (Ord.
2012-02, 3rd Series, passed 2-21-12)
(2) It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this section if
the purchase is prohibited by the terms of this section. (Prior Code, § 2.63)
§ 32.05 COMMERCIAL BUILDING REHABILITATION PROGRAM.
(A) General provisions.
(1) Authority. Pursuant to M.S. § 469.184 (1995), the City has been authorized to
establish a program to provide rehabilitation loans to owners of small and medium sized
commercial buildings. In establishing a commercial building rehabilitation program, the City
Council is acting in all respects for the benefit of the citizens of the City to serve a public
purpose in improving and otherwise promoting their health, welfare and prosperity.
(2) Findings. The City Council finds that many commercial buildings in the City are
physically deteriorating, underused, economically inefficient, or functionally obsolete and in
need of rehabilitation to meet applicable building codes; that there is a need for a
comprehensive program for the rehabilitation of the commercial buildings to prevent economic
and physical blight and deterioration, to increase the tax base of the City, and to assist in the
implementation of the comprehensive plan for the City; that some owners of small- and
medium-sized commercial buildings are unable to afford rehabilitation loans on terms available
in the private mortgage market or to obtain rehabilitation loans on any terms because the
private mortgage market is severely restricted; and that the health, safety and general welfare
and the preservation of the quality of life of the residents of the City is dependent upon the
preservation and rehabilitation of the commercial buildings.
(3) Definitions. The following terms when used in this subchapter shall have the
following respective meanings:
ACT. M.S. § 469.184 (1995), as now in effect and as from time to time
amended.
AGENCY. The Housing and Redevelopment Authority in and for the City.
PROGRAM. The commercial rehabilitation loan program authorized by the act
and set forth in division (A)(2).
REGULATIONS. Regulations drafted or approved by the agency for the
program.
SMALL- OR MEDIUM-SIZED COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A structure
having a total floor area not exceeding 40,000 square feet, the primary ground floor function
of which is commercial in nature, such as retail, service, or office. Noncommercial usage on
other floors of such a structure shall not affect the structure qualifying as a small- or mediumsized
commercial building.
(4) Administration. The agency is hereby authorized to administer the program in
accordance with the act and the regulations and resolutions adopted by the City for the issuance
of bonds, loans, or other obligations for the program.
(B) Program requirements.
(1) Regulations and forms. The agency shall adopt regulations setting forth uniform
procedures by which applications for loans shall be submitted and processed, and for
determining eligibility of borrowers, and other procedures necessary or desirable in carrying
out the program. The agency may, in the agency’s discretion and from time to time, prescribe
and amend forms to be used by an applicant in applying for financing under the program.
(2) Authorization of loans. Under the program, no loan shall be made or purchased
until the agency or its designee has reviewed the application relating to the loan
and has approved such loan. In approving applications for loans under the
program, the agency or its designee, in addition to other requirements and
regulations, shall consider the following factors:
(a) The availability and affordability of private mortgage credit;
(b) The availability and affordability of other government programs;
(c) Whether the building is required, pursuant to any court order, statute or
ordinance, to be repaired, improved or rehabilitated;
(d) Whether the proposed improvements will result in conformance with the
building and zoning codes and any design guidelines approved by the agency
for commercial areas.
(3) General limitations. The following limitations shall apply to all loans under the
program:
(a) No loan shall be made for a period exceeding 20 years.
(b) No loan shall exceed 80% of the estimated market value of the property to be
rehabilitated upon completion of the rehabilitation, less the principal balance
of any prior mortgage or contract for deed existing on the property at the
time the loan is made, or $200,000, whichever is less.
(c) All monies loaned under this program shall be used only on property located
within a redevelopment area designated by the City Council.
(4) Interest reduction program. The agency may develop and administer an interest
reduction program, pursuant to M.S. § 469.012, Subdivision 7-9, as now in effect and from
time to time amended, to assist in the rehabilitation or preservation of small-or medium-sized
commercial buildings.
(5) Expiration date. The agency’s ability to authorize payment of interest reduction
assistance pursuant to this subchapter shall expire on December 31, 2011. Interest reduction
assistance payments authorized prior to December 31, 2011 may be paid after December 31,
2011.
(Ord. 560, passed 12-4-2006)
§ 32.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
(A) Policy and purpose.
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size
and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural
causes, or from sabotage, hostile action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic
measure; and in order to ensure that preparations of the City of Hastings will be adequate to
deal with such disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the
public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of the
City of Hastings, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
(1) To establish a City of Hastings emergency management organization responsible
for the City of Hastings planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time
of disasters;
(2) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and
disasters;
(3) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the City of Hastings and other
political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of
emergency preparedness functions; and
(4) To comply with provisions of M.S. Ch. 12, § 12.25, which requires that each
political subdivision of Minnesota shall establish a local organization for emergency
management.
(B) Definitions
"EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT” means the preparation for and the carrying out
of
all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused
by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action or from
industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency
transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out of the foregoing functions.
Emergency Management includes those activities sometimes referred to as “Civil Defense”
functions.
“DISASTER” means a situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment
to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result
in catastrophic loss to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within
the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
“EMERGENCY” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
“EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES” means the total personnel resources
engaged in county-level/City-level emergency management functions in accordance with the
provisions of this resolution or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from the
City departments, authorized volunteers and private organizations and agencies.
“EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION” means the staff element
responsible for coordinating county-level/City-level planning and preparation for disaster
response. This organization provides City of Hastings liaison and coordination with federal,
state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures
implementation of federal and state program requirements.
(C) Establishment of an emergency management organization.
(1) There is hereby created, within the City government, an emergency management
organization that shall be under the supervision and control of the City emergency management
team, hereinafter called the Emergency Management Team. The Emergency Management
Team shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the City Council.
(2) The Emergency Management Team shall prepare a comprehensive emergencyplan
for the emergency preparedness of the City of Hastings including municipal and unincorporated
areas and shall present such plan to the Council and Mayor for its approval. When the Council
and Mayor have approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all City agencies and all
emergency preparedness forces of the City of Hastings to perform the
duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like
manner from time to time. The Emergency Management Team shall coordinate the emergency
management activities of the City of Hastings to the end that they shall be consistent and fully
integrated with the emergency plan of the State/Federal Government and the State and
correlated with emergency plans of other political subdivisions within the State.
(3) The Emergency Management Team shall utilize the personnel, services,
equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the county to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies
shall be, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and
facilities to the City Emergency Management Team and to the Governor upon request. The
head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Emergency Management Team
shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such emergency activities as will
involve the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.
(4) The Emergency Management Team shall, in cooperation with existing City of
Hastings departments and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of
such emergency management personnel that may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out
the emergency plans of the City of Hastings and state. To the extent that such emergency
personnel are recruited to augment a regular City of Hastings department or agency for
emergencies, they shall be assigned to such departments or agencies and shall be under the
administration and control of the department or agency.
(5) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Emergency Management
Team shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within
the county and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure
emergency operational capability in the several services (M.S. Ch. 12, § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time).
(6) The Emergency Management Team shall carry out all orders, rules and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
(7) The Emergency Management Team shall act as principal aide and advisor to the
City official responsible for direction and control of all City of Hastings emergency operations
during an emergency. The coordinator’s main responsibility is to assure coordination among
the operating departments, non-governmental groups and with higher and adjacent
governments.
(D) Local emergencies.
(1) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal
successors. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of 3 days except by or with the
consent of the City Council. Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a
local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly by the
City Clerk.
(2) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the
response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may
authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
(3) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless
expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an interjurisdictional
disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement
under which it functions.
(E) Emergency Management a Governmental Function.
All functions thereunder and all other activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect
the right of any person to receive benefits to which he/she would otherwise be entitled under
this resolution, or under the worker’s compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the
right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
(Ord. 2009-1, 3rd Series, passed 1-20-2009)
FRANCHISES
§ 32.20 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FRANCHISE. Any special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon, or under any
of the streets or public places of the City, whether the privilege has heretofore been granted by
it or by the State of Minnesota, or shall hereafter be granted by the City or by the State of
Minnesota. (Prior Code, § 2.65)
32.21 FRANCHISE ORDINANCES.
The Council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject
to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons desiring
to make any burdensome use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with the public’s right
in such places, or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon, under any street or public
place any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating
railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for
furnishing to the City or its inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities, water,
light, heat, power, gas, or any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to
obtain a franchise before proceeding to make the use of the streets or public places or before
proceeding to place the fixtures in the places.
(Prior Code, § 2.65)
§ 32.22 POWER OF REGULATION RESERVED.
The City shall have the right and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person,
of any franchise however acquired, and whether the franchise has been heretofore granted by it
or by the State of Minnesota. (Prior Code, § 2.65)
§ 32.23 CONDITIONS IN EVERY FRANCHISE.
All conditions specified in this section shall be a part of every franchise even though they
may not be expressly contained in the franchise:
(A) That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the terms of this
section and will comply with all pertinent provisions of any City charter and City code, as the
same may from time to time be amended;
(B) That the grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any power to fix fares,
rates, and charges; but that the fares, rates, and charges shall at all times be just, fair and
reasonable for the services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time
changed, unless regulated by an agency of the State of Minnesota, in the manner following:
(1) A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient
management, normally yield above all operating expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon
all money invested;
(2) If possible maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by direct negotiation
with the Council; and
(3) If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the Council shall, not less than 30
days before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its
representative, the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the 2 of
them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the 3 of them shall constitute a
board of arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon as possible and the rates and
charges it shall agree upon by majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to review
by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of 1 of the parties.
(C) That the Council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of any public
service system from time to time and to make the rules and regulations as may be required to
secure adequate and proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public;
(D) That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the
value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to receive upon condemnation
proceedings brought by the City to acquire the public utility exercising the franchise, any
return on account of the franchise or its value;
(E) That no sale or lease of the franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee
shall have filed with the City an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of the sale or
lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required
of the grantee thereunder;
(F) That every grant in the franchise contained of permission for the erection of poles,
masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying
of tracks in, or of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the
streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be
subject to the conditions that the Council shall have the power to require the alterations therein,
or relocation or rerouting thereof, as the Council may at any time deem necessary for the
safety, health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the power to
require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing
underground of all facilities for whatsoever purpose used;
(G) Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the City the right to acquire the
same in accordance with statute; and
(H) That the franchisee may be obligated by the City to pay the City fees to raise revenue
or defray increased costs accruing as a result of utility operations, or both, including, but not
limited to, a sum of money based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its
operations in the City.
(Prior Code, § 2.65)
§ 32.24 FURTHER PROVISIONS OF FRANCHISES.
The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be included in every
franchise or renewal or extension thereof shall not be construed as impairing the right of the
City to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension thereof such other and further
conditions and restrictions as the Council may deem proper to protect the City’s interests, nor
shall anything contained in this subchapter limit any right or power possessed by the City over
existing franchises. (Prior Code, § 2.65)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
31. CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
32. CITY POLICIES
33. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS
34. FEES
Section
CHAPTER 33: CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS
Section
33.01 General provisions
§ 33.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Criminal History Background Investigations. The Police Department is required to conduct
criminal history background investigations on applicants for licenses and positions with the
City as employees or volunteers. For employment positions, this section applies only to
applicants who are finalists for all regular full or part-time, seasonal, or temporary status
positions. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department in writing to undertake the investigation and to release the information to the City
Council, the City Administrator, and other appropriate City staff to conduct and review the
criminal history investigation. Except in the case of exceptions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as
may be amended from time to time, if the City rejects an application for employment due
partly or solely to the applicant’s prior conviction of a crime, the City will notify the applicant
in writing of the following:
(1) the grounds and reasons for denial;
(2) the applicant complaint and grievance procedures set forth in M.S. § 364.06, as may
be amended from time to time;
(3) the earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
(4) that all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon re-application.
(Ord. 2008-12, 3rd Series, passed 10-6-2008)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
31. CITY COUNCIL AND OFFICIALS
32. CITY POLICIES
33. CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS
34. FEES
CHAPTER 34: FEES
Section
34.01 Fees authorized and defined
34.02 Priority of application
34.03 Fee schedule
34.04 Special or Non-Routine Services by City Departments: fees
§ 34.01 FEES AUTHORIZED AND DEFINED.
The fees for licenses, permits, rentals, leases and municipal services are in the amounts
established in this section. Reference in other portions of this code or in other City ordinances
to terms including, but not limited to, “annual license fee”, “fee established by ordinance”,
“required license fee”, “ license fee”, or “appropriate fee” means the fees specified in this
section.
(Ord. 2009-4, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2009; Am. Ord. 2009-10, 3rd Series, passed 9-8-2009;
Am. Ord 2010-05, 3rd Series, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 34.02 PRIORITY OF APPLICATION.
If fees are specified in other parts of this code or in other City ordinances but not in this
section, then the fees specified shall be effective for all purposes. If there are amounts
specified in this section as well as other chapters or ordinances, then the amounts appearing in
this section supersede the others.
(Ord. 2009-4, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2009; Am. Ord. 2009-10, 3rd Series, passed 9-8-2009;
Am. Ord. 2010-05, 3rd Series, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 34.03 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees for licenses, permits, municipal services, rentals and leases are set forth below.
Investigation fee $100.00 one time 2009
License $100.00 annual (calendar year) 2009
During regular business hours (8 a.m. -
4:30 p.m., Mon-Fri)
no charge 1999
During non-business hours $40.00 two hour minimum 2011
White & Black $0.25 page 2011
Colored $0.50 page 2011
Neutered/Spayed
$12.00 two year license (expires in odd
years)
2009
Not Neutered/Spayed
$20.00 two year license (expires in odd
years)
2009
Neutered/Spayed $30.00 2016
Not Neutered/Spayed $45.00 2016
Replacement Dog Tag $5.00 2017
Commercial Filming Permit $150.00 day 2009
Permit Application Fee $50.00 event 2009
Selling fireworks only $350.00 annual (calendar year) state
Selling fireworks & merchandise $100.00 annual (calendar year) smtaatned ated
mandated
Exempt Gambling Activity $25.00 day 2015
Investigation Fee $100.00 one time 1999
Temporary $25.00 day 2015
City Clerk
Filming
Fireworks
Gambling
Adult Use
City Hall Rental
Copying
Dog License
Lifetime Dog License Option
Late Payment Penalty 10% of bill 2010
Bottle Club $75.00 annual (calendar year) state statute
Club
Less than 200 $300.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
201-500 $500.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
501-1000 $650.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
1001-2000 $800.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
Investigation Fee $500.00 (up to $10,000) one time 1999
Off-sale 3.2% $75.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
On-sale 3.2% $300.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
Off-sale Liquor $200.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
On-sale intoxicating Liquor $4,200.00 annual (July 1-June 30) 2015
Sunday On-sale $200.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
Temporary on-sale intoxicating Liquor $25.00 day 2015
Temporary 3.2% $25.00 day 2015
Wine On-sale $275.00 annual (July 1-June 30) state statute
Brew Pub and Brewery Taproom
On-Sale
$300.00 2015
Cocktail Room On-Sale $4,200.00 2015
Sunday On-Sale Licenses Fees
(includes Brew Pub, Brewery
Taproom, Microdistillery)
$200.00 2015
Off-Sale License Fees (includes Brew
Pub, Brewery Taproom, Microdistillery)
$200.00 2015
Initial License Application $50.00 2015
No Charge if site plan is not
modified
2015
$50.00 if site plan is modified
With Liquor License Amendment $50.00 Additional 2015
Mailing Cost of copying plus postage 2011
Renewal License
Sidewalk Café
Liquor License
Background Investigation $100.00 one time 1999
Establishment $100.00 three year license (calendar
year)
2009
Therapist $100.00 annual (calendar year) 1999
Annual License $225.00 2018
Daily License $30.00 2018
Investigation Fee $500.00 (up to $10,000) 1999
Reporting Fee $1.35 per transaction 2009
License $2,000.00 annual (July 1-June 30) 1999
Table license
$10.00 per table; annually (July 1-June
30)
1999
Investigation Fee
$25.00 each license + $10.00 for
each additional employee
2012
1 Day Permit $30.00 day 2012
30 Day Permit $100.00 30 days 2012
365 Day Permit $225.00 365 days 2012
Rivertown Days (Levee Park) $15.00 2012
Rivertown Days (Jaycee Park) $25.00 2012
All other Special Events $25.00 2012
License $150.00 annual (calendar) 2007
Commercial
$350.00 two year license (expires in odd
years)
1999
Mobile Food Unit
Special Events
Massage
Pawn Broker
Pool/Billiards
Tobacco
Waste Hauler
Temporary Merchant/Peddler
Refunds for Permit Fees 75% of permit fee No refunds for
plan reviews
2008
Basic Permit Fee $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Clearance Letter $5.00
Special investigation fee 2 x the building permit fee 2010
Additional Inspections $50.00 per hour 2010
Inspections outside of normal business
hours when approved by Building Official
$200.00 minimum + $50.00/hr.
after 2 hrs.
2010
Mobile Home Installation (Park only-gas
piping not included)
$100.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
In-ground swimming pools $200.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Decks $100.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Retaining Walls (over 4 feet high) $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
New Business Occupancy Permit $75.00 2014
Window replacement (total replacement of
window)
$65.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial Building Windows
$100.00 base fee or 1.25% of
valuation surcharge $1.00 or
.0005 x value
2015
Replace Patio Door Only $25.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Special Inspections
Windows
Building Safety
Work commencing before permit issuance
Residential (new tear off & repairs) $100.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial
$100.00 base fee or 1.25% x
valuation surcharge $1.00 or
.0005 x value
2015
Residential (reside or repairs) $100.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial
$100.00 base fee or 1.25% x
valuation surcharge $1.00 or
.0005 x value
2015
Basic Fee $75.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Each Fixture $3.00 2010
Residential Basic Plumbing. Permit Fee $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial
$100.00 base fee or 1.25% x
valuation surcharge $1.00 or
.0005 x value
2015
Installation or Replacement of Single Fixture
(water heater, water softener, etc.)
$35.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
New & replacement furnace installation
(including gas piping)
$75.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Gas fireplace or other single gas
appliance
$50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Central Cooling or Ductwork $75.00 +$1.00 surcharge 2015
Mechanical ventilation system (air to air) $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
New gas piping with air test only $35.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
In floor Heat $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Garage Furnace $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial
$100.0 base fee or 1.25% x
valuation surcharge $1.00 or
.0005 x value
2015
Mechanical
Single Family Residential
Single Family Residential:
Re-Roof
Residing
Plumbing
Systems originating from a 1" water
service or smaller
$75.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Systems originating from a water service
larger than 1"
$150.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Sewer Connection Inspection $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Water Connection Inspection $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Simultaneous Sewer & Water Connection
Inspection
$100.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Single Family Residential or Commercial $200.00+ $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial 750 GPD to 2,000 GPD or
Reconstruction of Existing System (With
approval from City Council)
Includes the fee above + $40.00
county fee
2010
Basement Finish/Remodel $150.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Single Family Dwellings $100.00 no surcharge fee 2014
Accessory structures < 120 SF Zoning Permit Required 2008
Accessory structures > 120 SF $50.00 no surcharge fee 2008
Accessory Structure $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Single Family Residential $150.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Commercial $200.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
Irrigation System Installation
Utilities
On-Site Septic Systems
Required Other Permits
Building Demolition
Relocation of structures
$1.00 to $500.00 $25.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
$501 to $1000 $50.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
$1001 to $2000 $75.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
$2001 and up
$100.00 base fee or 1.25% of
valuation surcharge $1.00 or
.0005 x value
2015
Fire Suppression/Hood Installation $75.00 + $1.00 surcharge 2015
City Contractor License $50.00
State Contractor Verification Fee $5.00
Single Unit $50.00 per two years 1999
Duplex $75.00 per two years 1999
Duplex-owner occupied $50.00 per two years 1999
Triplex $95.00 per two years 1999
Fourplex $115.00 per two years 1999
Over 4 units
$75.00 per building + $10.00 per
unit
1999
Plan Review Fee 65% of building permit fee
Zoning Permit $75.00 2009
Administrative Lot Split $75.00 2017
Annexation $500 + $1,000 escrow 2016
Conditional Use Permit $500.00 2008
Environmental Assessment $500.00 + $1000.00 escrow 2009
Garden Permit $100.00 2009
Community Development
Fire Sprinkler & Fire Alarm Systems
Rental Housing Inspections
Home Occupation Permit $300.00 2017
Home Occupation Permit Renewal $50.00 2018
House Move $500.00 2009
Minor Subdivision $500.00 2009
Rezoning Permit $500.00 2008
Roof Sign Approval $150.00 flat fee 2017
$ 1 - $ 500 $30.00 2009
$ 501 - $ 1000 $50.00 2009
$ 1001 - $ 2500 $75.00 2009
$ 2501 + $100.00 2009
Special Use Permit $500.00 2008
Residential $500.00 + escrow 2009
8 units or less $2,000.00 2009
9-40 units $3,250.00 2009
41 + units
$4,500.00 based on building
square footage
2009
Commercial $500.00 + escrow 2009
0-5000 SF $2,000.00 2009
5001 - 10,000 SF $3,000.00 2009
10,001 - 50,000 SF $3,750.00 2009
50,001 + SF $4,500.00 2009
Sign Permit
Site Plan
Site Plan
Final Plat $600.00 2008
Lot Split $500.00 2008
Ordinance $12.00 2008
Preliminary Plat $500.00 + escrow 2008
Under 10 acres $3,500.00 2009
10 + acres $6,500.00 2009
Waiver of Platting $500.00 2008
Vacation of ROW/Easement $500.00 2017
Variance Permit $300.00 2017
Zoning Ordinance $20.00 2018
Keeping of Chickens $100.00 annually 2010
Temporary Keeping of Goats $50.00 per permit 2018
Erosion Control $250.00 per schedule unit 2008
On lots where approved development
grading plan exists
$185.00 per schedule unit 2008
In cases where builder wishes to modify
lot grading after a certificate of survey has
already been reviewed and approved with
the original permit
$90.00 per schedule unit 2008
On lots where an approved development
grading plan does not exist
$390.00 per schedule unit 2008
Residential Lot Foundation Top of Block
Verification.
$100.00 per visit 2007
Residential Lot Final Grading Verification $185.00 per visit 2007
Subdivision
Engineering Related Fees on Building Permits
Residential Lot Review of Cert. of Survey
Residential Lot Final Grading
Re-inspection
$180.00 per site 2008
Additional Re-inspections for Final
Grading
$130.00 per hour 2008
Utility Permit (Blvd. - Only Excavation
$130.00 Per permit up to 1,000 L.F.
$130 per additional 1,000 L.F.
or fraction thereof.
2018
General Excavation Permit (Physical
disturbance/removal of any portion of an
improved roadway, including curbing, by
way of an open cut or trench
$190.00 Per permit up to 1,000LF.
$130 per additional 1,000 L.F.
or fraction thereof.
2018
Obstruction Permit $50.00 2006
Street Opening Permit $50.00 2006
Budget Book (copy) $5.00 each 2008
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(copy)
$5.00 each 2008
Conduit Debt Fee 10% of amount billed or $25,
whichever is greater
2008
Late Payments
$5000.00 deposit
plus administrative fee at closing
equal to 1/2 percent of the
original
principal amount of the debt
2016
Lodging Tax 5% of monthly lodging charges 2008
NSF Check Fee $30.00 2008
Right of Way Permit Fee Schedule
Finance
Special Assessment Search $25.00 2008
Fire/Ambulance $0.25 per page 2008
Code BLS $1,373.00 2016
Code BLS-NR $1,523.00 2016
Code ALS-1 $1,631.00 2016
Code ALS-1-NR $1,781.00 2016
Code ALS-2 $1,803.00 2016
Code ALS-2-NR $1,953.00 2016
Code ALS-Treat/No transport $522.00 2016
Code ALS-Treat/No transport-NR $702.00 2016
Code Mileage $22.00 2015
Non-Resident Fee $150.00 2015
Service Fee $26.00 per hour 2012
Burn Permit $20.00
Aerial Ladder $500.00 2008
Standby Fees-Aerial Ladder $500.00 per hour 2008
Grass Rig $200.00 2008
Pumper Truck $300.00 2008
Rescue Truck $200.00 2008
Tank Truck $200.00 2008
Display--Indoor $50.00 2008
Display--Outdoor $0.00 2008
Ambulance Stand-By (includes two staff
members)
$170.00 per hour 2017
Fire
Accident Report
Ambulance Rates
Equipment (includes operator fee)
Fireworks
Hazardous Chemicals $20.00 2008
Liquefied Petroleum Temporary
Storage Tank
$50.00 2016
Storage & Dispensing Sales
of Liquefied Petroleum
$150.00 2016
Underground Tank (install/remove) $150.00 2016
Pool Rental $125.00 per hour + staff cost
0-50 guests $108.00 per hour 2008
51 + guests $156.00 per hour 2008
0-10 guests $150.00 2016
Additional guests over 10 $15.00 each 2016
Lunch per person $4.00 2016
0-10 guests $100.00 2016
Additional guests over 10 $9.00 each 2016
Lunch per person $4.00 2014
Under 12 months Free 2014
Over 42" $7.50 2017
Under 42" $5.75 2014
After 5 p.m. $5.00 2014
Family Swim
$5.00 or season pass or punch
card
2014
Staff Costs
Option A
Option B
Daily Admission
Parks and Recreation
Aquatic Center
After Hour Rental
Birthday Parties
Lap Swim
$4.00 or season pass or punch
card
2014
Resident $37.00 2017
Non-Resident $44.00 2017
10 Punches $58.00 2017
20 Punches $94.00 2017
30 Punches $110.00 2017
40 Punches $126.00 2017
Each add'l 10 punches over 40 $30.50 2014
Single $58.00 2017
Family of 2 $105.00 2017
Family of 3 $154.00 2017
Family of 4 $203.00 2017
Family of 5 $252.00 2017
Family of 6 $301.00 2017
Family of 7 + $350.00 2017
Single $68.00 2017
Family of 2 $125.00 2017
Family of 3 $184.00 2017
Family of 4 $243.00 2017
Family of 5 $302.00 2017
Family of 6 $361.00 2017
Family of 7 + $419.00 2017
Private $50.00 for three 30-minutes
lessons
2016
Semi-private $50.00 for three 30-minutes
lessons
2016
Punch Cards
Season Pass-Resident
Season Pass-Non Resident
Swimming Lessons
Lap Swim Season Pass
Swim Lesson Express $7.00 for a 1 - 45 minute
lesson/swimmer
2016
One day a week classes $35.00 for a 3 - 45 minute
class/student
2016
Monday through Thursday classes $42.00 for a 8 - 30 minute
class/student
2016
Tuesday and Thursday classes $42.00 for a 8 - 30 minute
class/student
2016
Lifeguard Training $200.00 2014
Jr. Lifeguard Training $50.00 2014
Tons of Tots
$5.00 or season pass/punch
card
2014
Water Fitness
$4.00 each or season pass or
punch card
2014
Water Walking
$4.00 daily or $37.00 season or
Season Pass or Punch Card
2014
Per hour $82.00 plus tax 2017
All Day (Max of 14 hours) $780.00 plus tax 2009
Prime (7am to 9:30pm) $195.00 per hour-plus tax
effective 7-1-18
2017
Non-Prime(9:30pm to 7am) $175.00 per hour-plus tax 2016
Birthday Party Package $100.00 plus tax 2016
Rink Wall Ad 4' x 6' $350.00 per year 2005
Rink Wall Ad 30" x 6' $196.00 per year 2005
Zamboni - 23 3/4" x 75 5/8" x 3/16" $600.00 per year 2005
On-Ice Ad $1,000.00 per year 2005
Civic Arena
Ice Rental
Advertising
Dry Floor Rental
Ice Skating $4.50 2016
Ice Hockey $6.00 2017
Free Style $6.00 2017
Session Book of 10 $40.00 2006
Skate Rental $2.50 2006
Skate Sharpening $4.00 2009
Field Light Rental $20.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Resident $25.00 + tax per field, per hour 2014
Non-resident $45.00 + plus tax per field, per hour 2014
Resident $45.00 + tax per field, per hour 2014
Non-resident 65.00 + tax per field, per hour 2014
Resident $60.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Non-resident $85.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Resident $85.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Non-Resident $105.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Resident $50.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Non-Resident $75.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Resident $75.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Non-Resident $100.00 + tax per field, per day 2014
Soccer Field
Softball Field
Tournaments
Public Skate
Field Rental
Soccer - Youth
Softball/Baseball - Youth
Softball/Baseball - Adult
Soccer - Adult
Resident $100.00 + tax per day 2014
Non-Resident $150.00 + tax per day 2014
Badminton Set $20.00 plus tax 2008
Bocce Ball Set $10.00 plus tax 2008
Croquet Set $15.00 plus tax 2008
Picnic Grab Bag $35.00 plus tax 2008
Horseshoes (6) $5.00 plus tax 2008
Softball Equipment $20.00 plus tax 2008
Volleyball Set $20.00 plus tax 2008
Deposit $50.00 refundable
Hockey Set $25.00 plus tax 2009
Broomball set $25.00 plus tax 2009
Deposit $100.00 refundable 2009
Resident $40.00 plus tax 2016
Non-resident $50.00 plus tax 2016
Resident $50.00 plus tax 2016
Non-resident $60.00 plus tax 2016
Shelter deposit $100.00 refundable
Resident $40.00 + tax 2009
Non-resident $50.00 + tax 2009
Picnic Table Rental (for additional picnic
tables than what is provided)
$15.00 + tax Each 2009
Park Equipment
Open Air Shelters: Roadside, Vermillion Falls, Pioneer Parks
Enclosed Shelters: Lions, Wallin Parks
Parks: Cari, Tierney, Wilson, Other City Parks
Winter Equipment Rental
Park/Shelter Rental
Disc Golf Tournament
Resident $300.00 + tax
Non-resident $360.00 + tax
Resident $150.00 + tax
Non-resident $180.00 + tax
Resident $80.00 + tax
Non-resident $100.00 + tax
Block Party $85.00 plus tax 2015
Private Party-Weekday $65.00 plus tax 2015
Private Party-Weekend $85.00 plus tax 2015
Deposit $200.00 refundable 2006
3 v 3 men's/women recreational $75.00 2009
5 v 5 men's recreational $550.00 2009
Open Basketball $2.00 per person 2008
6 v 6 adult recreational $100.00 2009
Pair $25.00 2009
Foursome $40.00 2009
$115.00 per session 2009
$225.00 if register for both sessions 2009
6 v 6 adult recreational
Party Wagon
Levee Park
Recreation Fees (sales tax included)
Full day: 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Half day: 6:00 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. or 2:30 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Basketball
Broomball
Disc Golf (adult)
Dodge ball
Rotary Pavilion, Amphitheater and surrounding area
Rotary Pavilion
4 v 4 adult touch football $350.00 2009
Sunday Co-Rec Officiated $150.00 2009
Monday Co-Rec Officiated $150.00 2009
Men's League $740.00 2017
Women's League $590.00 2017
Co-Ed League $510.00 2017
Men's League $360.00 2017
Co-Ed League $360.00 2017
Audio Recording-statements $5.00 per tape or cd 2016
Clearance Letter $5.00 2010
Crime Free Multi Housing $5.00 per occurrence 2008
Dog Pick Up Fees $70.00 2016
Storage Fee (per overnight stay) $20.00 day 2016
Kennel Cough (Bordetella) Vaccine Fee $30.00 2010
Dangerous Dog Fee $500.00
Initial Alarm Permit Issuance/Renewal $0.00 2011
Alarm Permit Renewal $0.00 2011
Late Fee - Alarm Permit (initial & renewal $25.00 2011
Registration
Football
Kickball
Softball (Adult-Spring/Summer)
Softball (Adult-Fall)
False Alarm
Police
1st & 2nd False Alarm No Charge 2011
3rd False Alarm $100.00 2011
4th False Alarm $150.00 2011
5th & subsequent False Alarm $250.00 each 2011
Photos $5.00 CD 2016
Video $5.00 per tape or cd 2010
Audio Recording Statements $5.00 2016
Additional Police Report
(Members of Public non-data subject) 100
pages or fewer
$0.25 per page 2016
Additional Police Report
(Members of Public non-data subject)
more than 100 pages
Actual costs per MN State
Statute 13.03
2016
Addition of Photos-police reports printed $0.25 per page 2016
Antenna Lease (wireless) $27,504.23
Aerial Lift Truck $75.00 hour 2017
Air Compressor $40.00 hour 2014
Chipper $50.00 hour 2007
Front End Loader $85.00 hour 2014
Mower-John Deere $45.00 hour 2014
One Ton Dump Truck $40.00 hour 2014
Pickup Truck $35.00 hour 2014
Pump, 4" $50.00 hour 2007
Pump, 12" $75.00 hour 2007
Road Grader $100.00 hour 2007
Roller $40.00 hour 2007
Sewer Rodding Machine $90.00 hour 2007
Sewer Service Televising Camera $75.00 hour 2007
Sewer Televising Van/Equipment $200.00 hour 2016
Public Works
Equipment (plus operator fees for all equipment)
Police Reports
False Alarm Response Fees (for false alarms in same calendar year)
Sewer Vector $250.00 hour 2016
Single Axle Dump Truck $60.00 hour 2016
Single axle Dump Truck w/Paver $60.00 hour 2014
Skid Loader $85.00 hour 2007
Street Sweeper $100.00 hour 2016
Tandem Axle Dump Truck $80.00 hour 2016
Tractor Mower $75.00 hour 2007
Mini-Excavator $60.00 hour
Compacting Tamper $25.00 hour
Trash Pump $25.00 hour
Front End Loader w/Snow Blower $125.00 hour
New Holland Tractor w/Plow $75.00 hour
Trailer Mounted Generator $100.00 hour
7 am to 3 pm $100.00 2007
After Hours
$50 + applicable call out rate (2
hour min.) or extended day rate
(1 hour minimum)
2007
Installation $150.00 2017
$0.01 per gallon, up to 1,000 gallons 2007
$10.00 per 1,000 gallons
Interceptor Sewer Fees $485.00 per unit 2009
Meter Read (Final) $25.00 2009
Meter Testing
At cost + 10% administration fee 2007
Minnesota Testing Fee $1.59 per quarter 2007
SAC Fee $708.75 per unit 2017
Sewer Rates $18.66 base fee 2020
Sewer Rates $4.23 per 1,000 gallons 2020
Fill Station Water $4.50 per 1,000 gallons 2017
WAC Fee $2,306.25 per unit 2010
Usage
Hydrant Meters (Temporary Construction)
Fire Flow Tests
5/8” & 3/4“ Meter $18.13 2020
1.0” Meter $45.32 2020
1.25” & 1.5” Meter $90.65 2020
2.0” Meter $145.02 2020
3.0” Meter $271.93 2020
4.0” Meter $589.16 2020
6.0” Meter $1,268.96 2020
5/8” & 3/4“ Meter $36.26 2020
1.0” Meter $90.64 2020
1.25” & 1.5” Meter $181.30 2020
2.0” Meter $290.04 2020
3.0” Meter $543.86 2020
4.0” Meter $1,178.32 2020
6.0” Meter $2,537.92 2020
0 – 15,999 gallons $1.09 per 1,000 gallons 2020
16,000 – 30,999 gallons $1.42 per 1,000 gallons 2020
31,000 – 60,999 gallons $2.27 per 1,000 gallons 2020
61,000 gallons and above $4.31 per 1,000 gallons 2020
0 – 15,999 gallons $1.09 per 1,000 gallons 2020
16,000 – 75,999 gallons $1.42 per 1,000 gallons 2020
76,000 – 200,999 gallons $2.27 per 1,000 gallons 2020
201,000 gallons and above $4.31 per 1,000 gallons 2020
3/4" IPERL with MXU $320.00 plus tax 2014
1" IPERL with MXU $375.00 plus tax 2014
1 1/2" T2 OMNI irrigation meter with MXU $1,000.00 plus tax 2014
1 1/2" C2 OMNI commercial meter with
MXU
$1,355.00 plus tax 2014
Residential Users (applies all year)
Water Consumption
Other Users
Water Meters--Utilities Fees
Water Base Charges
Irrigation Base Charges
Larger than 1.5 inches TBD by PWD, based on meter
cot
plus tax 2014
During regular work hours (7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.)
$50.00 2014
Outside regular work hours $120.00 2014
During regular work hours (7:00 am to
3:00 p.m.)
$100.00 2009
Outside regular work hours $240.00 2009
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. No Charge If turn on is within the same day
as turn off
2013
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. $50.00 If turn on is NOT within the
same day as turn off
2013
Outside regular work hours $120.00 2013
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. No charge If turn on is within the same day
as turn off
2013
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. $100.00 If turn on is NOT within the
same day as turn off
2013
Outside regular work hours $240.00 2013
Low Density Residential $19.15 per lot 2020
Medium Density Residential $10.53 per lot 2020
High Density Residential $74.68 per acre 2020
Manufactured Housing $57.44 per acre 2020
Commercial/Office $91.90 per acre 2020
Industrial $80.41 per acre 2020
Public/Institutional Exempt per acre 2020
Golf Course $17.24 per acre 2020
O S/V $19.15 per acre 2020
Agricultural $19.15 per acre 2020
Winter Emergency Water Shut Off (December 1 through April 15)
Water Shut Off
Storm Water Utility Rates per Quarter
Winter Water Turn On (December 1 through April 15)
Water Turn On
§34.04 SPECIAL OR NON-ROUTINE SERVICES BY CITY DEPARTMENTS: FEES
(a) Any City Department that furnishes special or non-routine services to any person or organization, other
than services which it is required by law to perform without fee, may charge the person or organization
requesting such services as set by council ordinance for that type of service. If no fee has been adopted for a
special or non-routine service, the fee to be charged for staff time, shall be two (2) times the hourly rate paid
to staff person performing such service(s) being a reasonable approximation of the total costs incurred by the
City to provide the staff services. (Ord..2001.03, 3rd Series passed 2-07-11)
1
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. GENERAL PROVISIONS
51. UTILITIES
2
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
50.01 Remote reading type water meter required
50.02 Sewage and waste control rules and regulations adopted
50.03 Required hookup to City sanitary sewer
50.04 Required hookup to City water
50.05 On-site sewer requirements
50.06 Mandatory solid waste collection
50.07 Garbage and refuse haulers
50.08 Recycling haulers
§ 50.01 REMOTE READING TYPE WATER METER REQUIRED.
In all new construction using 1-inch size water meter, or smaller, remote reading type water meters
shall be installed at the expense of the owners. In all replacement of present 1-inch meters, or smaller,
the replacement shall be with a remote reading type meter allowing reading of same from the exterior
of the building. The reading device shall be installed by the Public Works Department.
(Prior Code, § 4.08) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.02 SEWAGE AND WASTE CONTROL RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
The Rules and Regulations for the Metropolitan Council of Environmental Services are hereby
adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of the Rules and Regulations
shall be marked CITY OF HASTINGS - OFFICIAL COPY and deposited on file in the office of the
City Clerk and open to inspection and use by the public. (Prior Code, § 4.09)
§ 50.03 REQUIRED HOOKUP TO CITY SANITARY SEWER.
All properties currently served with on-site sewer systems shall be required to hookup at owner’s
expense to City sanitary sewer within 1 year of such time as service becomes available to a property
boundary. Furthermore, properties currently being served by on-site sewer systems which have
available access to City sanitary sewer as of the effective date of this section (1-14-1994) shall be
required to hookup within 1 year. (Prior Code, § 4.10) Penalty, see § 10.99
3
§ 50.04 REQUIRED HOOKUP TO CITY WATER.
All properties currently served with private wells for potable water needs shall be required to
hookup at owner’s expense to the City water system within 1 year of such time as service becomes
available to a property boundary. Furthermore, properties currently being served by private wells
which have available access to City water service as of the effective date of this section (1-14-1994)
shall be required to hookup within 1 year.
(Prior Code, § 4.11) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.05 ON-SITE SEWER REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Adoption of Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems (SSTS). Standards for the installation and
repair of individual on-site sewer systems are established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Commonly referred to as the Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems Program – Chapters 7080 – 7083,
published by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, these standards along with Dakota County
Ordinance No. 113 are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. The stricter
provisions of Dakota County Ordinance No. 113 shall apply.
(B) Permit required. No person shall install, repair, alter, or pump an on-site sewer system
without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. Applications, provided by the City, must be
completed in writing prior to issuance of a permit. Permit fees shall be as provided in this code.
(C) SSTS License required. Installation and repair of on-site sewer systems requires licensing by
the respective county jurisdiction. Persons applying for a permit for installation or repair of an on-site
sewer system must provide evidence of licensure with Dakota County if the property where work will
be performed is in Dakota County or licensure with Washington County if the property where work
will be performed is in Washington County. All design, installation, alteration, repair, maintenance,
operation, pumping, and inspection activities for SSTS located in Hastings must be completed by a
business licensed by the MPCA under Minnesota Rules Chapters 7080-7083.
(D) Required conditions.
(1) Soil percolation tests must be completed by an independent party and must be favorable
for the operation of an on-site sewer system before a permit will be issued.
(2) Installations, alterations, repairs, and maintenance shall be performed in accordance with
MPCA Rules Chapter 7080-7083.
(3) No private on-site sewer system shall be permitted without approval by the City Council.
City Council may deny approval of an on-site sewer on property situated within the Municipal Urban
Service Area (MUSA) due to the pending availability of City sanitary sewer service.
(Prior Code, § 4.12) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2012-14, 3rd Series, passed 10-15-12)
§ 50.06 MANDATORY SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
4
CITY. The City of Hastings.
PROPERTY OWNER. Any real person, partnership, or a corporate entity that holds fee title
to real property which is occupied for residential, commercial, or industrial uses. In the case where real
property is being sold on a contract for deed, recorded at the Dakota County Recorder’s office, the term
PROPERTY OWNER shall also mean the CONTRACT VENDEE.
SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, and other discarded solid materials, including solid waste
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural operations, residential uses, and
community activities, but does not include earthen fill, boulders, rock, and other materials normally
handled in construction operations, animal waste used as fertilizer, any permitted material disposed of
as soil amendment, solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in
water resources, such as silt, waste water effluent, dissolved materials, suspended solids and irrigation
return flows, or other water pollutants.
(B) Mandatory refuse collection. All property which is occupied for residential, commercial, or
industrial uses shall receive solid waste collection service from a solid waste hauler licensed by the
City of Hastings.
(1) Responsible party. All owners of property in the City are responsible to ensure their
property receives the solid waste collection services required by this section. This responsibility
remains with the property owner regardless if the property is occupied by someone other than the
property owner.
(2) Failure to pay for solid waste collection. It is not a defense to the requirements of this
division (B) that the property owner or occupants of the property failed to pay for solid waste collection
services.
(C) Exemptions. The following individuals may be exempted from the requirements of this
section.
An owner of a business in the City who also resides in the City and who can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City that waste collection service is received by that individual at either their place of
business or their residence. The City Administrator is authorized to grant an exemption to individuals
who meet the requirements of this division (C). Any exemption granted under this division (C) will
expire on December 31 of the year in which it is granted, unless the individual applies for and is
granted a renewal of that exemption. If at any time during the term of that exemption, the individual
fails to meet all requirements of this division (C), the City Administrator is authorized to terminate that
exemption. Upon termination of an exemption, the individual must comply with the requirements of
division (B) above. (Prior Code, § 5.42) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.07 GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. City of Hastings.
5
COMMERCIAL HAULER. Any person licensed by the City to collect solid waste from commercial,
industrial, professional, governmental, institutional structures, or governmental property within the
City.
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES. Buildings which contain 4 or more dwelling units; and
buildings with commercial, industrial, professional, governmental, or institutional uses and which are
located in the appropriate zoning district. Buildings with home occupations shall be considered
residential structures.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIAL. Any refuse resulting from the
construction, alteration, or removal of a structure.
DWELLING UNITS. One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a daily, weekly,
monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may
be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
GARBAGE. All organic waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, service, and
consumption of food.
PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, or corporation.
RECYCLABLES. All those materials which are required to be recycled under § 50.08.
REFUSE. All inorganic waste, including construction and demolition material, from
residential, commercial, industrial, professional, governmental, or institutional operations that is the
result of their normal operations, excluding compost, recyclables, toxic waste, and hazardous waste.
RESIDENTIAL HAULER. Any person licensed by the City to collect solid waste from
residential structures within the City.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. Any structure containing 1 dwelling unit, 2 dwelling units,
or 3 dwelling units and which are located in a residential zone within the City. RESIDENTIAL
STRUCTURES that rent dwelling units on a daily, weekly, or longer basis, shall be considered a
residential structure for purposes of this section. RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES containing 1
dwelling unit, 2 dwelling units, or 3 dwelling units and which are nonconforming uses under Chapter
155, shall be considered residential structures for purposes of this section.
SOLID WASTE. Garbage and refuse.
WHITE GOODS. Refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers, washers and dryers, water heaters, and
household furniture.
YARD WASTE. Garden waste, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, and prunings.
(B) Residential solid waste collection.
6
(1) Statement of purpose. The City of Hastings finds that it is in the best interests of its
residents to have organized residential solid waste collection within the City, and will protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of its residents by promoting efficiency, reducing disturbances to residents,
reducing wear on residential streets, cost reduction and promoting the disposal of residential solid
waste within the City in an environmentally safe manner.
(2) License required. It is unlawful for any person to haul solid waste for hire from any
residential structure within the City without being issued a residential hauler’s license from the City.
(3) Number of licenses. The City shall issue 1 residential hauler’s license which will permit
that residential hauler to collect solid waste from residential structures within the City.
(4) License subject to this section. Any residential hauler’s license issued under this section
shall be subject to the terms of this section, any amendments to it, and additional requirements imposed
by the City Council through the request for proposal and licensing process.
(5) Change in number; expiration. The City Council may change the number of residential
hauler license(s) when it determines, by a 2/3 majority of the entire Council, that a change in
circumstances warrants changing the number of residential hauler license(s). All residential license(s)
shall expire on the same date.
(6) Term of license. The term of a residential hauler license shall be 3 years from the date of
issuance, unless terminated earlier, as provided in this section or as further limited by this section.
(7) License fee. The annual fee for a residential hauler’s license shall be set by Council
resolution and shall not be prorated. The first year’s fee shall be paid before the license shall be issued.
Subsequent annual installments of the license fee shall be paid by the first working day of each year.
Failure to pay the license fee shall be grounds for termination of the license. In determining the
amount of the license fee, the City Council shall include all costs incurred by the City to administer any
residential hauler’s license and to enforce City Code provisions relating to solid waste collection.
(8) Rate regulation. The City shall establish by resolution a written agreement with the
licensed hauler. Such rates may include an automatic price increase or fuel surcharge when based on an
ascertainable standard described in the written agreement. A residential hauler cannot request a rate
adjustment during the first year of a residential hauler’s license.
(9) Non-assignability of license. A residential hauler’s license issued by the City may not be
assigned or transferred in whole or in part by the hauler unless the City Council, in its sole discretion,
gives its approval prior to any proposed assignment or transfer. Any attempt to assign or transfer the
license in whole or in part without prior approval of the City Council shall be grounds for termination
of the license.
(10) Revocation. A residential hauler’s license may be terminated by the City for any
violation of City ordinance, Dakota County ordinances, or state or federal laws. The City may also
terminate the license for unsatisfactory performance by the hauler.
(11) Hours of collection. All residential solid waste collection shall take place between the
hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. There shall be no residential solid waste collection on Sundays or
Christmas Day.
7
(12) Insurance and performance bond requirements. Every residential hauler shall provide the
City with proof of insurance for general liability coverage in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for
injury to any one or more persons resulting from any 1 accident and not less than $500,000 for property
damage resulting from any 1 accident. Every residential hauler shall also provide the City with proof
of automobile liability insurance with a combined single limit of $1,000,000, covering all owned,
hired, and non-owned vehicles. Every hauler shall also provide the City with proof of worker’s
compensation insurance covering all of its employees.
(13) Performance bond. Every residential hauler shall provide the City with a performance
bond, in a form satisfactory to the City, to assure the hauler’s compliance with this section, all City
ordinances, county, state, and federal laws.
(14) Policy and bond effect. Any insurance policy or performance bond required from the
residential hauler under this section shall remain in full force and effect at all times that the hauler is
licensed in the City. All insurance policies and performance bonds required under this section shall
contain a provision requiring the City to be notified at least 30 days prior to the expiration or
cancellation of any insurance policy or bond. Failure to carry the required insurance or the required
performance bond shall be grounds for termination of the residential hauler’s license.
(15) Equipment. Every residential hauler shall transport residential solid waste only in
covered vehicles having watertight containers which prevent the scattering, dripping or removal of the
contents from the vehicle during transit. Every vehicle used to haul residential solid waste shall be
maintained in a clean condition. Permitting solid waste to scatter, drip, fall, spill, blow, or otherwise be
removed from the hauler’s vehicle during transportation, is prohibited and is hereby declared a public
nuisance.
(16) Residential yard waste. Every residential hauler shall provide for a method of disposal of
residential yard waste within the City limits where residents can drop off residential yard waste at no
additional cost to the residents.
(17) Pickup. Every residential hauler shall provide for pickup of residential yard waste at
curbside for which the hauler can charge the residential customer.
(18) Household white goods. Every residential hauler shall provide a method for disposal of
household white goods, with the hauler determining the cost and billing the residential customer for
that service.
(19) Household hazardous waste program. Every residential hauler must participate in any
household hazardous waste program conducted within the City. The hauler shall provide necessary
disposal containers and personnel at no direct cost to the City.
(20) Additional provisions. Any hauler issued a residential hauler’s license shall cooperate
with and assist the City in enforcing M.S. § 115A.941, as it may be amended from time to time, and
City Code § 50.06, both now in effect. The cooperation required by this section shall include, but not
be limited to, providing the City with all documentation needed by it to enforce mandatory collection
requirements. Any cooperation and assistance required by this section shall be provided at no cost to
the City.
(a) A residential hauler shall provide solid waste collection from each residential
structure at least weekly, except for qualified customers using the bag system.
8
(b) All residential solid waste collection shall be at the street curb unless separate
arrangements are made with the hauler to pick up the solid waste at a different part of the residential
dwelling.
(c) Until such time as the City issues more than 1 residential hauler’s license, the
residential hauler must provide, at no additional cost to the City, solid waste pickup at all buildings and
public parks used or maintained by the City.
(d) Every residential hauler shall provide, at no additional cost to the residents or City,
curbside Christmas tree pickup on a Saturday in January of each year. The specific Saturday in
January for Christmas tree pickup shall be selected by the residential hauler.
(e) Every residential hauler shall establish and maintain, in a location approved by the
City, an office with continuous supervision, for accepting complaints and resident calls. City residents
shall not be required to make long-distance calls for service or to register complaints. The office shall
be in service during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Any
change in the address or telephone number of the office shall be given to the City in writing.
(C) Commercial solid waste collection.
(1) License required. It is unlawful for any person to haul solid waste for hire from a
commercial, industrial, professional, governmental, or institutional structure or governmental property
without first obtaining a commercial hauler’s license from the City. A licensed commercial hauler may
also haul only construction and demolition material from residential structures.
(2) Number of licenses. The City can issue unlimited commercial haulers’ licenses for solid
waste collection from commercial, industrial, professional, governmental, or institutional structures or
property within the City. The City Council may change the number of commercial hauler licenses
when it determines by a 2/3 majority of the entire Council that a change in circumstances warrants
changing the number of commercial hauler licenses. At the first council meeting in March of each
year, the Council shall review whether the number of commercial hauler licenses should be changed.
(3) Term of license. All commercial haulers’ licenses shall expire on December 31, in each
odd year, regardless of when it was issued.
(4) Application and license fee. Any person requesting a commercial hauler’s license shall
complete the application form approved by resolution of the City Council.
(5) Application review. All applications shall be presented to the City Council for review. If
approved by the City Council, the commercial hauler’s license shall be issued to the applicant after
payment of the license fee. If the Council does not approve an application, it shall state in writing its
reasons for the denial.
(6) License fee to be set by Council. The license fee for a commercial hauler’s license shall
be set by resolution of the City Council and shall not be prorated.
(7) Denial or termination of license. False information provided by an applicant shall be
grounds for denial or termination of the commercial hauler’s license.
9
(8) Rates. The rates for commercial solid waste collection are not subject to City regulation.
(9) Termination of commercial hauler’s license. A commercial hauler’s license may be
terminated by the City for any violation of City ordinances, county ordinances, or state or federal laws.
(10) Non-assignability of license. A commercial hauler’s license issued by the City may not
be assigned or transferred by the commercial hauler in whole or in part, without the prior approval of
the City Council. Any attempt to assign or transfer the license in whole or in part without prior
approval of the City Council shall be grounds for termination of the commercial hauler’s license.
(11) Recycling. Any hauler wishing to haul solid waste from non-residential structures must
also offer recycling services to its customers. At a minimum, all commercial haulers must provide
their customers with the same recycling services that are offered to residential structures within the
City.
(12) Insurance requirements. Every commercial hauler shall provide the City with proof of
insurance for general liability coverage in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for injury to any 1 or
more persons resulting from any 1 accident, and not less than $500,000 for property damage resulting
from any 1 accident. Every commercial hauler shall also provide the City with proof of automobile
liability insurance with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 covering all owned, hired, and nonowned
vehicles. Every hauler shall also provide the City with proof of worker’s compensation
insurance covering all of its employees.
(13) Hours of collection. All commercial solid waste collection shall take place between the
hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.
(14) Equipment. All commercial haulers shall transport commercial solid waste only in
covered vehicles having watertight containers which prevent the scattering, dripping or removal of the
contents from the vehicle during transit. Every vehicle used to haul commercial solid waste shall be
maintained in a reasonably clean condition. Permitting solid waste to scatter, drip, fall, spill, blow, or
otherwise be removed from the hauler’s vehicle during transportation, is prohibited and is hereby
declared a public nuisance.
(15) Additional provisions. Any hauler issued a commercial hauler’s license shall cooperate
with and assist the City in enforcing M.S. § 115A.941, as it may be amended from time to time, and
City Code § 50.06, both now in effect. The cooperation required by this section shall include, but not
be limited to, providing the City with all documentation needed by it to enforce mandatory collection
requirements. Any cooperation and assistance required by this section shall be provided at no cost to
the City.
(16) Standards. The City Council may establish by resolution performance standards for solid
waste collection, which must be complied with by all commercial haulers. Violations of any
performance standards shall be grounds for termination of a commercial hauler’s license.
(Prior Code, § 5.43)
10
§ 50.08 RECYCLING HAULERS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED RECYCLING PROGRAM. A program for the collection and recycling of
recyclable materials which is instituted, sponsored, authorized, and controlled by the City of Hastings.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. All items of refuse designated by the City Council to be part
of an authorized recycling program and which are intended for transportation, processing,
remanufacturing, or reuse.
SCAVENGING. The unauthorized collection of recyclable materials that have been set out
by residents of the City specifically for participation in curb-side recycling programs.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to pick up recyclable materials from
residences or commercial buildings without a license from the City. There shall be issued by the City 1
recycling license until such time as the Council determines, by ordinance approved by a 2/3 majority of
the entire City Council, that additional licenses are necessary. The holder of a recycling license shall
be able to collect recyclable material from residential or commercial buildings as part of an authorized
recycling program. Application shall be made in the same manner as required by ordinance for a
garbage and refuse hauler in the City.
(C) Fee. The annual fee for a recycling license shall be $50.
(D) Designation of items. Items designated for recycling shall be listed by resolution of the City
Council to be part of an authorized recycling program.
(E) Ownership of recyclable materials. Ownership of recyclable materials set out for the purpose
of participating in a curb side recycling program shall remain with the person who set out the
recyclable materials until they are removed by the recycling hauler licensed by the City. Until the
recyclable materials are removed by the licensed recycling hauler, the person who set out the
recyclable materials are totally responsible for their proper preparation, handling, and storage.
Ownership and responsibility for the proper handling of the recyclable materials shall vest in the
licensed recycling hauler upon removal by it.
(F) Unauthorized collection. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not authorized by the City
to take, collect, or scavenge recyclable materials set out for authorized recycling programs within the
City. A violation of this division (F) shall be a misdemeanor.
(G) Contract. The City may require recycling haulers to enter into a contract with the City which
more specifically spells out the details and requirements of an authorized recycling program. Violation
of the contract will be grounds for revocation of any license issued pursuant to this section.
(H) Fees. Before the Council shall establish the rates for residential recycling collections. The
Council shall establish the rates by written agreement with the licensed hauler. Such rates may include
an automatic price increase or fuel surcharge when based on an ascertainable standard described in the
written agreement. A residential hauler cannot request a rate adjustment during the first year of a
residential hauler’s license. (Prior Code, § 5.44) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. GENERAL PROVISIONS
51. UTILITIES
11
CHAPTER 51: UTILITIES
Section
51.01 Generally
51.02 Contractual charges
51.03 Rules and regulations relating to municipal utilities
51.04 Definitions; water and sewer
51.05 Rules and regulations; water and sewer
51.06 Sanitary sewer, water main, and utility service improvement special assessment policy
51.07 Interceptor sewer charges
51.08 Sewer service charges
51.09 Industrial user strength charge
§ 51.01 GENERALLY.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated.
(A) Underground construction required. All utility lines hereafter installed, constructed, or
otherwise placed within the City for electric, telephone, TV cable, or other similar services to serve
residential, commercial, and industrial customers in newly platted areas, and which utilize metallic
conductors to carry electric current, whether owned, installed, or constructed by the supplier,
consumer, or any person shall be installed and placed underground in an approved, safe manner,
subject only to the exceptions hereinafter stated.
(B) Utility companies. All companies installing and operating lines such as those described herein
shall be referred to as utility companies for the purpose of this section.
(C) Exceptions to application. The following exceptions to the strict applicability of this section
shall be allowed upon the conditions stated.
(1) Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement of meters, gauges,
transformers, street lighting, and service connection pedestals shall be allowed.
(2) Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement of these lines
commonly referred to as high voltage transmission lines upon which the conductor’s normal operating
voltage equals or exceeds 23,000 volts-phase-to-phase shall be allowed, provided, however, that 60
days prior to commencement of construction of such a project, the Director of Public Works shall be
furnished notice of the proposed construction and, upon request, the utility company shall furnish any
relevant information regarding the project to the City Engineer.
(3) Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement of lines shall be
allowed in residential, commercial, and industrial areas where the Council, following consideration and
recommendation by the Planning Commission finds that:
12
(a) Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to
topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which adversely affect underground utility
placement; and
(b) Aboveground placement of temporary service line shall only be allowed:
1. During the new construction of any project for a period not to exceed 24 months;
2. During an emergency to safeguard lives or property within the City; and
3. For a period of not more than 7 months when soil conditions make excavation
impractical.
(D) Consumer and customer. The terms consumer and customer shall refer to any user of a utility
except when those terms are used with regards to a municipal utility, then those terms shall refer to the
owner of the property being served by the municipal utility. (Am. Ord. 540, passed 10-17-2005)
(E) Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are responsible for complying
with the requirements of this section, and prior to the final approval of any plat or development plan,
shall submit to the Planning Commission written instruments from the appropriate utility companies
showing that all necessary arrangements with the companies for installation of the utilities have been
made.
(F) Placement.
(1) All utility lines shall be placed with appropriate easements or dedicated public ways so as
to cause minimum conflict with other underground services. Whenever feasible, all utilities shall be
placed within the same trench.
(2) All utility companies shall submit annually to the Director of Public Works current maps
revealing locations of underground installation, whether the installations were installed prior to the
adoption of this section or hereafter. (Prior Code, § 12.01) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.02 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract
between the City and all consumers of municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be
deemed to assent to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services
other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code, § 12.03)
§ 51.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
(A) Billing, payment, and penalty.
(1) All municipal utilities shall be billed in monthly or quarterly installments, as the case may
be, but a utilities statement shall be sent to each consumer on or before the first day of the month
following reading of any meter read during the month. All utility charges shall be delinquent if they are
13
unpaid at the close of business on the twentieth day of the month following the billing, provided, that if
the twentieth day of the month shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the time shall be
extended to the close of business on the next succeeding day on which business is normally transacted.
(2) Except as specifically authorized in this Section, a penalty of 10% thereof shall be added
to, and become part of, all delinquent utility bills. Upon a utility bill becoming delinquent, the City
shall at month-end, by first-class mail to the recorded billing address, mail a delinquent notice and
disconnect warning, stating the amount of the unpaid bill, including penalty amount. This notice must
state that if payment is not received within 10 days of billing, an additional penalty of $10 will be
added to the bill and service will be disconnected. (If the above days fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday, the above procedure shall be implemented the next regular scheduled business day.)
(3) If any such bill is not paid in full on or before the thirtieth day of the month following the
date upon which it became delinquent, municipal utilities may, at the option of the City, be suspended
to the consumer whose bill is so delinquent. Disconnection of service due to an unpaid utility bill shall
be as soon as practicable following the eleventh business day after notification. Disconnection shall be
made during normal business hours.
(4) Prior to disconnection, the utility shall post a Notice of Water Shutoff on the property.
The Notice of Water Shutoff shall be posted conspicuously indicating the following:
(a) Water service termination date;
(b) Total amount due; and
(c) Contact information for making payment.
(5) No on-site collection attempts shall be conducted.
(6) If the delinquent utility bill remains delinquent beyond the water service termination date
identified in the posted Notice of Water Shutoff, the utility may disconnect the service.
(7) The Utility Department must reconnect service at the earliest practical time during regular
business hours of the Utility Department if the customer or designated representative:
(a) Pays the outstanding balance owed; or
(b) Enters into a written payment agreement with the City providing for partial payment
arrangements acceptable to the Finance Department. Failure of the customer to
adhere to the payment agreement as established by the utility shall result in
immediate disconnection of service by the utility. Payment must be made in full 60
days after original billing. Service termination shall occur the next regular business
day after dated water shut-off or agreement to pay letter expires and payment has not
been received. (Am. Ord. 491, passed 4-21-2003)
(8) In the case of single-metered residential buildings, the utility shall follow the
requirements of Minn. Stat. § 504B.215, as amended, as the same applies to notice of disconnection,
disconnection, and reconnection of service.
(B) Application, connection, and sale of service. Application for municipal utility services shall
be made upon forms supplied by the City, and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be
made until consent has been received from the City to make the same. All municipal utilities shall be
sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable rate applied to the amount of the utilities
14
taken as metered or ascertained in connection with the rates.
(C) Discontinuance of service. All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it
is found that:
(1) The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection
with the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of the City Code relative thereto, or
any connection therewith;
(2) Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial obligation imposed on
the present owner or occupant of the premises served, is unpaid after due notice thereof;
(3) There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any
application for service or delivery or charges therefore;
(4) Utility connections or disconnections have been made by anyone other than a Utility
Department employee or a contractor approved by the Utility Department; and/or
(5) The City is refused entry to property, dwelling or other building to install, read, inspect,
repair, maintain or replace a utility meter or to inspect or repair a utility system.
(D) Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains,
extensions, and appurtenances thereto, shall be and remain in the City and no person shall own any part
or portion thereof. Provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private
property are not intended to be included in municipal ownership.
(E) Right of entry. With the consent of the property owner or in the event of an emergency, the
City has the right to enter in and upon private property including buildings and dwelling houses, in or
upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, for the purposes of installing,
reading, inspecting, repairing, maintaining, or replacing utility meters or any part thereof; to inspect or
repair utility systems; and for the purposes of connecting and disconnecting service.
(F) Meter test/meter reading discrepancies. In the event that a customer suspects a discrepancy
in meter readings, the following procedures will be followed.
(1) Customer shall notify the Finance Department located in City Hall, of specific
discrepancies.
(2) The utility staff shall review customer consumption history. If findings indicate that a
discrepancy is possible, the meter shall be re-read.
(3) If the City is requested to test a consumer's utility meter and if that meter is found to be
inaccurate, then the meter shall be replaced with an accurate meter. If the meter is found to be
accurate, the meter shall be reinstalled and the consumer shall be billed a fee by the City for the cost of
the test at the rate listed in the City’s adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 2014-04, 3rd Series, Adopted 2-03-
14)
(4) In the case of remote water meters where there is a discrepancy between the outside
reader and the inside reader, the inside master meter reading shall be used.
(5) For final billings the utility staff will take a reading on both inside and outside meters
15
when possible.
(G) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb,
or in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system or commit any act tending to obstruct
or impair the use of any municipal utility.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any municipal utility system
without first having applied for and received permission from the City to make the same.
(3) It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been
turned off or disconnected by the City for nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first
having obtained a permit to do so from the City.
(4) It is unlawful for any person to jumper or by any means or device fully or partially
circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the
service of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
(5) It is unlawful for any person to distort any meter readings or meter accuracy. Any meters
damaged as a result of any attempt to distort meter readings or meter accuracy will be repaired by the
Utility Department at the consumer's expense.
(H) Municipal utility charges a lien.
(1) Statements for municipal utility charges shall be rendered to the consumer at the usual
times and in the usual manner. If any such municipal utility bill remains unpaid for period of more than
30 days, then a statement of the delinquent and unpaid service charge shall be served by mail or
personally upon the consumer. If the consumer fails or refuses to pay bills for utility charges relating to
the premises within a period of 30 days after statement of the charges has been duly rendered the City
may disconnect and discontinue to provide utility service for the premises as provided by division (I).
(2) Each charge levied by and pursuant to this chapter is hereby made a lien upon the
premises served by a connection to a municipal utility system of the City and located within the City;
and all the charges which are more than 60 days past due, and having been properly billed to the
consumer of the premises served, shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Auditor and the
City Clerk in so certifying the charges to the County Auditor shall specify the amount thereof and the
description of the premises served, the name of the owner thereof, and the amount so certified shall be
extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against the premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City along with other taxes.
(Prior Code, § 12.04) (Am. Ord. 540, passed 10-17-2005)
(I) Disconnection.
(1) It is the policy of the City to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of
nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The
City's form for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily
readable provisions to the effect:
(a) That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill; and
16
(b) That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed
containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within 10 days of the mailing of the second bill,
service will be discontinued for nonpayment; and
(c) That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall have a right to a
hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his
or her choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the City
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service
not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's
complaint.
(2) Except as specifically authorized in this Section, requests for delays or waiver of
payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the
absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided herein, service will
be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.
(3) When it becomes necessary for the City to discontinue utility service to a customer for
nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only during regular business hours of the Utility
Department and only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
an amount established by ordinance by the City Council. Penalty, see § 10.99
(J) Penalty Waiver.
(1) The Finance Department may grant a one-time waiver of the 10% penalty on delinquent
utility bills upon the customer satisfying the following conditions:
(a) The customer must submit a written request for waiver of penalty to the Finance
Department postmarked or hand delivered to the Finance Department no later than the thirtieth day of
the month following the date upon which the utility bill became delinquent.
(b) The customer must enroll in a program authorized by the Finance Department to
allow for automatic deduction of all future utility bill payments from a checking or savings account
designated by customer. Any costs imposed by the financial institution for establishing the automatic
deduction shall be paid by the customer.
(c) The customer must sign an agreement and authorization form by which the customer
agrees that the automatic deduction authorization may not be revoked by the customer without the
consent of the Finance Department for a period of six months and if for any reason the automatic
deduction authorization is revoked, or if additional utility bills become delinquent for any reason
during the same six month period, the full amount of the penalty previously waived, plus any
additional penalties which may be imposed by the subsequent delinquency, shall become immediately
due and payable by the customer.
17
(2) The penalty waiver shall be applied only one time during the duration of the utility
account regardless of the number of responsible individuals or owners of the property serviced by the
account. (Am. Ord. 2008-3, 3rd Series, passed 2-4-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2012-12, 3rd
Series, passed 06-18-12)
§ 51.04 DEFINITIONS; WATER AND SEWER.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or other premises used
primarily for the purposes of conducting a business , trade, or profession thereon and the establishment
shall be deemed to include all dwelling units which are appurtenant thereto.
DWELLING. One or more rooms occupied as a residence and equipped for the use of the
sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Those particular liquid discharges from any process of industry,
manufacture, trade or business having a concentration of B.O.D. or S.S. of more than 500 parts per
million. Industrial cooling or condenser waters which do not come in contact with any industrial
process, and for which specific approval is given for discharge into a natural watercourse, are
specifically excluded from this definition.
SEWAGE. Is herein defined as the water carried waste created in and to be conducted away from
residences, industrial and commercial premises, or institutions having a concentration of B.O.D. or
S.S. of 500 parts per million or less.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Includes all street lateral, main and intersecting sewers and structures by
which sewage or industrial wastes are collected, transported, treated and disposed of; provided, that
this shall not include plumbing inside or a part of a building or premises served, or service sewers from
a building to the street lateral. (Prior Code, § 12.20)
§ 51.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS; WATER AND SEWER.
(A) Water and sewer service pipe and connections. As to all water and sewer service pipes and
connections not covered in size and type of material by the Minnesota Plumbing Code, the City shall
specify the kind and size before connections may be made with mains, and consideration may be given
by the City to the type of equipment and supplies on hand for making the connection before permitting
the same.
(B) Private fire hose connections. All individual connections to the sanitary sewer system and/or
water system shall be charged access fees with the exception of fire services that only provide water to
fire sprinkling systems. Proprietors of lumber yards, factories, halls, stores, elevators, warehouses,
hotels, or other buildings, if they are regular municipal water consumers, may connect the street mains
with hydrants, large pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only and free of charge for the
use, but at their own installation expense.
18
(C) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful for any person, not expressly authorized by the City, to tap a water
distribution main or sewerage collection main.
(2) It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department or another
person duly authorized by the City, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt
to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so
authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except
for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
(3) No sewerage (including industrial wastes) shall contain any substance which is deemed
by the City to be deleterious to the operation of the sewerage system. If any person discharges any
deleterious substances therein, he or she shall be required to discontinue the discharge of the
substances into the sewerage system. It is unlawful for any person to, after 10-days’ written notice
from the City, continue discharging the deleterious substances into the sewerage system.
(4) It is unlawful for any person to make or maintain a connection, between eave troughs,
rain spouts, footing drains, or any other conductor used to carry natural precipitation or ground water,
and the sewerage system or any part thereof.
(5) It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any drain or sewer connected or
proposed to be connected to the sewerage system, without first having the plans and specifications
therefore approved by the City.
(6) It is unlawful to connect a steam exhaust or blow-off with a drain which also connects
with the sewerage system.
(7) It is unlawful to connect a drain from a laundry, hotel, restaurant, or other public cooking
establishment, with the sewerage system, without a grease trap or grated basin.
(8) It is unlawful to drain waste from dyeing clothes, cleaning, or other establishments using
naphtha, gasoline, or other inflammable liquids into the sewerage system.
(9) It is unlawful to connect a drain from a butcher shop, rendering establishment, packing
house, creamery, or other establishments with the sewerage system without intercepting it with some
form of catch basin or grated basin.
(10) It is unlawful to connect an automobile or other similar wash rack, drain with the
sewerage system without providing for a catch basin approved by the City to prevent entrance of dirt
and refuse from the wash-rack.
(11) It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, agent, occupant, or other person having charge of
any premises to maintain thereon any drain or sewer connected with the sewerage system in a clogged
obstructed, broken or damaged condition.
(12) It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any sewage
19
or unwholesome matter into any lake or public waters.
(D) Responsibility of property owner. Notwithstanding provisions of this chapter relating to
ownership of municipal utility facilities, the property owner served thereby is responsible for
installation and maintenance of all lateral sewer and water facilities from the main (owned and
maintained by the City) regardless of whether they may be on public or private property.
(E) Remote reading type water meter required. In all construction, remote reading type water
meters shall be installed at the expense of the owners. The water meter shall be purchased from the
City, with the meter purchase price included in the construction permit fee. The water meter will be
available for pick up by the contractor at the Public Works Garage during regular business hours. The
meter shall be installed by a private contractor. Upon completion of meter installation, the contractor
shall notify the Utility Department. The Utility Department will then install the remote reading device
on the water meter. Water meter charges and remote reading device installation fees shall be set by the
City Council by resolution.
(F) Inspection. Notice must be given to the City by every person who is constructing or altering
any sewer or drain connected or proposed to be connected with the sewerage system when the work is
ready for inspection and before rendering the inspection impossible by covering the work. Installation
of water service lines 4 inches in diameter or greater will require inspection by a representative of the
City’s Public Works Department. This inspection will include at a minimum, a hydrostatic pressure
test or visual leak detection test at the discretion of the inspector. The contractor shall hire a City
approved independent testing laboratory to collect and analyze a water sample to determine if the
water main is bacteriologically safe. The water sampling must be witnessed by the City’s inspector.
Water will remain shut off to the water service line until the City receives a passing report from the
independent testing laboratory. Utility inspection fees, including a re-inspection charges, shall be set
by the City Council by resolution.
(G) Water conservation.
(1) Lawn sprinkling. It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property to sprinkle a
lawn, wash a motor vehicle or to accomplish any non-essential use not involving private or public
sanitation or health when the same is prohibited in accordance herewith.
(2) Water emergency. After 24-hours’ notice following broadcast by local radio stations, or
immediately after hand-delivered special notice that a water emergency exists, it is unlawful for the
owner or occupant of any property to use water for sprinkling a lawn, washing a motor vehicle, or any
other non-essential use not involving private or public sanitation or health. The water emergency shall
continue until further notice by local radio station or newspaper.
(3) Ban. From May 15 to September 1 of each year, an odd/even lawn sprinkling ban shall
be in effect for all lawn sprinkling systems supplied by water from the City of Hastings water utility.
Properties with even numbered addresses may sprinkle lawns only on days with even numbered dates.
Properties with odd numbered addresses may sprinkle only on days with odd numbered dates. A 1-
week exemption from the odd/even sprinkling ban may be granted for newly planted sod, grass or
landscaping upon registering for the exemption and recommendation of the Hastings Utility
Department. Other exemptions may be granted upon evaluation and recommendation of the Hastings
Utility Superintendent. The utility billing address will establish the permitted odd or even day for
20
sprinkling for homeowners associations with both odd and even residences.
(H) Connection to City sanitary sewer and water mains.
(1) It is unlawful for any person not expressly authorized by the City to tap a water
distribution main or sewage collection main.
(2) All individual connections to the sanitary sewer system and/or water system shall be
charged access fees with the exception of fire services that only provide water to fire sprinkling
systems. At the time of connection to the sanitary sewer system and/or water system, or expansions to
existing sanitary sewer and water services that result in MCES sewer availability charges being levied,
all necessary permits, licenses, and fees, including but not limited to water availability charges (WAC),
MCES sewer availability charges (SAC), City sewer availability charges (SAC), meter charge and
permit fee, shall be paid by the owner in addition to the fees provided for by Paragraph E, if applicable.
(a) The number of City SAC units and the number of WAC units charged at the time of
connection to the sanitary sewer system and/or water system shall be equal to the number of MCES
SAC units charged. A single WAC unit will be charged for water main connections for lawn irrigation
services 2 inches in diameter and smaller. Lawn irrigation services larger than 2 inches in diameter
must be approved by the City Council and the WAC fee will be based on the ratio of pipe area to 2-
inch diameter pipe.
(b) Collected water availability charges and City sewer availability charges shall be used
to fund water system and sanitary sewer system capital improvements.
(c) Water availability charges (WAC) and sanitary sewer connection fees shall be
determined by the Council and adopted by resolution.
(3) All easement rights necessary to connect to the sanitary sewer and/or water system shall
be acquired at the expense of the property owner.
(4) All costs related to the connection of the sanitary sewer service and/or water service to
the property shall be borne by the property owner.
(5) Any property which is sought to be connected to the City sanitary sewer and/or water
systems and which was not assessed for the sanitary sewer and/or water mains when they were
installed shall, in addition to the charges listed in division (H)(2) above, be charged a connection fee
equivalent to the front footage of the lot multiplied by the average annual rate of assessment being
assessed for sanitary sewers and/or water mains during the year in which the connection is made. The
annual rate of assessment shall be determined by the City Engineer.
(I) Sewage and waste control rules and regulations adopted. The MCES Rules and Regulations
are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein.
(J) Required hookup to City sanitary sewer. All properties currently served with on-site sewer
systems shall be required to hookup at owner’s expense to City sanitary sewer within 1 year of such
time as service becomes available to a property boundary. Furthermore, properties currently being
served by on-site sewer systems which have available access to City sanitary sewer as of the effective
date of this section (1-14-1994) shall be required to hook-up within 1 year.
21
(K) Required hookup to City water. All properties currently served with private wells for potable
water needs shall be required to hookup at owner’s expense to the City water system within 1 year of
such time as service becomes available to a property boundary. Furthermore, properties currently
being served by private wells which have available access to City water service as of the effective date
of this section (1-14-1994) shall be required to hook-up within 1 year. (Prior Code, § 12.21)
(L) RPZ reporting requirements. All facilities with RPZ installations shall forward a copy of the
Minnesota Department of Health required annual inspection report to the Public Works Department for
review. Failure to provide the Public Works Department with a copy of the RPZ annual inspection
report may result in disconnection of the water service. (Ord. 545, passed 3-6-2006)
penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.06 SANITARY SEWER, WATER MAIN, AND UTILITY SERVICE IMPROVEMENT SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT POLICY.
(A) Generally. Sanitary sewer, water main, and utility service improvements shall be assessed as
1 combined project cost with street, sidewalk, and storm sewer improvements based on estimated
benefit of the improvements of the property assessed. Benefit shall be defined as the increase in
property value attributable to the public improvements. The cost of replacing existing water and
sanitary sewer service lines within the street right-of-way as part of a street reconstruction project shall
not be assessed against abutting property but shall be funded by the City Water or Wastewater Fund.
(B) Determination of benefit. The estimated benefit of the public improvements shall be
determined by the Public Works Director, subject to approval by the City Council, and based on an
opinion of special benefit for a typical property prepared by a Certified General Real Estate Appraiser.
(C) Sanitary sewer, water main, and utility service improvements.
(1) Assessments for the construction of sanitary sewer lines greater than 10 inches in
diameter shall be on the basis of an equivalent 10-inch diameter sanitary sewer. The additional cost for
installing sanitary sewer lines greater than 10 inches in diameter shall be paid by the City.
Assessments for the construction of water mains greater than 8 inches in diameter shall be on the basis
of an equivalent 8-inch diameter water main. The additional cost for installing water mains greater
than 8 inches in diameter shall be paid by the City.
(2) The cost of replacing or repairing existing sanitary lines shall not be assessed against
abutting property owners but shall be funded by the City’s Waste Water Fund. The cost of replacing
or repairing existing water mains shall not be assessed against abutting property owners but shall be
funded by the City’s Water Fund.
(3) A presumption will be made for new sanitary sewer, water main, and utility service
construction that the project cost of the ordered improvements divided among the improved properties
will be less than or equal to the special benefit of the improvements to the properties being assessed.
The project cost shall reflect the maximum equivalent costs of a 10-inch diameter sanitary sewer and
8-inch diameter water main as listed above. The Public Works Director may order an opinion of
22
special benefit if the Public Works Director questions whether the project cost may exceed special
benefit, or if the property owner(s) to be assessed request(s) an opinion of special benefit and the City
Council orders the opinion of special benefit to be performed.
(4) A per lot assessment basis shall be used for new sanitary sewer, water main, or utility
service improvements, except where inconsistencies in lot size, frontage, and/or development densities
exist, in which case assessments based on abutting frontage may be used. In general, there should be
no City participation for new sanitary sewer, water main, or utility service improvements except for
large sanitary sewer or water mains as listed above.
(D) Unusual conditions. This assessment policy is intended to set guidelines for assessing
improvements and yet to be general and flexible enough so that the most logical method may be
chosen to fit individual circumstances. To meet extreme or very unusual conditions, the City reserves
the right to levy an assessment or an improvement in a manner not outlined in this policy without
affecting or negating any portion of this policy for use in normal conditions. (Prior Code, § 12.31)
Cross-reference:
For street, sidewalk and storm sewer assessments, see § 90.15
§ 51.07 INTERCEPTOR SEWER CHARGES.
(A) Generally. All newly platted residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional
development shall be charged interceptor sewer charges, which shall be collected at the time of
platting. The interceptor sewer charge shall be determined by the Council and adopted by resolution.
The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the
office of the City Clerk, and shall be uniformly enforced.
(B) Determination of charges due. One interceptor sewer charge shall be collected for each
residential unit proposed to be developed. Six interceptor sewer charges shall be collected for every
acre of commercial, industrial, or institutional development proposed to be developed. The number of
interceptor sewer charges to be paid by the developer shall be determined by the Planning Director
through a review of the development’s preliminary plat.
(C) Development of unplatted property. When development occurs on unplatted property where
sanitary sewer service is available, an interceptor sewer charge shall become due and payable upon site
plan approval and before any development occurs on the property or before any building permits are
issued for the property.
(D) Use of charges. Collected interceptor sewer charges shall be used to fund sanitary sewer
system capital improvements. (Prior Code, § 12.60) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.08 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) For the purpose of providing funds to meet operating and maintenance cost of the sewerage
system, there is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premises which
may have an active sewer connection with the sanitary sewerage system of the City, or which may
otherwise discharge sewage or industrial waste either directly or indirectly, into the system or any part
thereof. The charges and rates shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the
quantity may be measured by the water meter or meters of the City Utility Department serving the lot,
parcel of land, or premises. The charges and rates shall be calculated upon a quantity basis and shall
23
be determined and payable as hereinafter provided.
(B) Charges for single and 2-family dwellings shall be based on a winter-quarter water meter
reading except as otherwise provided and except as noted in division (C) below. The winter-quarter
reading shall include 3 of the following months: November, December, January, February, or March.
The amount of water used in the winter-quarter shall be used to compute the quarterly charge for each
sewer connection and the charge shall apply for the remaining 3 quarters of the year. The 3 months
that apply shall be as determined by operating procedures of the City Utility Department, applied on a
uniform basis. This division (B) shall continue the procedures and methods previously applied for
determining the applicable single- and 2-family dwelling sewer service charges.
(C) For customers who show minimal or no consumption for the winter quarter, the City will use
a fixed amount of gallons (to be set by City Council resolution) as a base rate for these winter
vacationers for the remaining 3 quarters. This base rate will be used unless the following quarter’s
consumption is less, than that consumption will be used for their sewer rate.
(D) If any lot, parcel of land, or premises which discharge sewage or industrial wastes into the
sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly obtains part or all of the water used thereon from
sources other than the City Utility Department and the water so obtained is not measured by a meter in
a manner which is acceptable to the Council, then, in such case the Council shall permit the discharge
of the sewage or industrial waste into its sanitary sewerage system only when the owner of the lot,
parcel of land or premises or some other interested party at his or her expense shall install and maintain
a water meter which shall be satisfactory to the Council. The water meters shall be installed so as to
measure all water received on the lot, parcel of land, or premises and the above charges and rates shall
be applied to the quantity of water received, as measured by the meters. However, if it shall be
deemed impracticable by the Council to measure the water used on any lot, parcel of land, or premises,
a flat charge may be made in accordance with estimated use of water on the lot, parcel of land, or
premises.
(E) If a lot, parcel of land, or premises discharges sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary
sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, and the amount of water is such that the rate of charge
will be in excess of the minimum bill therefore and if it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Council
that a portion of the water measured by the water meter or meters does not and cannot enter the
sanitary sewerage system, then, and in that event, the Council is hereby authorized to determine, in
such a manner and by the method as they may deem practicable, the percentage of the water measured
by the meter which enters the sanitary sewerage system. In such case the charges and rates shall be
based upon the percentage of the metered water so determined by the Council. In the alternative, in
any such case of other or additional meters in the manner that the quantity of water which actually
enters the sanitary sewerage system may be determined; in that case the charges or rates shall be based
upon the amount of water so shown actually to enter the sewerage system.
(F) For any lot, parcel of land, or premises from which connection is made with the City
sewerage system, or which begins to discharge sewage or industrial waste into the City sewerage
system either directly or indirectly, after this section becomes effective, the charges and rates for the
first payment period after the beginning date of sewage or industrial waste discharge into the City
sewerage system, shall be based upon the per diem pro rata amount of the established minimum charge
or shall be based upon the water consumed at the established rates, whichever is the larger.
(G) The Council shall have the power to classify the sewage or industrial wastes discharged into
the sewerage system based upon its concentration and cost of disposal and fix just and reasonable rates
24
and charges for its disposal according to the classification, and the Council shall have the power to
increase or decrease all rates and charges in this section provided for as the same may be reasonably
required.
(H) The City Finance Department shall compute the amount due the City for service charges and
render a statement thereof quarterly, or at the times as the Council may direct, to the owner or occupant
of any premises served, or to both. All amounts due hereunder shall be payable at the office of the
City Treasurer, or where otherwise designated by the Council. (Prior Code, § 12.70)
§ 51.09 INDUSTRIAL USER STRENGTH CHARGE.
(A) Recitals. The MCES organized and existing under the laws of the State of Minnesota (the
Commission), in order to receive and retain grants in compliance with the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments in 1972 and regulations thereunder (the Act), has determined to impose an
industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal System (as defined in
M.S. § 473.121, Subdivision 24, as it may be amended from time to time) to recover operation and
maintenance costs of treatment works attributable to the strength of the discharge of industrial waste,
the sewer strength charge being in addition to the charge based upon the volume of discharge. In order
for the City to pay the costs based upon strength of industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by
the Commission, it is hereby found, determined, and declared to be necessary to establish sewer
strength charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial users receiving waste
treatment services within or served by the City. Furthermore, M.S. § 444.075, Subdivision 3, as it may
be amended from time to time, empowers the City to make the sewer charge a charge against the
owner, lessee, occupant, or all of them and certify unpaid charges to the County Auditor as a tax lien
against the property served.
(B) Establishment of strength charges. For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the City
each year by the Commission that are based upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the City, there is hereby approved, adopted, and
established, in addition to the sewer charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon
each company or corporation receiving waste treatment services within or served by the City, based
upon strength or industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the City (the strength charge).
(C) Establishment of strength charge formula. For the purpose of computation of the strength
charge established by division (B) above, there is hereby established, approved, and adopted in
compliance with the Act the same strength charge formula designated in Resolution No. 76-172
adopted by the governing body of the Commission on 6-15-1976, the formula being based upon
pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced through an evaluation of pollution
qualities in excess of an annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance
of waste treatment services provided by the Commission.
(D) Strength charge payment. It is hereby approved, adopted, and established that the strength
charge established by division (B) above shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste
treatment services and subject thereto before the twentieth day next succeeding the date of billing
thereof to the user by or on behalf of the City, and the payment thereof shall be deemed to be
delinquent if not so paid to the billing entity before the date. Furthermore, it is hereby established,
approved, and adopted that if the payment is not paid before the date an industrial user shall pay
interest compounded monthly at the rate of 2/3 of 1% per month on the unpaid balance due.
25
(E) Establishment of tax lien. As provided by M.S. § 444.075, Subdivision 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, it is hereby approved, adopted, and established that if payment of the
strength charge established by division (B) above is not paid before the sixtieth day next succeeding
the date of billing thereof to the industrial user by or on behalf of the City, the delinquent sewer
strength charge, plus accrued interest established pursuant to division (D) above, shall be deemed to be
a charge against the owner, lessee, and occupant of the property served, and the City or its agent shall
certify the unpaid delinquent balance to the County Auditor with taxes against the property served for
collection as other taxes are collected; provided, however, that the certification shall not preclude the
City or its agent from recovery of the delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under any
other available remedy. (Prior Code, § 12.72)
' 51.10 STORM WATER UTILITY.
A storm water utility is established with the inclusion of Section 51.10 as follows:
51.10 Storm Water Utility
(A) Statutory authority. Minnesota Statute ' 444.075, authorizes cities to impose just and
equitable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer facilities. By this section, the City elects
to exercise such authority, establishing a municipal storm water utility.
(B) Purpose. It is the intent of this section to establish a storm water utility to collect charges to
finance costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the City’s storm sewer system, and
implementation of storm water management programs and storm water improvements.
(C) Land use. For the purpose of the storm water utility, land use categories are defined as
follows.
(1) Low Density Residential. Detached single family dwellings less than 5 acres in size. For
the purposes of calculating storm water utility fees, all Low Density Residential units are assumed to
be 1/3 acre in size.
(2) Medium Density Residential. Lots containing multiple dwelling units such as duplexes,
town houses, quad homes and associated common open space that is privately owned. For the purposes
of calculating storm water utility fees, all Medium Density Residential units are assumed to be 1/6 acre
in size.
(3) High Density Residential. Multiple dwelling units such as apartment complexes and
senior housing, which are comprised of multiple levels of individual dwellings.
(4) Manufactured housing. Manufactured and mobile homes that are part of a common
manufactured home park.
(5) Commercial. Properties that contain retail sales, offices, professional services, hotels or
motels and private recreational facilities operated for profit such as theaters and bowling alleys.
26
(6) Industrial. Properties used for general contracting, manufacturing, warehousing, goods
movement facilities, communications, utilities and wholesale trade.
(7) Public/institutional. Those schools, religious institutions, churches, hospitals, nursing
homes, YMCA, state and federal government facilities and Dakota County
government offices and library included in the list which is found in the
following list.
TAXPIN Full Name Area - AC
196315001000 REGINA MEDICAL CENTER 0.66
196315002000 REGINA MEDICAL CENTER 6.14
196315001001 REGINA MEDICAL CENTER 5.65
193215006052 LIFE TABERNACLE 0.16
193215004015 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 0.42
197730008001 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 6.03
193215102022 CHRISTS FAMILY CHURCH INC 0.21
193215103022 CHRISTS FAMILY CHURCH INC 0.21
193215105122 SOO LINE RR 0.08
193215106122 CHRISTS FAMILY CHURCH INC 0.21
193215107022 CHRISTS FAMILY CHURCH INC 0.21
193215108022 CHRISTS FAMILY CHURCH INC 0.21
193215101023 CHRIST'S FAMILY CHURCH INC 0.21
193215001216 HASTINGS ECONOMICDEV
REDEV AUTHORITY
0.91
193215104022 CHRISTS FAMILY CHURCH 0.13
193215103123 CHRIST FAMILY CHURCH 0.32
193215006045 ST LUKES EPISC PARISH 0.42
193215008045 ST LUKES EPISC PARISH 0.42
190270001050 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 15.07
190270001188 CORNERSTONE BIBLECH 4.09
193215008047 ST ELIZABETH ANN SETON 1.70
190280001066 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 0.32
190280001066 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 53.74
191050020018 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 2.40
27
193215005065 OUR SAVIOURS LUTH CH 0.21
193215006065 OUR SAVIOURS LUTH CH 0.23
TAXPIN Full Name Area - AC
193215008065 OUR SAVIOURS LUTHCH 0.45
196660201001 SHEPHERD OF THE VALLEY
LUTHERAN CHURCH
4.00
193220002000 COUNTY OF DAKOTA 0.08
193220001001 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 41.68
190290002035 COUNTY OF DAKOTA 7.43
190290001030 COUNTY OF DAKOTA 1.93
190290001030 COUNTY OF DAKOTA 36.63
193203001001 COUNTY OF DAKOTA 3.43
190290002051 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 12.15
191360003002 METH EPISC CH 0.61
191360005002 UNITED METHODIST CHURCH OF
HASTINGS
0.30
191360008002 UNITED METHODIST CHURCH OF
HASTINGS
0.30
191360009002 HASTINGS METH CH 0.30
191360012002 METH EPISC CH 0.61
191360004005 CALVARY BAPT CH 0.78
196580001001 CH ST ELIZABETH ANN SETON 18.46
190390003001 CALVARY BAPT CH 2.81
190320001001 ST PHILIPS LUTH CH 0.81
190320001001 ST PHILIPS LUTH CH 5.06
191187501001 AUGUSTANA HOME OF
HASTINGS
3.87
190340001060 HASTINGS NATIONAL GUARD 6.15
193215006053 1ST JOHNS EVANG LUTH CH 0.30
193215008154 ST JOHNS EVANG LUTH CH 0.63
193215008055 THE CHURCH OF ST ELIZABETH
ANN SETON
0.26
191050012023 IMMANUEL BIBLE CHAPEL 0.34
28
193215008178 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 0.85
193215002044 FIRST UNITED PRESB CH 0.42
TAXPIN Full Name Area - AC
196320201001 REGINA MEDICAL CENTER 12.38
190280001268 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 1.43
193215002065 OUR SAVIOURS LUTH CH 0.45
193215003065 OUR SAVIOURS LUTH CH 0.23
193215004065 OUR SAVIORS EVANGEL
LUTHERAN CHURCH
0.21
193215004068 FIRST BAPTIST CH 0.85
193215008178 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 0.83
193215007077 INDEPENDENT SCHOOL DIST 200 0.55
(8) Golf course. Public and private golf courses.
(9) Agricultural. Undeveloped land which is used primarily for agricultural purposes and
may include a homestead or other structures.
(10) Open space/vacant. Undeveloped land that is used for non-agricultural purposes, such as
cemeteries and vacant lots with no existing structures.
(D) Rate structure. The charges imposed as a part of this storm water utility shall be derived from
parcels net acreage and residential equivalency factor (REF). The REF is defined as the ratio of runoff
volume generated by 1 acre of low density residential land. The residential equivalency factors for
each land use established as part of ths storm water utility shall be as follows:
Land Use REF
Low Density Residential 1.0
Medium Density Residential 1.1
High Density Residential 1.3
Manufactured Housing 1.0
Commercial/Office 1.6
Industrial 1.4
Golf Course 0.6
Open Space/Vacant 0.6
29
Agricultural 1.0/parcel
(1) All storm water utility fees shall be calculated based on the following formula (REF)
(Base Rate as established by the City Council) = Rate per Acre.
(2) Low Density Residential and Medium Density Residential parcels shall be charged on a
per unit basis with respect to the average lot sizes described above. Agricultural parcels shall be
charged 1.0 REF regardless of parcel size. All other land uses shall be charged on a per acre basis.
(3) The quarterly base rate shall be established by City Council and amended by Council
annually as deemed necessary.
(4) Exemptions: The following land uses are exempt from the storm water utility fee:
(a) Public rights-of-way;
(b) Public/institutional properties;
(c) Delineated wetlands, lakes, ponds and rivers;
(d) Land outside of the City; and
(e) Other properties as deemed appropriate by the City Council.
(E) Billing, payment and penalty. These charges shall be included on the utility accounts of each
property and are payable in accordance with the provision for filing and payment of municipal utility
bills. Penalties for late payment or non-payment of billings for charges shall be the same as those
applicable for municipal utility billings.
(F) Rate appeal. Property owners may appeal their storm water utility fee by providing data
demonstrating that the actual storm water runoff volume from their site is substantially different from
that of the assigned Land Uses. These appeals shall be made to the City Administrator who may
recommend adjustments to individual parcels based on information provided to the City Council for
consideration. No adjustments to the utility fee shall be made retroactive.
(G) Credits. Properties of 2 acres in size or greater may receive a 50% credit on their storm water
utility charge by installing and maintaining storm water runoff control features that retain 100% of the
property’s runoff from a 10 year storm event, defined as a 4.1 inch rainfall. The City Administrator
shall determine whether a storm water runoff control feature meets the credit criteria and is being
properly maintained. Failure to properly maintain a storm water control feature may result in loss of
the credit. (Ord. 2009-15, 3rd Series, passed 1-19-2010)
1
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
71. PARKING REGULATIONS
2
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
70.01 Crossing of double yellow lines
70.02 Operation of motorized golf carts and 4-wheel all-terrain vehicles on city streets
70.03 Bicycles
70.04 Snowmobile regulations
70.05 Unlawful transport of refuse
70.06 Exhibition driving
70.07 Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal
70.08 Regulation of motor vehicles on public, semi-public, and private property
§ 70.01 CROSSING OF DOUBLE YELLOW LINES.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to cross a double yellow line for the
purpose of parking on the opposite side of the street. (Prior Code,§ 7.03) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 70.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS, FOUR WHEEL SIDE-BY-SIDE ALLTERRAIN
VEHICLES AND UTILITY TASK VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the operation of motorized golf carts, four
wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicles or utility task vehicles by disabled individuals on designated city
streets in the City of Hastings pursuant to the authority given to the city by M.S. § 169.045, as it may be
amended from time to time, now in effect.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISABLED INDIVIDUAL or DISABLED PERSON. A person who:
(a) Because of disability cannot walk without significant risk of falling;
(b) Because of disability cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest;
(c) Because of disability cannot walk without the aid of another person, a walker, a cane,
crutches, braces, a prosthetic device, or a wheelchair;
3
(d) Is restricted by a respiratory disease to such an extent that the person=s forced
(respiratory) expiratory volume for 1 second, when measured by spirometry, is less than 1 meter;
(e) Has an arterial oxygen tension (PA02) of less than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
(f) Uses portable oxygen; or
(g) Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person’s functional limitations are
classified in severity as Class III or Class IV according to the standards set by the American Heart
Association.
FOUR WHEEL SIDE-BY-SIDE ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A side-by-side all-terrain
vehicle as defined in M.S. § 84.92, as it may be amended from time to time, that has four wheels, and is
carrying only the operator of the vehicle and otherwise meets the requirements of this section.
MOTORIZED GOLF CART. A 3- or 4-wheeled, self-propelled vehicle that is carrying only the
operator of the vehicle and otherwise meets the requirements of this section.
UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. A side-by-side, off-road vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled
by an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less,
and has a total dry weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds, that is carrying only the operator of the
vehicle and otherwise meets the requirements of this section.
(C) Required permit. All disabled persons who desire to operate a motorized golf cart, four wheel
side-by-side all-terrain vehicle or utility task n vehicle pursuant to this section must first obtain a permit
from the city.
(1) Permit applications shall be available at the City Clerk’s office and shall be in a form
approved by resolution of the City Council.
(2) At the time of application, the applicant shall:
(a) Provide proof of insurance complying with the requirements of M.S.§ 65B.48,
Subdivision 5, now in effect and as it may be amended from time to time;
(b) Submit a certificate signed by a physician stating that the applicant is able to safely
operate a motorized golf cart, four wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle on the city
streets; and
(c) All other information as may be required by the city.
(3) All permits granted pursuant to this section shall be issued for a period not to exceed 1 year
and may be renewed annually by complying with the requirements of this section.
(D) Revocation. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the City Council, at
any time, if evidence is presented to the City Council that the permittee cannot safely operate the
motorized golf cart, four wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle on the designated
streets. Before any permit can be revoked by the City Council, the permittee shall be given notice of the
Council Meeting where the permit will be discussed. At that Council Meeting, the permittee will be given
an opportunity to address the Council.
4
(E) Designated streets. A permittee shall be allowed to operate a motorized golf cart, four wheel
side-by-side all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle on all city streets in the City of Hastings. A permittee
may not operate a motorized golf cart, four wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicle or utility task vehicle on
any county road or state highways in the City of Hastings. This does not prohibit a permittee from
crossing a county road or state highway while traveling on a city street.
(F) Times of operation. Motorized golf carts, four wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicles and utility
task vehicles may only be operated on streets designated in division (E) above from sunrise to sunset.
Motorized golf carts, four wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicles and utility task vehicles shall not be
operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions
or at any time when there is insufficient light to see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of
500 feet.
(G) Slow-moving vehicle emblem. Motorized golf carts, four wheel side-by-side all-terrain vehicles
and utility task vehicles shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem as provided for in M.S.§ 169.522,
as it may be amended from time to time, whenever they are operated on designated streets.
(H) Application of traffic laws. Every person operating a motorized golf cart, four wheel side-byside
all-terrain vehicles or utility task vehicle shall have all of the rights and duties applicable to the driver
of any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time,
except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts or utility task vehicles.
(I) Required equipment. All motorized golf carts, four wheel side-by-side, all-terrain vehicles or
utility task vehicles operating on designated streets pursuant to this section shall be equipped with a mirror
that is located so as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the
rear of the vehicle.
(J) Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior Code,§ 7.04) Penalty, see §10.99 (Ord. 2014-18, 3rd Series Adopted 11-03-14) (
Ord. 2015-08, 3rd Series, Adopted 6-15-15)
§ 70.03 BICYCLES.
(A) Traffic laws apply. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except as
to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature
can have no application.
(B) Manner and number riding.
(1) It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(2) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the number for which it is
designated or equipped.
(C) Hitching rides. It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled,
or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
5
(D) Where to ride.
(1) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
(2) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single file except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(3) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders
shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
(E) Right-of-way. Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
Provided, that it is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on a sidewalk in a business area.
(F) Carrying articles. It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle,
or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least 1 hand upon the handlebars.
(G) Lighting and brake equipment. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a
lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department which is visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition
to the red reflector. (Prior Code,§ 7.20) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 70.04 SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS.
(A) Scope of application. Notwithstanding provisions of this chapter to the contrary, this section
shall regulate the operation of snowmobiles in the City of Hastings. All provisions of this chapter apply to
snowmobiles. The intent of this section is to provide corridors for snowmobiles to exit and enter the city.
No recreational snowmobiling shall be allowed within the city limits.
(B) Permitted areas of operation.
(1) Snowmobiles may be operated on the following streets in the City of Hastings which are
provided as corridors for snowmobiles to exit and enter the city:
(a) 10th Street between Highway 61 and Highway 291;
(b) 4th Street, West to State Street, North to 1st Street, West to the city limits;
(c) Pine Street between 2nd Street to County Road 47;
(d) Ramsey Street between 2nd Street and 18th Street;
(e) Tyler Street between 2nd Street and 18th Street;
6
(f) 15th Street between Tyler Street and the west city limits;
(g) 18th Street between Highway 61 and Pine Street;
(h) Ashland Street between Highway 55 and County Road 47;
(i) 36th Street from Kendall Drive to Highway 61; and
(j) General Sieben Drive from 4th Street to Carleton Drive
(2) Snowmobiles may be operated on any residential street when traveling to or from the
operator=s residence and 1 of the streets listed in division (B)(1) above.
(3) When leaving the city, no person operating a snowmobile shall cross any of the streets listed
in division (B)(1) above. When a snowmobile comes to a street listed in division (B)(1), the snowmobile
must travel on the street listed in that paragraph to the city limits. When returning to the city, the
snowmobile must be operated on 1 of the streets listed in division (B)(1) to a street which will provide the
most direct route back to the operator=s residence.
(4) A snowmobile service district is created between Highway 316 and Highway 61, from 33rd
Street south to the southern city limits. Within this service district, snowmobile operators are permitted to
stop at restaurants, gas stations, lodging facilities, and parking lots for park and ride operations.
(C) Prohibited areas of operation. No snowmobile shall be operated in any of the following
locations:
(1) Public sidewalks;
(2) Boulevards within any public right-of-way;
(3) Private property of another without the specific permission of the property owner;
(4) Any trails, walk paths, bike paths, or alleys;
(5) Within any ponding basins;
(6) Within any city park, except the boulevard area of Roadside Park up to a maximum of 50
feet south of the centerline of Highway 55;
(7) All school property;
(8) All city property;
(9) Lake Rebecca; and/or
(10) Ditches of state highways and county roads except as allowed by state law and by county
ordinance.
(D) Manner of operation.
7
(1) When operating a snowmobile on a permitted street, all snowmobiles shall be operated on
the most right-hand portion of the lane used for traffic traveling in the same direction of travel.
(2) No person shall operate or be in physical control of a snowmobile anywhere in the city
while under the influence of alcohol or drugs in violation of M.S. § 84.91, now in effect and as it may be
amended from time to time.
(3) No snowmobile shall be operated at a speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
surrounding circumstances, but in no event shall a snowmobile be operated at a speed greater than 20 mph
while traveling on a public street or right-of-way. Within the service district, snowmobiles shall not be
operated at a speed greater than 10 mph.
(4) No snowmobile shall be operated in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly
in disregard for the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or
cause injury or damage to any person or property.
(5) No snowmobile shall be operated in the city from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., on any day,
except when returning to the operator=s residence and on a street listed in division (B)(1) above.
(6) No snowmobile operator shall allow their snowmobile to tow any person or thing on a
public street except when using a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile and when the item
being towed is equipped with the proper reflective material required by Minnesota Statutes.
(7) No person while operating a snowmobile shall intentionally drive, chase, run over, or kill
any animal.
(8) No person shall leave a snowmobile in a public place without locking the ignition, removing
the key, and taking the key with the operator.
(9) All snowmobiles in the city must be operated in conformance with M.S. Chapters 84 and
169 which are incorporated herein by reference, which are now in effect and as they may be amended
from time to time.
(10) No snowmobiles shall be operated in the city from April 2 to November 30 of each year.
(E) Required standards of operation.
(1) Equipment. All snowmobiles operated in the city must be properly equipped in compliance
with M.S. Chapter 84, now in effect and as it may be amended from time to time.
(2) Operators. No person under 18 years of age shall operate a snowmobile except in
compliance with Minnesota state law. (Prior Code,§ 7.30) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 70.05 UNLAWFUL TRANSPORT OF REFUSE.
It is unlawful for any person to haul or transport refuse, as defined in this code, upon any street unless
8
the same is in a watertight container on all sides and the bottom, with a tight-fitting cover, or in a vehicle
with a leak-proof body and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other means so as to completely
eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo, and along a route directly from the point of origin to a legal place
of disposal. (Prior Code,§ 7.40) Penalty, see§ 10.99
9
§ 70.06 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
(A) Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving when a motor vehicle
stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates, or turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal,
gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing, or skidding, or, as to 2-wheeled or 3-wheeled
motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface.
(B) Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition driving on any street,
parking lot, or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for the
operation to prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section shall not apply to
driving on a licensed racetrack with the permission and under the auspices and direction of the licensee.
(Prior Code,§ 7.50) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 70.07 DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic-control device by driving upon or
through any private property.
(Prior Code, §7.51) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 70.08 REGULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC, SEMI-PUBLIC, AND PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTOR VEHICLES. Self-propelled motorized vehicles, whether or not licensed by the State
of Minnesota, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, mini bikes, dune buggies, trail
bikes, go-carts and all terrain vehicles (but specifically excluding snowmobiles as defined and regulated
by City Code).
PARKING LOTS. Areas designated for parking of motor vehicles and access and entrance
roads used in connection with the parking lots.
PRIVATE PROPERTY. Property, whether owned by government unit or private person or
corporations, not open for use by the public, including but not limited to yards of residences, apartment
buildings, industrial and commercial locations, railroads, cemeteries, and golf courses.
PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property owned by a governmental body that may be used by the public,
subject to reasonable regulations by the government body, including: public parks; county, city and school
parks, grounds, yards and parking lots, but excluding state, city and county streets and roads.
10
SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY. Privately-owned property, generally open for use by the public,
including commercial and institutional parking lots and other property generally used by patrons of a
commercial business or institution.
(B) It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle:
(1) On private property of one other than the owner, and on semi-public property (except
parking lots), without express permission of the owner;
(2) On public property (excluding parking lots) unless area is expressly posted to allow the use
by governmental until having control of area in which case operation thereon shall comply with all posted
restrictions and regulations;
(3) On parking lots and (when authority is granted as above provided) on public property,
semi-public property and private property:
(a) Contrary to posted instructions and directions;
(b) At unsafe or unreasonable speeds;
(c) In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger life or property;
(d) While under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or narcotic drug or combination
thereof; and/or
(e) So as to create or cause unnecessary engine noises or tire squeal or so as to cause the
tires to spin or slide upon the acceleration or stopping of the vehicle or so as to cause the motor vehicle to
turn abruptly or swerve from side to side or so as to create a substantial likelihood of damage to person or
property.
(4) On any public, semi-public, or private property (except parking lots) during the hours from
10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. except that a property owner or persons specifically authorized by him or her may
operate between these hours but the operation shall comply with the prohibition set forth in division
(B)(3) above.
(C) It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on public, private, or semi-public property, including
parking lots, unless equipped as follows:
(1) With standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation
of the motor vehicle to the minimum necessary for operation. No muffler cutouts, by-passes, straight
pipes, or similar devices shall be allowed;
(2) Without brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the vehicle;
11
(3) Without a deadman throttle which when pressure is removed will cause the motor to be
disengaged from the drive system if such a throttle was part of the original equipment on the vehicle; and
(4) When operated at night, without at least 1 clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness
under normal atmospheric conditions. The headlamps shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with at least 1 red tail lamp,
having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance
of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment
shall be required and shall be in operating condition when the vehicle is operated during the hours of 2
hour after sunset to 2 hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility.
(D) It is unlawful to chase, drive after, run over, kill, or injure any animal with a motor vehicle.
(E) Vehicles not licensed under the laws of the State of Minnesota may not be operated on parking
lots, whether publicly owned or semi-private property unless specifically authorized by the owner thereof.
(F) Persons operating motor vehicles the operation of which requires the operator to wear a helmet
under regulations of the State of Minnesota and in particular the Public Safety Department thereof shall,
when operated in the City of Hastings, be operated by a person wearing an approved helmet.
(G) Passengers may not be carried in or upon the vehicle if under the laws of the State of Minnesota,
passengers are not allowed when the vehicle is operated on the public roads. When passengers are under
state law allowed on or in the vehicle, the passengers shall be governed by state law applicable to
passengers on vehicles of that type when operated on public right-of-way. (Prior Code,§ 7.65) Penalty,
see§ 10.99
1
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
71. PARKING REGULATIONS
12
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
71.01 Definitions
71.02 Presumption
71.03 General parking prohibitions
71.04 Unauthorized removal
71.05 Direction to proceed
71.06 Angle parking
71.07 Emergency
71.08 Tractor trailer, trailer, semi-trailer, commercial vehicle/equipment, recreational
vehicle/equipment parking
71.09 Restricted days and hours of parking
71.10 Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise
71.11 Vehicle repair on street
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT. Including but not limited to back hoes, dump trucks,
landscaping equipment, skid steers, wood chippers, cube or box type trailers or trucks, flat bed trailers,
open trailers with rails, tractor trailers, semi-trailers, farm trailers, custom service vehicles, and the like.
LOT. A separate parcel, tract, or area of land undivided by any public street or approved private road,
established by plat, metes and bounds subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, and occupied by or
intended to be developed for and occupied by a principal building or group of the buildings and accessory
buildings, or utilized for a principle use and uses accessory thereto, including the open spaces and yards as
are designed and arranged or required by city code for the building, use, or development.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally manufactured to operate
primarily upon public roads and highways. It includes any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled
vehicle.
13
MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to
travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground, including motor scooter and bicycles with
motor attached, other than those vehicles defined as motorized bicycles.
MOTORIZED BICYCLES. A bicycle that is propelled by a motor of a piston displacement capacity
of 50 cubic centimeters or less, and a maximum of 2 brake horsepower, which is capable of a maximum
speed of not more than 30 mph on a flat surface with no more than 1% grade in any direction when the
motor is engaged.
PASSENGER AUTOMOBILE. Any motor vehicle designed and used for carrying not more than 15
persons including the driver.
PASSENGER VEHICLES. Any passenger automobile, pick-up truck, van, self-propelled
recreational vehicle, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, bus, school bus, or a farm truck.
PICK-UP TRUCK. A truck with a manufacturer=s nominal rated carrying capacity of 3/4 ton or less
commonly known as a pick-up truck.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT. Motorized or non-motorized. Includes but not
limited to boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers and coaches, tent campers, tent trailers,
canoes, snowmobiles, motor homes, jet skis, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, mud trucks, stock cars, stock
car trailers, buses, snowmobile trailers, jet ski trailers, truck toppers, and enclosed box trailers whether
occupied or not by equipment and any trailer capable of carrying any of the foregoing items.
SEMI-TRAILER. A vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a tractor
trailers that a considerable part of its own weight or that of its load rests upon and is carried by the tractor
trailers and includes a trailer drawn by a tractor trailers semi-trailer combination.
TRACTOR TRAILER. A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and
not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load drawn .
TRAILER. Any vehicle designed for carrying property, cargo, or passengers on its own structure and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VAN. Any vehicle of box-like design with no barrier or separation between the operators and the
remainder of the cargo-carrying area, and with a manufactures nominal rated carrying capacity of 3/4 ton
or less
VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, passenger vehicle, recreational vehicle/equipment, or commercial
vehicle/equipment. (Prior Code,§ 8.01) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004)
14
§ 71.02 PRESUMPTION.
As to any vehicle parked in violation of Chapters 70, 71, and 90, when the driver thereof is not
present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of
the owner. (Prior Code,§ 8.02) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 71.03 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic-control device
in any of the following places:
(A) On a sidewalk;
(B) In front of a public or private driveway;
(C) Within an intersection;
(D) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
(E) On a crosswalk;
(F) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
(G) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
(H) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(I) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly sign-posted;
(J) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the stopping, standing, or
parking would obstruct traffic;
(K) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(L) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
(M) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or
(N) Upon private residential property without first receiving consent of the owner thereof.
(Prior Code,§ 8.03) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004) Penalty, see§ 10.99
15
§ 71.04 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by the person into any prohibited area or
away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (Prior Code,§ 8.04) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004)
Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to proceed
by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Prior Code,§ 8.06) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.06 ANGLE PARKING.
Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb marking or signposting,
or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the
front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street, provided that the
front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of 1-way
traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 8.08) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.07 EMERGENCY.
No vehicle shall be left parked on the streets of the City after a snowfall of two inches or more in
depth until streets are plowed to their full width. If a vehicle is found in violation of this subsection, a
citation may be issued and the vehicle may be removed at the owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 8.10) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004) Penalty, see§ 10.99 (Ord. 2014-19, 3rd
Series, passed 11-17-14)
§ 71.08 TRACTOR TRAILER, TRAILER, SEMI-TRAILER, COMMERCIAL VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT,
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT PARKING.
(A) It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer, detached tractor trailer, or commercial
vehicle/equipment upon any street, municipally owned parking lot, or other public property.
(B) It is unlawful to park an attached trailer and semi-trailer or commercial vehicle/equipment, on
any streets or alleys, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same. In no case may tractor
trailer, semi-trailer, or commercial vehicle/equipment parking exceed 6 hours.
(C) It is unlawful to park more than 1 tractor trailer on a private lot in any residential district.
(D) No tractor trailer shall be parked on a lot or in the street when loading or unloading in any
residential district with the motor running for more than a 30-minute period.
(E) It is unlawful to park a trailer of any kind, loaded or unloaded, whether or not attached to a
vehicle, on any street or alley between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. It is unlawful to park a trailer
16
of any kind, loaded or unloaded, whether or not attached to a vehicle on any municipally-owned parking
lot. Trailers parked on the street and alleys between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. must utilize
blocking or other means to prevent the trailer tongue support from damaging the pavement surface.
(F) It is unlawful to park recreational vehicles/equipment on any street or alley, except for the
purpose of loading or unloading the same. In no case may recreational vehicle/equipment being loaded or
unloaded be parked on the be parked on the street in excess of 6 hours. It is unlawful to park recreational
vehicles or recreational equipment on any municipally-owned parking lot except for the Mississippi River,
Lake Rebecca, and Lake Isabel boat ramp parking areas.
(G) It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle/equipment within an alley in such a manner or under
the circumstances as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the alley traveling surface for free
movement of vehicular traffic, except that persons loading or unloading merchandise to stores or other
business establishments and like facilities may, if necessary to the loading or unloading, occupy a greater
portion of the alley so long as the operator of the vehicle ins in the immediate presence of the vehicle to
allow moving of the vehicle when necessary for passage of other vehicles using the alley.
(H) In municipally owned parking lots, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to
be parked thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking, provided that the limitations and
restrictions are sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipally owned parking
lots contrary to the restrictions or limitations so sign-posted.
(Prior Code,§ 8.11) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.09 RESTRICTED DAYS AND HOURS OF PARKING.
It is unlawful for any person to park on any street on any day during prohibited hours on any day, or
in excess of the permitted number of hours when the same has been marked by signposting in each block
or contiguous area of parking thereon, provided that parking on any street is prohibited in excess of 24
hours. This provision shall supplement any other provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code,§ 8.13) (Am. Ord. 519, passed 6-21-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.10 PARKING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING OR SELLING MERCHANDISE.
It is unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit from the city, to park a vehicle on any
street for the purpose of selling merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any merchandise for sale or
a forthcoming event, for a period longer than 15 minutes. Provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to the sale of farm or garden products by the person producing same.
(Prior Code,§ 8.20) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 71.11 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET.
It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon a
street, or attempt to do so, except to service the vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency
repairs thereon. (Prior Code,§ 8.21) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
91. ANIMALS
92. RENTAL HOUSING
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
90. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
2
CHAPTER 90: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
90.1 Scope
90.2 Application
90.3 Traffic and parking control
90.4 Ice and snow on public sidewalks
90.5 Grass, weeds, and trees in streets
90.6 Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk, and curb and gutter
90.7 Street, avenue, alley, and other dedicated public ways excavations
90.8 Vacation of streets; procedure
90.9 Fires, signs, obstructions, and refuse in streets
90.10 Load limits
90.11 Private use of public streets and parking lots
90.12 Curb setback
90.13 Parades
90.14 Sidewalk painting or coloring
90.15 Street, sidewalk, and storm sewer improvement special assessment policy
§ 90.01 SCOPE.
The provisions of Chapters 70, 71, and 90 relate exclusively to the streets, alleys, and private
roads in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles upon the streets, alleys, and private
roads.
(Prior Code, § 6.02)
§ 90.02 APPLICATION.
(A) The provisions of Chapters 70, 71, and 90 applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the
streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles including, but not limited to, those owned or operated
by the United States, this state, or any county, city, town, district, or any other political subdivision
of the state, subject to the specific exemptions as set forth in Chapters 70, 71, and 90 with reference
to authorized emergency vehicles.
(B) Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of Chapters 70, 71, and 90 applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Provisions
specifically referring to bicycles shall be in addition to other provisions of these chapters applying to
vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 6.03)
3
§ 90.03 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
(A) Authority. No permanent device, sign, or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or
parking control unless approved by City Council resolution. The Council may reverse or amend or
otherwise change any action taken by the City Engineer and Chief of Police under this section.
(B) Temporarily restricting or directing traffic and parking; curb painting.
(1) When clearly marked or sign-posted, traffic and parking may be temporarily restricted
for any public or private purpose. All the restrictions shall be in accordance with a uniform policy
promulgated by the Chief of Police but who shall be ultimately responsible to the Council for proper
enforcement thereof.
(2) Restricted or prohibited used of parking and traffic lanes may be designated by painting
the same upon streets and curbs. The work shall be done under the direction of the Chief of Police
and in compliance with the provisions of Chapters 70, 71, and 90.
(3) It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to signposting or marking
authorized and described in this section.
(4) The Chief of Police’s authority to temporarily restrict or direct traffic or parking shall
not exceed a period of 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 6.04) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.04 ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
(A) Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting
private property within 48 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
(B) City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed from all public sidewalks
beginning 48 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow and ice which may be discovered
thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of the removal and the private property adjacent to
which the accumulations were found and removed.
(C) Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Clerk shall, upon direction of the Council, and on
receipt of the information provided for in division (B) above, extend the cost of the removal of snow
or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks which were
cleared, and the special assessments shall at the time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor be
certified for collection as other special assessments are certified and collected.
4
(D) Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Clerk shall, in the alternative, upon direction of the
Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land
adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above, the cost of the clearing
and the cost and disbursements of a civil action therefore.
(E) Placing snow or ice in public street or on other city property. It is unlawful for any person,
not acting under a specific contract with the city, to remove snow from private property and place the
same on a public street (which includes sidewalks) in the quantity, or in the manner, as to cause a
hazard to travel, without adequate arrangements for the immediate removal thereof; and it is also
unlawful for any person not acting under a contract with the city to dump snow on other city
property.
(Prior Code, § 6.05) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05 GRASS, WEEDS, AND TREES IN STREETS.
(A) City to control trees and grass plats. The city shall have control and supervision over all
shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging all streets or other public property, and all street right-of-way
or other public property.
(B) Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds and maintain trees and shrubs. Every
owner of property abutting on any street shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut from the line of
the property nearest to the street in the center of the street. If the grass or weeds in such a place
attain a height in excess of 12 inches it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with this
division (D). Every owner of property abutting on any street shall, subject to the provisions herein
requiring a permit therefore, trim, cut, and otherwise maintain all trees and shrubs from the line of
the property nearest to the street to the center of the street.
(C) City may order work done. The city shall, in cases of failure to comply with division (D)
above, perform the work with employees of the city, keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof
for each lot, piece, or parcel of land abutting upon the street.
(D) Assessment. If the maintenance work is performed by the city as set forth in division (E)
above, the City Clerk shall forthwith upon completion thereof ascertain the cost attributable to each
lot, piece or parcel of abutting land. The City Clerk shall, at the next regular meeting thereof,
present the certificate to the Council and obtain its approval thereof. When the certificate has been
approved it shall be extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against the abutting
land and the special assessment shall, at the time of certifying the taxes to the County Auditor, be
certified and collection, or in the alternative, the city may institute civil suit to collect the cost of the
service.
(Prior Code, § 6.06) Penalty, see § 10.99
5
§ 90.06 CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING,
SIDEWALK, AND CURB AND GUTTER.
(A) Methods of procedure.
(1) Abutting or affected property owners may contract for construct or reconstruct roadway
surfacing, sidewalk, or curb and gutter in accordance with this section if advance payment is made
therefore or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in advance.
(2) With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of
Minnesota Statutes, presently beginning with M.S. § 429.011, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(B) Permit required. It is unlawful to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter, or roadway
surfacing in any street or other public property in the city without a permit in writing from the Public
Works Department. Application for the permit be made in forms approved and provided by the city
and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of
work, and the length of time required to complete the same, provided, that no permit shall be
required for any such improvement ordered installed by the Council. All the applications shall
contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and plans and specifications
consistent with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices shall also accompany
the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person or
property of another caused by the work.
(C) Specifications and standards. All construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing,
sidewalk, and curb and gutter improvements shall be strictly in accordance with specifications and
standards on file in the Engineering Department and open to inspection and copying there. The
specifications and standards may be amended from time to time by the city, but shall be uniformly
enforced.
(D) Inspection. The Public Works Department shall inspect the improvements as deemed
necessary or advisable. Any work not done according to the applicable specifications and standards
shall be removed and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may
be stopped by the Public Works Department if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with
the specifications and standards, but this shall not place a continuing burden upon the city to inspect
or supervise the work. (Prior Code, § 6.07) Penalty, see § 10.99
6
§ 90.07 RIGHT OF WAY MANAGEMENT.
Sec. 1.01. Findings, Purpose, and Intent.
To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and
the appropriate use of the rights of way, the city strives to keep its rights of way in a state of good repair
and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code relating to right of way permits and
administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of
facilities and equipment currently within its rights of way or to be placed therein at some future time. It
is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons
excavating and obstructing the rights of way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally,
this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights of way.
This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially
codified in Minn. Stat. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and 2017
Minn. Laws, ch. 94, art. 9, amending the Act, and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city
and users of the right of way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. R.
7819.0050–7819.9950 and Minn. R., ch. 7560 where possible. To the extent any provision of this
chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent
with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Sec. 1.02. Election to Manage the Public Rights of Way
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and
common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to Minn. Stat. 237.163 subd. 2(b), to manage rights of
way within its jurisdiction.
Sec. 1.03. Definitions.
The following definitions apply in this chapter of this code. References hereafter to “sections” are,
unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms,
whether or not capitalized.
Abandoned Facility. A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the
operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right of way user.
Applicant. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right of way.
City. The City of Hastings, Minnesota. For purposes of section 1.29, city also means the City’s elected
officials, officers, employees, and agents.
Collocate or Collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless
facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is
owned privately, or by the city or other governmental unit.
Commission. The State Public Utilities Commission.
7
Congested Right of Way. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right of way that occurs
when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for
construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral
facilities in conformance with Minn. Stat. § 216D.04, subd. 3, over a continuous length in excess of
500 feet.
Construction Performance Bond. Any of the following forms of security provided at permittee’s
option:
• Individual project bond;
• Cash deposit;
• Security of a form listed or approved under Minn. Stat. § 15.73, subd. 3;
• Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
• Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
• A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction bond, for a time
specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
Degradation. A decrease in the useful life of the right of way caused by excavation in or disturbance of
the right of way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right of way earlier than would be required if
the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
Degradation Cost. Subject to Minn. R. 7819.1100, means the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as
determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in
plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minn. R., parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
Degradation Fee. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to recover costs
associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right of way caused by the excavation, and which
equals the degradation cost.
Department. The department of public works of the city.
Director. The director of the department of public works of the city, or her or his designee.
Delay Penalty. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right of way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
Emergency. A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or
(2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
Equipment. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right of way.
Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right of
way.
Excavation permit. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may
excavate in a right of way. An Excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right of
way described in such permit.
Excavation Permit Fee. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in
Section 1.13.
Facility or Facilities. Any tangible asset in the right of way required to provide Utility Service.
Five-Year Project Plan. Shows projects being contemplated by the city for construction within the
next five years.
8
High Density Corridor. A designated portion of the public right of way within which
telecommunications right of way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to
build and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.
Hole. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less than the width of the
pavement.
Local Representative. A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by
a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the
scope of this chapter.
Management Costs. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights of way, including such
costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying
right of way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right of way work; determining the
adequacy of right of way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and
the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right of way or small wireless facility permits.
Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right of way user for the use of the
right of way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees tied to or
based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the
fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123;
Minn. Stat. §§ 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and
costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section 1.31 of this chapter.
Obstruct. To place any tangible object in a right of way so as to hinder free and open passage over that
or any part of the right of way.
Obstruction Permit. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may
obstruct a right of way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion
of that right of way, for the duration specified therein.
Obstruction Permit Fee. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the costs as provided in
Section 1.13.
Patch or Patching. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of
(1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing
pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all direct ions. A patch is
considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city’s five-year project plan.
Pavement. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right of way and that is paved or
otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
Permit. Has the meaning given “right of way permit” in Minn. Stat. § 237.162.
Permittee. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right of way has been granted by the
city under this chapter.
Person. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however organized, whether
public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural,
corporate, or political.
Probation. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this chapter.
9
Probationary Period. One year from the date that a person has been notified in writing that they have
been put on probation.
Registrant. Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right of
way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right of way or place its facilities
or equipment in the right of way.
Restore or Restoration. The process by which an excavated right of way and surrounding area,
including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed
before excavation.
Restoration Cost. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to achieve the level of
restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission rules.
Public Right of Way or Right of Way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other
dedicated rights of way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right of way does not
include the airwaves above a right of way with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications
or broadcast service. A right of way also does not include city park trails, sidewalks, or access
roadways within the park boundary.
Right of Way Permit. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on
the context, required by this chapter.
Right of Way User. (1) A telecommunications right of way user as defined by Minn. Stat., § 237.162,
subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in the right of way that is used or intended to be
used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right of way.
Service or Utility Service. Includes (1) those services provided by a public utility as defined in Minn.
Stat. 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications right of way user, including
transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable communications systems as defined in
Minn. Stat. ch. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the
city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under Minn. Stat., ch. 308A;
and (6) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling, or heating services.
Service Lateral. An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute or furnish ‘gas, electricity,
communications, or water from a common source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
Small Wireless Facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
(i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or could fit
within such an enclosure; and
(ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such equipment
is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems,
grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public
view within or behind an existing structure or concealment.
Supplementary Application. An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right of way
than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued.
10
Temporary Surface. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of the
existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the
replacement is of pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered full
restoration.
Trench. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than
the width of the pavement.
Telecommunications Right of Way User. A person owning or controlling a facility in the right of
way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right of way that is used or is intended to be used for
providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For
purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. ch.
238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a
public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency
organized under Minn. Stat. ch. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under
Minn. Stat. ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right of way users for purposes of this chapter except
to the extent such entity is offering wireless service.
Two Year Project Plan. Shows projects being contemplated by the city for construction within the
next two years.
Utility Pole. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service.
Wireless Facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services
between user equipment and a wireless service network, including equipment associated with wireless
service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies,
and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline backhaul facilities,
or cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to
and directly associated with a specific antenna.
Wireless Service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-
Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities.
Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended, including cable service.
Wireless Support Structure. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or
capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city.
Sec. 1.04 Administration.
The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights of way, right of
way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.
Sec. 1.05. Utility Coordination Committee.
The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee. Participation on the committee is
voluntary. It will be composed of any registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information
and, by making recommendations regarding use of the right of way, and to improve the process of
performing construction work therein. The city may determine the size of such committee and shall
appoint members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the city.
Sec. 1.06. Registration and Right of Way Occupancy.
Subd. 1. Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right of way or
place any equipment or facilities in or on the right of way, including persons with installation and
maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the city. Registration
11
will consist of providing application information.
Subd. 2. Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or
perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof, in any right of way without first
being registered with the city.
Subd. 3. Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city
ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right
of way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings
or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right of way, and shall not be required to obtain
any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or
gardens under this chapter. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the
provisions of the Minn. Stat. ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law.
Sec. 1.07. Registration Information.
Subd. 1. Information Required. The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall
include, but not be limited to:
(a) Each registrant’s name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address and email
address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
(b) The name, address, and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a
local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided
at the time of registration.
(c) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance
acceptable to the city;
(2) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including
death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of
the right of way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and (ii)
placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right of way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities,
and collapse of property;
(3) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in
force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages;
(4) Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the
policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
(5) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers’
compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts sufficient to
protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.
(6) The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
(7) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is required to be filed under state
law as recorded and certified to by the secretary of state.
(8) A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval from the applicable state
or federal agency to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval from said commission or other state or federal agency.
Subd. 2. Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all
times by providing to the city information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the date on
which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
Sec. 1.08. Reporting Obligations.
12
Subd. 1. Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each year,
file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall
be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the
city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and
obstructions of rights of way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced
during the next calendar year (in this section, a “next-year project”); and
(b) To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all
projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in this section, a “fiveyear
project”).
The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year projects and five-year projects.
By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for inspection in the city’s office a composite list
of all projects of which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible
for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects, and
must notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant listed by the
other registrant.
Subd. 2. Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an
application for a right of way permit for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the
registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.
Sec. 1.09. Permit Requirement.
Subd. 1. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may obstruct or
excavate any right of way, or install or place facilities in the right of way, without first having obtained
the appropriate right of way permit from the city to do so.
(a) Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of
the right of way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the
specified portion of the right of way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and
for the duration specified therein.
(b) Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of right of way by placing equipment described therein on
the right of way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is
not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
(c) Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to
erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to
otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion or the right of way, to the
extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
Subd. 2. Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right of way beyond the date or
dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a supplementary application for another right
of way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
Subd. 3. Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3 and notwithstanding subd. 2
of this Section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right of
13
way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time
to time by City Council resolution.
Subd. 4. Permit Display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or
otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the
city.
Sec. 1.10. Permit Applications.
Application for a permit is made to the city. Right of way permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
(a) Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter.
(b) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and
scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all
known existing and proposed facilities.
(c) Payment of money due the city for:
(1) permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management costs;
(2) prior obstructions or excavations;
(3) any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant’s prior
excavations or obstructions of the rights of way or any emergency actions taken by the
city;
(4) franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
(d) Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow
account an amount equal to at least 110 percent of the amount owing.
(e) Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when
applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the
existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.
Sec. 1.11. Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
Subd. 1. Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the city shall
issue a permit.
Subd. 2. Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and
the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary
to protect the right of way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to Minn. Stat. §§ 216D.01 - .09
(Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. R., ch. 7560.
Subd. 3. Small Wireless Facility Conditions. In addition to subdivision 2, the erection or installation
of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a
small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure,
under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit
application.
(b) No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in
height without the city’s written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height
limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the
right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an existing
wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject
to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.
(c) No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its wireless support structure.
(d) Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the
city may impose separation requirements between such structure and any existing wireless
support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.
(e) Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign or
other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable
14
requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such
structure.
(f) Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose
reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such
structure.
(g) Certification by the applicant’s licensed engineer that the particular wireless support structure,
in its existing condition, has sufficient structural integrity and strength to support the particular
small wireless facility or facilities.
Subd. 4. Small Wireless Facility Agreement. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a
small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right -ofway,
after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the
city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
(a) Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
(b) $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
(c) A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
1. $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
2. $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
3. The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small
wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required to
obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not
supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant,
Sec. 1.12 Action on Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications.
Subd. 1. Deadline for Action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit
application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility permit, and any
associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the
application within the review periods established in this section.
Subd. 2. Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility
permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater
number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:
(a) are located within a two-mile radius;
(b) consist of substantially similar equipment; and
(c) are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small wireless
facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small
wireless facilities in the application.
Subd. 3. Tolling of Deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit
application may be tolled if:
(a) The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for
more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the city may
extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in
writing of such extension.
(b) The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides
written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the application.
Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have ten days to notify
the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.
(c) The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period.
15
Sec. 1.13. Permit Fees.
Subd. 1. Excavation Permit Fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the following costs:
(a) the city management costs;
(b) degradation costs, if applicable.
Subd. 2. Obstruction Permit Fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the city management costs.
Subd 3. Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The city shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover:
(a) management costs, and;
(b) city engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small
wireless facilities.
Subd. 4. Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without
payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within
thirty (30) days of billing.
Subd. 5. Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach
as stated in Section 1.23 are not refundable.
Subd. 6. Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may
be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right of way user in the
franchise.
Sec. 1.14. Right of Way Patching and Restoration.
Subd. 1. Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of
the right of way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit,
increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of
the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under Section 1.17.
Subd. 2. Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city may choose either to
have the permittee restore the right of way or to restore the right of way itself.
(a) City Restoration. If the city restores the right of way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof
within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles due to
permittee’s improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days
of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
(b) Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right of way itself, it shall at the time of
application for an excavation permit post a construction performance bond in accordance
with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.3000.
(c) Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right of way restoration, a right of way
user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right of way user shall remain
responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish
these responsibilities.
Subd. 3. Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minn.
Rule 7819.1100.
Subd. 4. Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration
performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all
restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be
16
completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days
during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when
work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under Section 1.17.
Subd. 5. Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right of way in the manner and to the
condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by
the city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within
thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right of way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the
city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.
Sec. 1.15. Joint Applications.
Subd. 1. Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right
of way at the same place and time.
Subd. 2. Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which
the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In
order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay
and indicate the same on their applications.
Subd. 3. With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed
by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or a single application, are
not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a
permit would still be required.
Sec. 1.16. Supplementary Applications.
Subd. 1. Limitation on Area. A right of way permit is valid only for the area of the right of way
specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except
as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area (i) make application
for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or
permit extension.
Subd. 2. Limitation on Dates. A right of way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit.
No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue
working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply
for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old
permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must
be submitted before the permit end date.
Sec. 1.17. Other Obligations.
Subd. 1. Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a right of way permit does not relieve permittee of
its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the
city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
state and federal laws, including but not limited to Minn. Stat. §§ 216D.01-.09 (Gopher One Call
Excavation Notice System) and Minn. R., ch. 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in
the right of way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
Subd. 2. Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right of way
obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable
for such work.
Subd. 3. Interference with Right of Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right of way that the
natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with.
17
Private vehicles of those doing work in the right of way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks
must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.
Subd. 4. Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing
trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall
follow all requirements set forth in Minn. Stat. ch. 216D and Minn. R., ch. 7560 and shall require
potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the
director.
Sec. 1.18. Denial or Revocation of Permit.
Subd. 1. Reasons for Denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public or when necessary to protect the right of way and its current use.
Subd. 2. Procedural Requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be made in writing and
must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in
writing within three business days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is
denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and resubmit its
application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no
additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application
within 30 days after submission.
Sec. 1.19. Installation Requirements.
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right of way
shall be done in conformance with Minn. R. 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local
requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minn. Stat., §§ 237.162 and 237.163.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn. R., ch 7560 and these
ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth
by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in Section 1.23 subd. 2 of this
ordinance.
Sec. 1.20. Inspection.
Subd. 1. Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee
shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minn. Rule 7819.1300.
Subd. 2. Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the city and to all others as
authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of
the work.
Subd 3. Authority of Director.
(a) At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which
poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public.
(b) The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the
terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that
failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days
after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation has
been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may
revoke the permit pursuant to Sec. 1.23.
Sec. 1.21. Work Done Without a Permit.
Subd. 1. Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event
regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever
18
actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call
regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two (2) business days after
the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees
associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance
with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant’s facilities, the city will attempt to
contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In
any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost
of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
Subd. 2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having
obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right of way must subsequently obtain a permit
and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by
the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right of way, and
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
Sec. 1.22. Supplementary Notification.
If the obstruction or excavation of the right of way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on
the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this information is
known.
Sec. 1.23. Revocation of Permits.
Subd. 1. Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right of way
permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) The violation of any material provision of the right of way permit.
(b) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right of way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens.
(c) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right of way permit.
(d) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or
unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee’s control.
(e) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated
on an order issued pursuant to Sec. 1.20.
Subd. 2. Written Notice of Breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of
the permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial
breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on
the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
Subd. 3. Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notification of the
breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach.
Permittee’s failure to so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation
of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically
place the permittee on probation for one (1) full year. Icon
Subd. 4. Cause for Probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of the
permit, which if breached will automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as,
19
but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right of way grossly outside of
the permit authorization.
Subd. 5. Automatic Revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined
above, permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further
permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.
Subd. 6. Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city
for the city’s reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
Sec. 1.24. Mapping Data.
Subd. 1. Information Required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information
required by the city in accordance with Minn. R. 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days
following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate
maps and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all equipment installed, owned, and maintained
by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all
facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s electronic mapping system,
when practical or as a condition imposed by the director. Failure to provide maps and drawings
pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.
Subd. 2. Service Laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than
minor repairs as defined in Minn. R. 7560.0150, subp. 2, shall require the permittee’s use of
appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the service
lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their
subcontractors shall submit to the director evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service
lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher State One Call law
and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any
city approval necessary for:
a) payments to contractors working on a public improvement project, including those under
Minn. Stat. ch. 429, and
b) city approval under development agreements or other subdivision or site plan approval under
Minn. Stat. ch. 462.
The director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the
city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in
the revocation of the permit issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or its
subcontractors.
Sec. 1.25. Location and Relocation of Facilities.
Subd. 1. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other
applicable law, and with Minn. R. 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not
limit authority otherwise available to cities.
Subd. 2. Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right of way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility that is or, pursuant to current technology,
the city expects will someday be located within the right of way. All excavation, obstruction, or other
permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the
proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right of way in a position at variance with the corridors
established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the
area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right of way,
unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors
20
as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to
the registrant.
Subd. 3. Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities found in a right of way that
have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights
it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the
facilities and restoring the right of way to a useable condition.
Subd. 4. Limitation of Space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, or when
necessary to protect the right of way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or
limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right of way. In making such decisions, the
city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right of
way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public’s needs for the
particular utility service, the condition of the right of way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right of way, and future city plans for public
improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
Sec. 1.26 Pre-Excavation Facilities Location.
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minn. Stat. 216D.01-.09 (“One Call Excavation
Notice System”) before the start date of any right of way excavation, each registrant who has facilities
or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said
facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty (20) inches below a concrete or asphalt
surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its
facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
Sec. 1.27. Damage to Other Facilities.
When the city does work in the right of way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a
registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within thirty
(30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right of way which it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the
cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s response to
an emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
Sec. 1.28. Right of Way Vacation.
Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right of way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the
registrant’s rights in the vacated right of way are governed by Minn. R. 7819.3200.
Sec. 1.29. Indemnification and Liability
By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees
to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250.
Sec. 1.30. Abandoned and Unusable Facilities.
Subd. 1. Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion of
its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s
obligations for its facilities in the right of way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by
another registrant.
Subd. 2. Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right of way shall remove it from
that right of way if required in conjunction with other right of way repair, excavation, or construction,
unless this requirement is waived by the city.
Sec. 1.31. Appeal.
21
A right of way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had a
permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with Minn. Stat. § 237.163,
subd. 6; or (5) disputes a determination of the director regarding Section 1.24, subd.2 of this ordinance
may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City
Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
provided the right of way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a
regular agenda item. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition
will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
Sec. 1.32 Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers
A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
general ordinances as necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Sec. 1.33. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set
forth herein.
Ord. 2017-13, 3rd Series passed on 12-18-17
§ 90.08 VACATION OF STREETS; PROCEDURE.
(A) No public grounds or streets (as defined in Chapter 155) shall be vacated except upon the
Council’s own motion or upon the petition directed to the Council of a majority of the owners of
property on the line of the public grounds or streets, and completion of the procedure hereinafter
specified. The petition shall set forth the reasons for the desired vacation, accompanied by a plat of
the public grounds or streets proposed to be vacated, and the petition shall be verified by the oath of
a majority of the petitioners.
(B) If, in the discretion of the Council, it is expedient that the matter by proceeded with, it may
order the petition filed for record with the City Clerk, order a hearing on the petition and fix the time
and place of the hearing.
(C) The City Clerk shall give notice of the hearing by publication once at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing, and by mail to the last known address of all of the owners of property on the
line of the public grounds or streets proposed to be vacated at least ten days in advance of the
hearing, the last known addresses to be obtained from the office of the County Auditor. The notice
shall in brief state and object of the hearing, the time, place and purpose thereof, and the fact that the
Council, Board, Commission, or person designated by them shall hear the testimony and examine the
evidence of the parties interested.
(D) The Council, after hearing the same, or upon the report of the Board, Commission, or
person designated to hold the hearing, may by resolution passed by majority vote of all members,
declare the public grounds or streets vacated, or deny the petition. The resolution, if granting the
position, shall be certified by the City Clerk and shall be filed for record and duly recorded in the
office of the Register of Deeds for the county in which the property is located. (Prior Code, § 6.09)
22
23
§ 90.09 FIRES, SIGNS, OBSTRUCTIONS, AND REFUSE IN STREETS.
(A) Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit any fence or other
obstruction upon any street without first having obtained a written permit to do so from the City
Administrator, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of the
permit, and taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public.
(B) Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a roadway.
(C) Dumping in streets.
(1) For purposes of this section, the term REFUSE means and includes putrescible animal
and vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food;
putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, industrial wastes; combustible and non-combustible wastes such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, dirt, metal
scraps; and liquids such as water containing salt, injurious chemicals, or petroleum products.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any refuse in a public street.
(Prior Code, § 6.10) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.10 LOAD LIMITS.
The Public Works Department may from time to time impose upon vehicular traffic on any part
or all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or desirable. The limits, and the specific
extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is
unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation so posted.
(Prior Code, § 6.15) Penalty, see § 10.99
24
§ 90.11 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND PARKING LOTS.
(A) The Council may, in its discretion, grant special permission whereby on-street parking or
the use of city-owned parking lots or ramps on public sidewalks may be temporarily or permanently
prohibited or restricted for private reasons and purposes (including, but not limited to, establishment
of private or leased parking, loading zones, sidewalk cafes, mobile food units, or display of
merchandise on sidewalks) at the places, on the terms and for the compensation as the Council may
deem just and equitable. In establishing the amount of the compensation to be paid to the city, the
Council shall consider the amount of space, location, thereof, public inconvenience, and hazards to
persons or property. Upon complaint of any aggrieved person at any time and by reason of any
specific special permission so granted, the Council shall at its next regular meeting after receipt of
the complaint, call a hearing thereon to be held after 10-days’ notice in writing to applicant and
complainant and published notice at least 10 days prior to the hearing. After the hearing, the Council
may by resolution decide whether to terminate, continue, or redefine the terms of the permission and
the decision shall be final and binding on all persons directly or indirectly interested therein, except
that the Council may, on its own motion, reconsider the same.
(B) Free and reserved on-street parking shall be limited to city-owned and operated vehicles.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to park or otherwise infringe upon a grant of right under this
section, when clearly and distinctly marked or sign-posted. It is unlawful for any person not granted
the right to assert the same, or for any grantee of the right to exceed the same under claim thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6.16) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.12 CURB SETBACK.
(A) Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to hereafter remove, or cause to be removed,
any curb from its position abutting upon the roadway to another position without first making written
application to the Council and obtaining a permit therefore.
(B) Agreement required. No permit shall be issued until the applicant, and abutting landowner
if other than applicant, shall enter into a written agreement with the city agreeing to pay all costs of
constructing and maintaining the setback area in at least as good condition as the abutting roadway,
and further agreement to demolish and remove the setback and reconstruct the areas as was at the
expense of the landowner, his or her heirs or assigns if the area ever, in the Council’s opinion
becomes a public hazard. The agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds,
and shall run with the adjoining land.
(C) Sign-posting. Angle parking only signs shall be purchased from the city and erected and
maintained at the expense of the adjoining landowner in all the setback areas now in use or hereafter
constructed. It is unlawful for any person to park other than at an angle in the setback areas, as the
angle parking is herein described and allowed.
25
(D) Public rights reserved. The setback parking areas shall be kept open for public parking and
the abutting landowner shall at no time acquire any special interest or control of or in the areas.
(Prior Code, § 6.17) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.13 PARADES.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PARADE. Any movement of vehicles, persons, or animals, or any combination thereof,
which either moves together and as a body so as to in some way impede or affect the free and
unobstructed flow of traffic, or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one or more
traffic laws or regulations, is such movement is without a permit hereunder.
(B) Permit required. It is unlawful to sponsor or participate in a parade for which no permit has
been obtained from the city, and it is also unlawful to obtain a parade permit and not conduct the
same in accordance with a permit granted by the city. Application for the permit shall be made to
the City Clerk at least 14 days in advance of the date on which it is to occur and shall state the
sponsoring organization or individuals, the route, the length, the estimated time of commencement
and termination, the general composition, and the application shall be executed by the individuals
applying therefore or the duly authorized agent or representative of the sponsoring organization.
(C) Procedure and granting. The City Clerk shall forthwith refer all applications for parades to
the Chief of Police for his or her consideration which shall take no longer than 7 days. If any state
trunk highways are in the route the Chief of Police shall make all necessary arrangements with the
Minnesota Highway Department for alternate routes or whatever may be necessary. If the Chief of
Police finds that such a parade will not cause a hazard to persons or property, and will cause no great
inconvenience to the public, and if he or she is able to make arrangements for necessary direction
and control of traffic, he or she shall endorse his or her acceptance and return the application to the
City Clerk who shall then issue the permit. If the Chief of Police finds the parade described in the
application to be a hazard, a substantial inconvenience, or if he or she is unable to make adequate
arrangements for direction or control of traffic, he or she shall return the same to the City Clerk with
his or her reasons for denial, and the permit shall not be granted unless all conditions and objections
of the Chief of Police are met or removed by the applicant. (Prior Code, § 6.18) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 90.14 SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.
It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter, or color any sidewalk for advertising purposes or to
paint any letters, words, figures, or characters up on any sidewalk for any purpose.
(Prior Code, § 6.19) Penalty, see § 10.99
26
§ 90.15 STREET, SIDEWALK, AND STORM SEWER IMPROVEMENT SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT POLICY.
(A) Generally. Street, sidewalk, and storm sewer improvements shall be assessed as 1
combined project cost based on estimated benefit of the improvements to the property assessed.
Benefit shall be defined as the increase in property value attributable to the public improvements.
(B) Determination of benefit. The estimated benefit of the public improvements shall be
determined by the Public Works Director, subject to approval by the City Council, and based on an
opinion of special benefit for atypical property prepared by a certified general real estate appraiser.
(C) Street, sidewalk, and storm sewer improvements. All street, sidewalk, and storm sewer
improvements shall be classified into 2 categories; New Construction and Reconstruction or
Rehabilitation, which shall be defined as follows:
(1) New construction. All public improvement construction where there is no existing
platted right of way and improved, city maintained roadway prior to the commencement of
construction; and
(2) Reconstruction or rehabilitation. All public improvements other than new construction.
(D) New construction street, storm sewer, and sidewalk improvements.
(1) A presumption will be made for new construction street, storm sewer, and sidewalk
improvements that the project cost of the ordered improvements divided among the improved
properties will be less than or equal to the special benefit of the improvements to the properties being
assessed. However, the Public Works Director may order an opinion of special benefit if the Public
Works Director questions whether the project cost may exceed special benefit, or if the property
owner(s) to be assessed request(s) an opinion of special benefit and the City Council orders the
opinion of special benefit to be prepared. Requests for an opinion of special benefit to be prepared
should be made on or before the improvement hearing date.
(2) A per lot assessment basis shall be used for street, storm sewer, and sidewalk
assessments for new construction improvements, except where inconsistencies in lot size, frontage,
and/or development densities exist, in which case assessments based on abutting frontage may be
used. In general, there should be no city participation for street, storm sewer, and sidewalk
assessments for new construction improvements.
(E) Reconstruction or rehabilitation. All street, storm sewer, and sidewalk reconstruction
improvements shall be classified into 2 categories; collector and municipal state aid streets, and noncollector
and non-municipal state aid streets, which shall be defined as follows:
(1) Collector and municipal state aid streets. Collector streets are those streets which have
an average daily traffic count of 2,000 or more vehicles per day. Municipal state aid streets are
27
those streets within the city on the Minnesota Department of Transportation Municipal State Aid
System; and
(2) Non-collector and non-municipal state aid streets. All streets other than collector or
municipal state aid streets.
(F) Collector and municipal state aid streets. All street storm sewer and sidewalk
reconstruction improvements on collector or municipal state aid streets shall be constructed to
Minnesota Department of Transportation State Aid standards. For reconstruction or rehabilitation of
collector streets or state aid streets, a presumption will be made that 25% of the estimated project
cost of the ordered street, storm sewer, and sidewalk improvements divided among the improved
properties will be less than or equal to the special benefit of the improvements to the properties being
assessed. The estimated project cost will be prepared by the Public Works Director and based on the
low bids received for the improvement construction. However, the Public Works Director may
order an opinion of special benefit if the Public Works Director questions whether 25% of the
estimated project cost of the ordered street, storm sewer, and sidewalk improvements may exceed
special benefit, or if the property owner(s) to be assessed request(s) an opinion of special benefit and
the City Council orders the opinion of special benefit to be performed. The division of 25% of the
estimated project costs shall be based on abutting frontage except as follows.
(1) Corner lot assessments.
(a) For corner lots with improvements along more than 1 side of abutting frontage, the
assessed frontage shall be considered the entire length of the short side and 25% of the long side of
the lot. The city shall pay the remaining 75% of the assessment on the long side of the corner lot.
(b) For corner lots with improvements along the abutting frontage of the long side, the
assessment shall be 25% of the abutting frontage with the city paying the assessment on the
remaining 75% of the abutting frontage.
(c) For corner lots with improvements along the abutting frontage of the short side, the
assessment shall be 100% of the abutting frontage.
(d) For corner lots with 2 or more sides of equal length the short side frontage shall be
defined as the side on which the house fronts or will front.
(2) Irregular shaped lots. For lots whose shapes are irregular, as in the case of curvilinear
streets or cul-de-sacs, a per lot assessment basis may be used in lieu of the formulas in this section.
The funds for the city’s participation as described above for municipal state aid streets shall come
from state aid funds, if available. Funding for the city’s participation for collector streets shall come
from the assumption of that portion of the improvement bond.
(G) Non-collector and non-municipal state aid streets. All street, storm sewer, and sidewalk
reconstruction or rehabilitation improvements of non-collector streets or non-municipal state aid
streets shall be assessed on a front foot basis at a rate determined by the Public Works Director. The
front foot assessment rate shall be based on 90% of the estimated special benefit to the assessed
properties accruing from the constructed improvements. Properties benefitting from the street, storm
28
sewer, and sidewalk improvements shall be assessed based on abutting frontage except as follows.
(1) Corner lot assessments.
(a) For corner lots with improvements along more than 1 side of abutting frontage, the
assessed frontage shall be considered the entire length of the short side and 25% of the long side of
the lot. The city shall pay the remaining 75% of the assessment on the long side of the corner lot.
(b) For corner lots with improvements along the abutting frontage of the long side, the
assessment shall be 25% of the abutting frontage with the city paying the assessment on the
remaining 75% of the abutting frontage.
(c) For corner lots with improvements along the abutting frontage of the short side, the
assessment shall be 100% of the abutting frontage.
(d) For corner lots with 2 or more sides of equal length the short side frontage shall be
defined as the side on which the house fronts or will front.
(2) Irregular shaped lots. For lots whose shapes are irregular, as in the case of curvilinear
streets or cul-de-sacs, a per lot assessment basis may be used in lieu of the formulas in this section.
The funds for the city’s participation as described above for municipal state aid streets shall come
from state aid funds, if available. Funding for the city’s participation for collector streets shall come
from the assumption of that portion of the improvement bond.
(H) Sidewalk improvements. All sidewalks shall be constructed a minimum of 5 feet in width.
In general, where sidewalks are to be constructed in new developments, the sidewalks should be
constructed one foot off the property line. Where sidewalks are to be constructed within existing
developments, the walks should be constructed at least 15 feet from existing homes. However,
except in commercial or industrial areas, all sidewalks shall be constructed with a minimum 5-foot
boulevard.
(I) Sidewalk assessments.
(1) Where sidewalk improvements are constructed as part of a street and/or utility
improvement project, assessments for sidewalks shall be included with street and/or utility
assessments as 1 combined project cost. Assessment credit shall be given for properties whose
existing sidewalk is in good condition and does not need to be replaced as determined by the Public
Works Director. The sidewalk assessment credit shall be determined by the Public Works Director
and based on the project sidewalk construction costs.
(2) Assessments for sidewalks constructed as a stand alone project shall be assessed on a
front foot basis at a rate determined by the Public Works Director. The front foot assessment rate
shall be based on 90% of the estimated special benefit to the assessed properties accruing from the
constructed sidewalk. Corner lots and irregular shaped lots shall be assessed as described previously
in division (G) above.
29
(J) Trunk storm sewer improvements. The assessment policy for trunk storm sewers shall be
based on benefitted area. All lots contributing storm water runoff to the trunk storm sewer shall be
assessed in the same proportion each lot has to the total area contributing storm water runoff to the
trunk storm sewer.
(K) Lateral storm sewer improvements. Where lateral storm sewer improvements are
constructed as part of a street and/or utility improvement project, assessments for storm sewer shall
be included with street and/or utility assessments as 1 combined project cost. Assessments for storm
sewer constructed as a stand alone project shall be assessed on a front foot basis at a rate determined
by the Public Works Director. The front foot assessment rate shall be based on 90% of the estimated
special benefit to the assessed properties accruing from the constructed storm sewer. Corner lots and
irregular shaped lots shall be assessed as described previously in division (G) above.
(L) Unusual conditions. This assessment policy is intended to set guidelines for assessing
improvements and yet to be general and flexible enough so that the most logical method may be
chosen to fit individual circumstances. To meet extreme or unusual conditions, the city reserves the
right to levy an assessment for an improvement in a manner not outlined in this policy without
affecting or negating any portion of this policy for use in normal conditions. (Prior Code, § 6.20)
Cross-reference:
Assessment policy for sanitary sewer, water main and utility service improvements, see § 51.06
30
§ 90.16 SIDEWALK CAFES.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SIDEWALK CAFÉ. A grouping of tables, chairs and related items located wholly or partially within
a public sidewalk or right-of-way for the purposes of service and consumption of food and beverages by
patrons, when located immediately adjacent to a food and beverage service establishment having a common
operator.
(B) Sidewalk cafés authorized. Sidewalk cafés with or without service of alcohol may be located on
public sidewalks subject to a license issued by the City Council pursuant to this section.
(C) Requirements. Installation and operation of all sidewalk cafés are subject to the following
requirements and sidewalk cafés serving intoxicating liquor, beer or wine are subject to the applicable
requirements of Chapter 111.
(1) Sidewalk cafés may only be installed and operated from during the hours of operation of the food
service establishment provided that no sidewalk café may be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
11:00 a.m. Tables, chairs, furnishings, planters, fences or other obstructions shall be immediately removed from
public sidewalks when the license holder is no longer operating the Sidewalk Café due to changing seasons.
Tables, chairs, furnishing, planters, fences or other obstructions shall not impede snow removal efforts. The
City Council may further restrict the hours of operation of a sidewalk café based upon the proximity to
residential dwelling units, and upon considerations relating to the safety, repose and welfare of residents,
businesses and other uses near the establishment. Furniture and fixtures may be stored overnight within the
sidewalk café area provided the licensee shall ensure all items are stored and secured in a neat and orderly
manner.
(2) All sidewalk cafés must abut and be operated as part of the food service establishment operated
by the applicant and shall have delineated limits separating the sidewalk café from the travelled portion of the
sidewalk. Sidewalk cafés serving intoxicating liquor, beer or wine must have a visually appealing and
continuous barrier made of fencing or planters surrounding the entire sidewalk café area which must be compact
and contiguous with the enclosed portion of the licensed premises. No licensee shall expand a sidewalk café
without first obtaining an amended sidewalk café license covering the additional space.
(3) Only food or beverages for immediate consumption may be offered for sale and no alcoholic
beverages may be dispensed from within the sidewalk café. The licensee shall provide food service in all
sidewalk café areas during all hours of operation. Food service may consist of less than a full menu, but shall at
all times offer a substantial choice of main courses, other food items, and non-alcoholic beverages. An
establishment that offers a regular menu to customers with food items delivered from other local good service
establishment for purposes of this Chapter and those portions of Chapter 111 regulating sidewalk cafes provided
that sidewalk café operations shall be allowed only during the times when food delivery if offered. Glassware
may be used in the service of food and beverages but only to the extent such use does not create a safety hazard
for patrons or the public in adjacent areas and the licensee is responsible to immediately remove any broken
glass from the premises.
(4) No licensee shall allow entertainment within a sidewalk café, including non-live entertainment
such as radio, taped music and television unless the same is expressly approved in writing by the City Council
and in no event shall noise be generated that would unreasonably annoy or interfere with neighboring property
31
owners or occupants or the public.
(5) No sidewalk café may: (i) unduly restrict the safe usage of any roadway or the sidewalk by the
public after taking into consideration the locations of obstructions, vehicular traffic and other impediments to
the passage of vehicles and pedestrians; (ii) be located within ten (10) feet of any traffic signal, crosswalk or
pedestrian curb cut; or (iii) adjoin any premises other than the applicant’s food service establishment. All signs,
including sandwich boards, must comply with Chapter 155 and no signs may be placed in a manner that would
obstruct a pedestrian sidewalk the licensee is otherwise required to keep clear and unobstructed.
(6) Fencing and planters shall be visually appealing and constructed of high-quality, durable
materials maintained in good condition and shall not be permanently attached to the sidewalk or right-of-way.
Fences and planters shall not exceed three (3) feet in height provided live plants may extend to a height of not
more than six (6) feet, all as measured from the surface of the sidewalk or right-of-way. Planters must include
live plants and must be well maintained at all times.
(7) Sidewalk cafés shall be handicap accessible and shall be installed in a manner complying with all
ADA requirements and shall provide for a minimum of four (4) feet of clear, unobstructed pedestrian walkway
between all obstructions and the edge of the sidewalk café. No employee or server may obstruct pedestrian
walkways at any time.
(8) Operation of a sidewalk café must comply with all provisions of the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air
Act.
(9) No sidewalk café shall be installed or operated, and no license shall be issued, for any location
where the same is prohibited by state or local law and the ownership, operation and maintenance of all sidewalk
cafés shall be subject to all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
(10) The licensee shall maintain the sidewalk café in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible to remove all trash and litter generated by the operation of the sidewalk café within a reasonable
distance from the area. The licensee shall be responsible for all costs of repairing any damage to the sidewalk
or other public property caused by the use of the sidewalk or public property as a sidewalk café. If the City
Council approves any improvements to the sidewalk or right-of-way necessary for the licensee to operate a
sidewalk café, the costs of such improvements plus any administrative costs shall be paid for in advance by the
licensee.
(11) All sidewalk café licensees must at all times maintain commercial liability insurance covering the
licensed premises and the sidewalk café area with minimum policy limits for bodily injury or death of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 annual aggregate and for property damage of not less than
$50,000. Proof of the required liability insurance shall be in the form of a certificate of insurance or some other
form acceptable to the City Attorney and City Clerk. All liability insurance policies required herein shall name
the city as any additional insured and shall provide that there shall be no cancellation of the policy for any
cause, by the insured or by the insurance company, without first giving 10-days’ written notice to the city,
addressed to the City Clerk. Operation of a sidewalk café or liquor sales by a licensee without required liability
insurance coverage shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license. In addition, the
licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, the city’s public officials, employees and agents from any
loss, costs, damages and expenses arising out of the use, design, operation or maintenance of the sidewalk café.
These insurance and indemnification requirements shall be memorialized in a license agreement signed by the
licensee prior to the initial issuance of the sidewalk café license and upon any renewal thereof, but failure of the
city and the licensee to execute such a license agreement shall not alleviate the licensee of its insurance and
indemnification obligations hereunder.
32
(12) The city shall retain the right to remove or cause to be removed any tables, chairs,
furnishings, planters, fences or other obstructions from the sidewalk or public right-of-way as necessary to
access public utilities and facilities, during community civic festivals, celebrations and other events, or if the
city reasonably determines any such item or items create an unreasonable risk to public health or safety. The
city shall endeavor to give reasonable advance notice to the licensee that items need to be removed or relocated.
(D) License Applications.
(1) An applicant for a sidewalk café license shall file an application on forms provided by the City
Clerk which shall include, in addition to any other information required by the City, the following:
(a) The business name, address, phone number and contact person.
(b) A site plan of the proposed sidewalk café drawn to scale covering the entire area between
the curb and building showing locations of the property lines, curbs, all streets in front of and
adjacent to the property, all sidewalk dimensions measured from the building face to the back of
the curb, all existing facilities and obstructions within the right-of-way, the proposed location of
all sidewalk café fixtures, including but not limited to tables, chairs, umbrellas, planters, fences,
barricades, lighting, and heaters, and the proposed limits of the sidewalk café.
(c) Photographs and manufacturer specifications for all proposed sidewalk café furniture and
fixtures.
(d) Description and locations of any sound, television or video systems proposed for the
sidewalk café.
(e) Description of all food and beverages that will be served within the sidewalk café and the
proposed hours of operation.
(f) Description of all points of access between the building and the sidewalk café and exterior
areas.
(g) Description of ingress and egress arrangements including those necessary to provide
handicap accessibility and control of persons entering and leaving the premises to prevent
consumption of alcohol by minors and to ensure safety of moveable seating arrangements.
(h) Description of all physical improvements to be constructed to accommodate the sidewalk
café.
(i) An insurance commitment or binder securing all insurance coverage required under this
chapter and Chapter 111, if applicable, on the sidewalk café areas and meeting all requirements
for naming the city as an additional insured.
(j) Any other information known to the applicant that may reasonably impact the issuance of
the license including but not limited to objections to the proposed sidewalk café raised by
neighboring property owners or the public, obstructions or other factors that may interfere with
pedestrian travel on the affected sidewalk area, or conditions that may impact public health or
safety if the sidewalk café license is issued.
(2) Upon submission of a complete application the City Clerk shall place the application upon the
agenda of the next available City Council meeting for which proper notice as required by this section can be
given. A public hearing on the application shall be required for all initial sidewalk café applications, all
subsequent applications proposing modifications to a sidewalk café site plan, and whenever the City determines
a public hearing is necessary to determine whether the criteria for granting a sidewalk café license are satisfied.
When applicable, the City Clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be given in the same manner as
prescribed for special use permits.
(E) Granting of license. Following the required public hearing, if any, the City Council may grant or deny
the license or refer the matter to any commission or committee for further study.
33
(F) Criteria for issuance and renewal. No sidewalk café license may be issued or renewed if the results
of the investigation or other evidence given to the City Council through any means, shows to the satisfaction of
the Council, that the issuance or renewal would not be in the public’s interest. The Council shall make written
findings, certifying the sidewalk café will comply with the following criteria.
(1) The design and operation satisfy the applicable requirements of this chapter and will be in
harmony with the purpose and intent of Chapter 155 and all rules applicable in any Heritage Preservation
District within which the sidewalk café is located.
(2) The design and operation will not unreasonably interfere with or annoy users of neighboring
residential, commercial or public property.
(3) The design and operation will not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
access to any public street, utility or other facilities.
(4) Where liquor, wine or beer will be served, the licensed premises is compact and contiguous with
the premises licensed under Chapter 111 and the design and operation will safeguard against consumption of
alcohol by minors.
(G) Conditions of license. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the conditions
of this section and all other sections of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance of the city, state law, or
federal law, and shall include the following conditions.
(1) Posting. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at all
times.
(2) Additional conditions. The Council may, upon a finding of necessity, place the conditions and
restrictions upon the license as it, at its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified to protect the public
interest.
(3) Licenses limited to certain areas. All fixtures shall be placed, and all operations conducted,
within the space described on the license.
(4) Inspection by peace officers or health officers. All sidewalk cafés shall be subject to compliance
inspections and no licensee or employee of a licensee shall hinder or prevent a peace officer, health officer,
building official, fire official, or any other employee so designated by the City Council or City Administrator
from entering upon and inspecting the licensed premises during business hours, without a search warrant.
(5) Responsibility of licensee. Every licensee, whether actually present on the licensed premises or
not, shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensed premises and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and
order on the licensed premises.
(6) Payment of WAC and SAC. Licensees shall pay all additional WAC and SAC imposed as a result
of additional seating offered within a sidewalk café.
(H) Transfer of license. No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferrable to another person
or entity nor may any such license be transferred to a different location.
(I) Expiration of license. Every license issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31st of each
year, regardless of when the license was issued.
34
(J) Suspension or revocation of license. The City Council may suspend, revoke or deny renewal of any
sidewalk café license upon the violation of any license condition or of any provision or condition of this
chapter, any other city ordinance, or of any state or federal law. Before the Council shall suspend or revoke any
license issued under this chapter, the licensee shall be given at least 10-days’ notice stating the time and place of
the hearing and the charges against the licensee.
(Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series, passed 6-1-15) (Ord. No. 2017-09, 3rd Series passed on 11-06-17)
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
91. ANIMALS
92. RENTAL HOUSING
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
34
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
91.01 Definition
91.02 Keeping
91.03 Housing
91.04 Treatment
91.05 Restraint and confinement
91.06 Cat regulation
Dogs
91.20 License required
91.21 Application
91.22 License term and fee
91.23 Tag required
91.24 Inspection; right of entry
91.25 Impounding; right of entry
91.26 Animal pound
91.27 Release from animal pound
91.28 Disturbing the peace
91.29 Immobilization of dogs
91.30 Regulation of dangerous dogs
91.31 Kennels
91.32 Euthanasia of animals
91.33 Cruelty to animals
91.34 Removal of dog waste
GENERAL PROVISIONS
35
§ 91.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMALS. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens,
guinea hens, and all other animals and feathered fowl except dogs and cats, unless the pets are
specifically included in particular sections hereof, and this definition shall extend to this subchapter
only. (Prior Code, § 9.29)
§ 91.02 KEEPING.
It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal, not in transit, in any part of the city not zoned
for agricultural purposes.
(A) Exceptions.
(1) Chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus) subject to § 155.07.
(Prior Code, § 9.29) (Am. Ord. 2009-08, 3rd Series, passed 9-21-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99
(2) Temporary Keeping of Goats subject to §91.35.
§ 91.03 HOUSING.
It is unlawful for any person to keep any animals in any structure infested by rodents, vermin,
flies, or insects. (Prior Code, § 9.29) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04 TREATMENT.
It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal or house pet in a cruel or inhuman manner.
(Prior Code, § 9.29) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.05 RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT.
It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat,
to run at large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or
accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively
restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has
posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited. ” Penalty, see § 10.99
36
§ 91.06 CAT REGULATION.
(A) It shall be unlawful for an owner or possessor of any cat to fail to obtain a rabies vaccination
certificate and tag from a licensed veterinarian. The owner or possessor shall provide to the Hastings
City Clerk a certificate by a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine, which
certificate shall state that the cat is immunized against rabies. The owner or possessor of the cat shall
also retain a copy of the certificate and shall furnish same for inspection by any police officer so
requesting. All cats shall wear a collar and have rabies tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing the
rabies vaccine for the period set forth in division (C) below.
(B) It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the owner or possessor of any animal of this
class to prevent the animal from molesting, defiling, or destroying any property, or to howl, screech,
or make other noise so as to constitute a public nuisance.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or harbor a cat or animal of related
genera which has not been vaccinated for rabies within the time required under standard veterinarian
practices; once a year shall be deemed to be the longest period of time during which the animal may
go between rabies vaccinations, while standard veterinarian practices may require more frequent
vaccinations.
(D) If a cat or other animal is reasonably believed to be rabid or otherwise diseased, hurt,
vicious, or dangerous and cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort, or without serious risk to
the impounder or other person, the animal will immediately be killed. (Prior Code, § 9.32) Penalty,
see § 10.99
§ 91.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any owner or other possessor of a dog, when the dog reaches the age of 6
months, to fail to obtain a property city license therefore. (Prior Code, § 9.21) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.21 APPLICATION.
Application for a dog license shall be upon a form supplied by the city containing a certificate by
a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the State of Minnesota, which
certificate shall state that the dog for which application for a license is made, has been inoculated
against rabies and the dog owner shall be responsible for keeping the dog inoculated against rabies
for the entire term of the license. (Prior Code, § 9.21) (Ord. No. 2017-01 passed 1-3-17)
§ 91.22 LICENSE TERM AND FEE.
All dog licenses issued for a bi-annual term shall expire on July 31 of each odd-numbered year
37
following issuance of the license. All dog licenses issued for the lifetime of the dog shall have no
expiration date. The license fee for dog licenses shall be established by ordinance of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 9.21) (Am. Ord. 512, passed 4-5-2004; Am. Ord. 2009-05, 3rd Series, passed 4-20-
2009)(Ord. No. 2017-01 passed 1-3-17)
§ 91.23 TAG REQUIRED.
All licensed dogs shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing the license
for the term of the license. (Prior Code, § 9.21) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. No. 2017-01 passed on
1-3-17)
§ 91.24 INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
To enforce this subchapter or state law, the Animal Control Officer or police may enter upon the
private premises, except households, with consent or where it appears or where there is reasonable
cause to believe that a dog is not licensed or is not being kept confined or restrained as required
herein or in pursuit of a dog running at large. Any owner shall produce for the officer’s inspection,
the dog’s license or receipt when requested to do so by the officer. (Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 91.25 IMPOUNDING; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Animal Control Officer or police are empowered to and may take up and impound any dogs
found anywhere, including dogs found on the private property of their owners, within the city, in
violation of this subchapter. Dogcatchers are further empowered and instructed to enter any private
premises, except households, where they have reasonable cause to believe there is an unlicensed dog
or a dog involved in any violation of this code. (Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 91.26 ANIMAL POUND.
Any dog found in the city without a license, or running at large shall be placed in an animal
pound, and an accurate record of the time of the placement shall be kept on each dog. Every dog
placed in the animal pound shall be retained for a period of 5 days, and if unclaimed shall become the
property and responsibility of the animal pound. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if a
dog is found at large in the city and its owner can be identified and located, that animal need not be
impounded but may, at the discretion of a peace officer or animal control officer, be taken to its
owner. In this event, the animal shall not be returned to its owner until the owner pays the impound
fee provided for by § 91.27. (Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 91.27 RELEASE FROM ANIMAL POUND.
38
Before the city will authorize the release of any impounded dog, the owner of the dog must first
pay the city the following fees:
(A) Impound fee to be set by City Council resolution; and
(B) Dog license fee if the owner of the dog is a resident of the city and the dog was not
previously licensed, together with any penalty established by City Council resolution for failing to
timely license the dog. (Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 91.28 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
(A) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at
least 5 minutes with less than 1 minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the
owner’s or caretaker’s premises.
(B) Warrant required. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter the property
of the owner of an animal described in this section unless the officer has first obtained the permission
of the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided for in § 10.20, to search for and seize the animal. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.29 IMMOBILIZATION OF DOGS.
For the purpose of enforcement of this subchapter, any peace officer, dogcatcher, or other
person assisting a peace officer or dogcatcher may use a tranquilizer gun or other instrument for the
purpose of immobilizing and catching a dog. (Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 91.30 REGULATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
(A) State Law Adopted. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes 347.50 through 347.565 are
adopted by reference and govern dangerous dogs in the City of Hastings.
(B) Hearing Officer Decisions Final. All decisions or impartial hearing officers appointed
pursuant to M.S. 347.541 shall be final without any further right of administrative appeatl.
(C) Quarantine. Any dog that has bitten a person or is believed to have bitten a person shall
immediately be impounded for at least 10 days and kept apart from other animals, under the
supervision of a veterinarian, until it is determined whether the animal had or has a disease which
might have been transmitted by the bite. The impounding may be done by the owner, under the
supervision of a veterinarian, and need not be at a shelter designated by the city, but if it is not at the
city designated shelter, the owner shall notify the City Animal Control Officer or the Police
Department immediately and shall furnish proof in writing where the dog is being impounded. After
39
10 days, if it is determined the dog does not have a disease which might have been transmitted by the
bite, it may be released upon approval of the Animal Control Officer or Police Department.
(1) Any dog which is not quarantined as required by this subdivision, is subject to
immediate seizure by the city. Any person who fails to quarantine an animal as required by this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2) Any dog which has been bitten or otherwise exposed by a rabid animal shall be
humanely euthanized or quarantined for 6 months. A dog may be released from quarantine after 40
days if:
(a) The dog had been vaccinated for rabies at least 21 days and no longer than 1 year,
before the bite;
(b) The dog has been re-vaccinated for rabies immediately after the bite. The 40-day
period begins on the date of the re-vaccination;
(c) The required written report is sent to the Minnesota Board of Animal Health; and
(d) The owner of the dog notifies the city’s animal control officer or Hastings Police
Department before the dog is released from quarantine.
(3) The dog’s owner is responsible for all costs incurred in confining, impounding, and
disposing of any dog quarantined under this section. (Prior Code, § 9.21) Penalty, see § 10.99
(Ord. 2014-15, 3rd Series, Adopted 10-6-14)
§ 91.31 KENNELS.
No person, or combination of persons, shall keep or harbor more than 3 cats or dogs or
combination thereof in excess of the age of 3 months on any parcel within the City of Hastings
without first obtaining an annual kennel license from the City Clerk in accordance with this code.
Provided, however, that this section shall not in any way limit or apply to small animal clinics
holding a special use permit as provided for in Ordinance No. 23, Second Series. Violation of this
section shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and in addition may be enforced by civil proceedings
for a restraining order in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior Code, § 9.21) (Am. Ord. 499,
passed 8-4-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Additional regulations on kennels, see § 110.17
§ 91.32 EUTHANASIA OF ANIMALS.
In the event it becomes necessary to destroy a dog or other animal under this subchapter or any
other applicable law or regulation, the owner thereof shall be responsible for and pay to the city the
40
city’s cost for storage and the euthanasia of the animal. This section may be enforced by the city by
appropriate civil action. (Prior Code, § 9.21)
§ 91.33 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
(A) The word ANIMAL includes every living creature except the human race; the word
TORTURE or CRUELTY meaning every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain, suffering, or death shall be caused or permitted.
(B) No person shall overdrive, overload, torture, cruelly beat, neglect, or unjustifiably injure,
maim, mutilate, or kill any animal, or cruelly work any animal when unfit for labor, whether
belonging to himself or herself or another.
(C) No person shall deprive any animal of which he or she has charge or control of necessary
food, water, or shelter.
(D) No person shall abandon any animal.
(E) No person shall allow any maimed, sick, infirm, or disabled animals to lie in any street,
road, or other public place.
(F) No person shall willfully set on foot, instigate, or in any way further any active cruelty to
any animal or animals, or any act tending to produce the cruelty. (Prior Code, § 9.21) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
(G) Tethering:
a). No person shall leave an animal unattended while chained, tied, fastened or otherwise
tethered for a period of time or to the extent that the animal is deprived of adequate food, water,
or shelter.
b). No person shall tether an animal as a primary means of confinement. Stationary confinement
by tethering shall be considered cruel treatment.
c). A single animal may be attached to a cable line or trolley system if the system allows the
animal adequate access to food, water, and shelter with freedom to move, lie down, and access
shelter.
(Ord. 2014-02, 3rd Series, adopted 1-21-14)
§ 91.34 REMOVAL OF DOG WASTE.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit a dog to be on any public property or private
property, not owned or possessed by that person, unless that person is in immediate possession of
41
equipment to remove and carry dog feces to a proper receptacle located on property owned or
possessed by that person.
(B) It is unlawful for any person having custody or control of a dog to fail to pick up any feces
of the dog and dispose of them in a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by the
person.
(C) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the ownership or use of service dogs or
dogs used in police or rescue activities. (Prior Code, § 9.21) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.35 TEMPORARY KEEPING OF GOATS FOR CONTROL OF INVASIVE SPECIES AND
OTHER WEED CONTROL PURPOSES
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish conditions under which the temporary
and periodic use of limited number of goats for invasive species and other weed control is permitted
in the A – Agriculture, I -1 Industrial Park, and PI – Public Institution Zoning Districts, and to
establish requirements for doing so to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general
population.
(B) Requirements for Temporary Keeping of Goats for Invasive Species or Other Weed Control
(1) Properties must be at least 1.5 acres in size.
(2) Goat containment fences shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any residence.
(3) Temporary Use of goats shall not exceed two thirty day periods in any 12-month period.
(4) The goats must be contained by an adequate containment fence at all times. If an electric
fence is used it must display a warning that the fence is electric.
(5) All goat waste material must be removed so as to not cause a public nuisance.
(6) The property must be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition so as to be free from
offensive odors, fly breeding, dust, and general nuisance conditions.
(7) Goats shall not be allowed on a vacant lot.
(8) Habitual Bleating. It shall unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a goat which
habitually bleats. Habitual bleating is defined as bleating for repeated intervals of at least 5 minutes
with less than 1 minute of interruption. The bleating must also be audible off of the owner’s or
caretaker’s premises.
(9) The City shall have no liability for any damage that may be caused by goats kept on a
property pursuant to this section. Property owners and permittees under this section shall be jointly
and severally liable for any damage that may be cause by the goats kept pursuant to a permit issued
under this section.
42
(C) Permit Required
(1) No person shall own, harbor, keep or maintain temporarily or otherwise goats on their
property within the City without first obtaining a Temporary Goat Permit by the City of Hastings.
(2) The permit shall allow the permit-holder to temporarily have goats on their property for
up to 30 days for the purpose of invasive species or other weed control on their property.
(3) A person may be issued no more than two such permits per property in any 12-month
period.
(4) Applications shall be made to the Community Development Department for review and
approval.
(5) Applicants shall provide the following information on the permit application:
(a) Name, address, and contact information of the permit applicant.
(b) Address and description of the property where the goats will be temporarily kept.
(c) Description of the type of invasive species or weed control problem on the property.
(d) Name, address, and contact information of the property owner and person or entity
providing the goats.
(e) Site plan showing where on the property the goats will be temporarily kept,
including a plan and description of the fencing that will be sued to keep the goats on the property.
(f) A plan to dispose of goat manure in a safe and adequate manner with removal of
waste within 24 hours.
(g) Proposed number of goats. The number of goats allowed per permit shall be
determined based on the size of the area where goats will be kept.
(6) No permit shall be issued until the City reviews the application and inspects the property
and determines that the applicant has complied with the requirement of this section.
(7) The applicant shall be the property owner or tenant with written consent of the property
owner.
(8) Written permission from a Homeowner’s Association, if applicable or a statement by the
applicant that keeping goats on the property is consistent with any Homeowner’s Association Bylaws
or Rules.
(9) The permit shall be issued if the applicant is delinquent in paying of any taxes,
assessments, forfeitures, or fines for violations of City ordinances, utility bills, or other claims owed
to the City.
43
(D) Permit Fee.
(1) Application and Permit fee shall be in the amount established by City fee schedule.
(2) Permit fees shall not be prorated or refundable.
(E) Inspection and Enforcement
(1) The Hastings Police Department, Animal Control Officer, or their designees shall have
the power, whenever they may deem reasonably necessary, and consistent with the requirements of
statutory and constitutional law, to enter a building, structure, or property related to a permit under
this section to inspect and ascertain whether the license holder is in compliance with this chapter. The
above listed departments may issue compliance orders and citations pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, this code and state law. The inspecting party shall have recourse to every remedy provided
by law to secure entry, including the right to secure a proper inspection warrant.
(2) The City may revoke a permit at any time if the permittee does not follow the terms of
the permit or this section, or if the City finds that the permit holder has not maintained the goats,
fences, or outdoor enclosures in a clean and sanitary condition.
(F) Other Methods Not Excluded. The requirements and remedies provided under this section are
not exclusive and may be used in combination with each other or with any other section of this code
or applicable state statute.
(G) Severability. If any provision in this section, or portion thereof, is found to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining sections shall not be affected.
(I) Violation and Penalty. Every person who violates a section or division of this chapter by
performing an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or by failing to do an act hereby required,
or when the person fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, shall upon
conviction be punished as for a misdemeanor.
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
91. ANIMALS
92. RENTAL HOUSING
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
43
CHAPTER 92: RENTAL HOUSING
Section
92.01
Crime Free Multi-Housing Program; prospective tenant background checks
§ 92.01 CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM; PROSPECTIVE TENANT
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
(A)
11)
Minnesota Crime Free Multi
certification, may request the Police Department to conduct a criminal history/background
investigation of a prospective residential tenant as provided under division (B) below. The requests
shall be on a form approved b
the investigation fee established by resolution of the City Council.
(B)
prospective tenants of residential
owner or resident manager of the property as provided in division (A). The landlord must present a
consent/waiver signed by the perspective tenant on a form approved by the Police Department
investigation shall be conducted and no information shall be disseminated unless the landlord presents
the required signed consent/waiver.
Any owner or resident manager of rental property who has completed Phase 1 of the
-Housing training program and is actively working toward full
y or provided by the Police Department and shall be accompanied by
The Police Department may conduct criminal history/background investigations on
rental property within the City of Hastings upon request of the
. No
(Prior Code, § 9.09) (Ord. 2011-21, 3rd Series, adopted 9-19-
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
91. ANIMALS
92. RENTAL HOUSING
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
45
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Uniform Fire Code
93.01 Adoption of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code
93.02 Establishment of duties of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
93.03 Definitions
93.04 Establishment of limits of jurisdiction in which storage of flammable or combustible
liquids in outside, above-ground tanks is prohibited
93.05 Establishment of limits in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases are to be restricted
93.06 Amendments made in the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code
93.07 Establishment of restrictions on the use of barbecues
93.08 New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits
93.09 Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosive and blasting agents is
to be prohibited
93.10 Appeals
93.11 Effective date
Fire Alarm Systems and Installations
93.20 Purpose
93.21 Definition
93.22 When required
93.23 Permit required
93.24 Permit application
93.25 Installation
93.26 Fire Department key box
93.27 Key holder
93.28 Effective date
93.98 Violations
46
UNIFORM FIRE CODE
§ 93.01 ADOPTION OF THE MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
The 2007 Edition of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code is hereby adopted by the City of Hastings
for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from
fire and explosion, except those portions that are deleted or amended by § 93.06. One copy of the
Minnesota Uniform Fire Code in effect within the City of Hastings shall be on file in the office of the
City Clerk. (Prior Code, § 9.82) (Am. Ord. 2007-03, 3rd Series, passed 8-6-2007)
§ 93.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF DUTIES OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
(A) The Minnesota Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Fire Department of the City of Hastings which is hereby established and which shall be operated
under the supervision of the Fire Chief.
(B) The Fire Marshal in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the
Hastings City Council on the basis of examination to determine his or her qualifications.
(C) The Fire Chief may appoint the members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from
time to time be necessary. The Fire Chief shall recommend to the Hastings City Council the
employment of technical inspectors, who, when the authorization is made, shall be selected through
an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members
and nonmembers of the Fire Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an
indefinite term with removal only for cause. (Prior Code, § 9.82)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION. Fire Marshal.
CORPORATION COUNSEL. Whenever used in the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, it shall be
held to mean the attorney for the City of Hastings.
JURISDICTION. Whenever used in the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean
the City of Hastings. (Prior Code, § 9.82)
47
§ 93.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF JURISDICTION IN WHICH STORAGE OF
FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE, ABOVE-GROUND TANKS IS
PROHIBITED.
(A) The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above-ground storage tanks is
prohibited in all areas within the city except for the following zoning districts: I-1 Industrial Park
and I-2 Industrial Park Storage/Services. Allowed storage shall be limited to Class I, Class II, and
Class III liquids as defined in the Minnesota State Fire Code (MSFC). Allowed storage shall be for
the sole purpose of fleet fueling. Resale of product from allowed tanks is prohibited.
(B) Installation and maintenance of above-ground storage tanks shall comply with current
editions of the Minnesota State Fire Code, National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA), and the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules and regulations.
(C) The maximum storage capacities for above-ground tanks shall not exceed 2,000 gallons for
Class I liquids and 10,000 gallons for Class II and Class III liquids.
(D) No installation of outside above-ground storage tanks may occur without the prior approval
of the Fire Chief and the Fire Marshal and issuance of a fire code permit issued by the Office of the
Fire Marshal. (Prior Code, § 9.82) (Ord. 2008-14, 3rd Series, passed 10-20-2008) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 93.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GASES ARE TO BE RESTRICTED.
(A) Liquefied petroleum gases may be stored in industrial parks for uses by industry located
therein, but any such use shall comply with the following. The storage facility shall be diked,
mounded, buried, or in the alternative protected with at least a 1-hour fire retardant material with the
approval of the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal or his or her authorized representative. Any storage
facilities that are mounded or buried shall be coated with an approved coating and shall have devices
installed on the facility so that the tank or tanks can be tested periodically for corrosion and
durability.
(B) Liquefied petroleum gases may be stored and dispensed in Zone C-4 according to the city’s
Zoning Code, for the purpose of resale, when approved by the Fire Chief or the Fire Marshal. Any
such use shall comply with the Minnesota State Fire Code and the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Pamphlet 58. Additionally, any such use shall comply with the following:
(1) Liquefied petroleum storage containers having a water capacity of 2.7 pounds or greater
shall be limited to 1 container.
(2) The liquefied petroleum storage container shall be no larger than 1,000 U.S. liquid
gallons.
(3) The fill/transfer site shall be visible from a constantly attended location within the
facility.
48
(4) There shall be a minimum of 2 certified operators on the property at any time the
transfer of liquefied petroleum is in progress.
(5) A distance of not less than 75 feet shall be maintained from the storage and dispensing
operation area to any adjacent structure or any public roadway.
(6) A distance of not less than 25 feet shall be maintained from the storage and dispensing
operation area to any property line.
(7) Any storage of liquefied petroleum products must have written approval by the owner
of said property.
(8) Containers to be filled shall not be left on site for filling at a later time.
(9) Sales of liquefied petroleum containers shall be restricted to new certified containers
only.
(10) Transfer operators shall exercise precaution to ensure that the liquefied petroleum gases
transferred are those for which the transfer system and the containers to be filled are designed.
(11) Injection of compressed air, oxygen, or any oxidizing gas into containers to transfer
liquefied petroleum shall be prohibited.
(12) Containers shall be filled only after determination that they comply with the design,
fabrication, inspection and marking for use with liquefied petroleum gas.
(13) Containers authorized as “single trip, ” “nonrefillable, ” or “disposable” containers shall
not be refilled with liquefied petroleum gas.
(C) Operation of transfer systems.
(1) Sources of ignition shall be turned off during transfer operations, while connections or
disconnections are made, or while liquefied petroleum gas is being vented to the atmosphere.
(2) Internal combustion engines within 15 feet of a point of transfer shall be shut down
while such transfer operations are in progress.
(3) Exception. Engines of liquefied petroleum gas cargo tank vehicles constructed and
operated for the purpose of driving transfer pumps or compressors on these vehicles to load and
unload liquefied petroleum gases.
(4) Smoking, open flame, metal cutting or welding, portable electrical tools and/or
appliances, and extension cords and or lighting capable of igniting liquefied petroleum gas shall not
be permitted within 25 feet of a point of transfer while transfer operations are in progress. Materials
that have been heated above the ignition temperature of liquefied petroleum gas shall be cooled
before that transfer is started.
49
(5) Sources of ignition shall be turned off during the filling of any liquefied petroleum
container on the vehicle.
(6) Transfer of liquefied petroleum gas shall only occur outdoors.
(D) Venting liquefied petroleum gas to the atmosphere.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas, either liquid or vapor form, shall not be vented to the
atmosphere.
(2) Exception. Venting of liquefied petroleum gas between shutoff valves before
disconnecting the liquid transfer line from the container. Where necessary, bleeder valves shall be
used.
(3) Venting of liquefied petroleum gas indoors shall be prohibited.
(4) Exception. Structures designed and constructed for liquefied petroleum gas transfer.
(E) Vehicle impact protection.
(1) Guard posts shall comply with all of the following requirements:
(a) Constructed of steel not less than 4 inches in diameter and concrete filled.
(b) Spaced not more than 4 feet between posts on center.
(c) Set not less than 3 feet deep in a concrete footing of not less than a 15-inch
diameter.
(d) Set with the top of the posts not less than 3 feet above ground.
(e) Located not less than 3 feet from the protected object.
(2) Physical barriers shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height and shall resist a force of
12,000 pounds applied 36 inches above the adjacent ground surface.
(F) Fire protection. The liquefied petroleum transfer station shall be provided with at least one
approved portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 4A 60BC. The required fire
extinguisher shall be located no more than 50 feet from the storage area. This required fire
extinguisher shall be accessible at all times.
(G) Liquefied petroleum gases may not be stored in any area other than industrial parks and
Zone C-4 (as provided by division (A) above) except that in non-dense residential areas where
natural gas is not available, with approval of the Fire Chief or his or her designate, liquefied
50
petroleum gas storage may be used as is necessary to service a residence or commercial operation.
Under no circumstances may liquefied petroleum gases be stored in densely populated residential
areas. Whenever allowed in sparsely populated residential areas because of the unavailability of
natural gas, the storage facility shall be diked, mounded, buried or protected with at least 1-hour fire
retardant material with the approval of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative. Any
storage facilities that are mounded or buried shall be coated with an approved coating and shall have
devices installed on them so the tank or tanks can be treated periodically for corrosion and durability.
(H) Temporary use of liquefied petroleum as an energy source during construction shall be
allowed only when approved by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal and then in accordance with the
restrictions as may be imposed by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal or his or her representative to
assure safe operation. (Prior Code, § 9.82) (Am. Ord. 564, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007) Penalty,
see § 10.99
§ 93.06 AMENDMENTS MADE IN THE MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
(A) It is unlawful to park any vehicle or to locate any obstruction in an area designated as a fire
lane, whether the fire lane is adjacent to a public or private structure or property.
(B) The Fire Chief or his or her representative may review all building plans, except plans for
single- or 2-family residences to assure compliance with the provisions of the Minnesota Uniform
Fire Code and he or she shall note any violations discovered in connection with the proposed
structures to the persons as may be charged with the responsibility for review of the plans.
(C) Section 10.402(c) of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code shall be amended to read as follows:
FIRE DOOR
DO NOT OBSTRUCT
or
FIRE DOOR
KEEP CLOSED
(D) Article 4 of the Uniform Fire Code, 1982 Edition, titled “Permits and Certificates” is
adopted in its entirety and incorporated as fully as if set out herein, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(E) Each permit issued by the Fire Department, pursuant to the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code,
shall be issued for a 1-year period unless otherwise provided in this section. The yearly permit fee
for the permit shall be $20, provided, however, that if more than 1 permit is required for the
establishment, the maximum permit fee shall be $30 per year. Further provided that tank installation
permits shall be valid until revoked by the Fire Chief or his or her designee and the permit fee shall
be $25 per installation, (not per tank). Permits issued for a period of less than 10 days shall require
a fee of $10. Permit fees may be reviewed and until otherwise directed by the Council by resolution,
the permit year shall be the calendar year. Pro rata adjustments, on a monthly basis, shall be made
for permits for less than 1 full year. Except for tank installation permits and short term permits for
less than 10 days, all permits shall expire on the last day of December of each calendar year. The
51
Fire Chief shall establish procedures and forms to carry out the intent of this section.
(F) The Chief and members of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the powers of a police
officer in performing their duties under this code. (Prior Code, § 9.82) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.07 ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF BARBECUES.
(A) In any structure containing 3 or more dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or
cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, or on any ground floor patio within
15 feet of any structure.
Exceptions:
1. Residential occupancies where all units have private direct ingress and egress
to
exterior of the structure and no use of common means of egress (examples
hallways or stairways used by separate occupancies).
(B) No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or other similar heating or lighting
chemicals or devices in the locations designated in § 93.07 (A).
(C) Electric grills or gas-fired barbecue grills which are permanently mounted, wired, or
plumbed to the building’s gas supply or electrical system and maintaining a minimum clearance of 18
inches on all sides may be installed on balconies and patios when approved by the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 9.82) Penalty, see § 10.99, (Ord. No. 2013-03, 3rd Series, passed on 6-3-13)
§ 93.08 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE
PERMITS.
The City Administrator, the Chief, and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a
committee to determine and specify, and for giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any
new materials, processes, or occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now
enumerated in the code. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall post the list in a
conspicuous place in his or her office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (Prior
Code, § 9.82)
§ 93.09 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF
EXPLOSIVE AND BLASTING AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
It is the intent of this subchapter to prohibit storage of explosives and blasting agents in the city
and to require that any such explosive and blasting agents to be removed from the city for storage.
(Prior Code, § 9.82)
52
§ 93.10 APPEALS.
Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or
when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of
the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Chief to the Board of Appeals established pursuant to the State Building Code and a provision
of the City Code regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all
buildings and/or structures in the city. (Prior Code, § 9.82)
§ 93.11 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This subchapter shall take effect upon its passage and publication. (Prior Code, § 9.82)
§ 93.20 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter shall address the application, installation, performance and
maintenance of fire alarm systems in new and existing buildings and structures not required by other
codes as adopted by the city. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007)
§ 93.21 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, FIRE ALARM SYSTEM will have the same definition as
contained in Minnesota State Fire Code (MSFC) 2000 Edition [National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) Standard 72]. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007)
§ 93.22 WHEN REQUIRED.
(A) A fire alarm system shall be installed in the following:
(1) Any building, which has mixed occupancies when one of the occupancies is residential.
(2) Exception.
(a) A building where all required components of egress are on the level of exit
discharge and acceptable occupancy separation exists which complies with the Minnesota State Fire
Code.
(b) A building protected throughout by a supervised automatic fire suppression system,
as approved by the Fire Marshal.
(c) A home occupation business where the business owner is also the primary resident.
53
(B) Any building when required under the International Building Code or the International Fire
Code. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.23 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install a Fire Alarm System, as defined in this section, without first obtaining a
permit from the City of Hastings.
(B) Exception. Individual R-3 (one and two family residential dwellings) occupancies, as stated
in the Minnesota State Fire Code. Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily
permanent in nature and there is no mixed-use classification of the building. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series,
passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.24 PERMIT APPLICATION.
The application for a permit for the installation of a Fire Alarm System shall be made on a form
approved by the City Council to the city’s Department of Building Safety and shall include:
(A) The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
(B) The address of the proposed location for the Fire Alarm System to be installed;
(C) The name, address and phone number of the architect/designer and installer of the proposed
fire alarm system;
(D) Site plan showing location of detection and audio/visual alarm device;
(E) Floor plan showing alarm control panel and trouble signaling equipment location;
(F) Manufacturers, model numbers and listing information for equipment, devices and
materials;
(G) Any other information deemed necessary by the Hastings City Council. (Ord. 565, 2nd
Series, passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.25 INSTALLATION.
Automatic fire detectors shall be installed in common laundry rooms, boiler and furnace rooms,
mechanical and electrical rooms, commercial and retail spaces, storage spaces, trash-collection
rooms,
54
workshops, locker rooms and basements. In addition, all components of egress such as corridors,
common areas, hallways and stairways shall also be protected by installation of automatic fire
detectors.
(A) All automatic fire detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system and shall
sound the fire alarm signal when activated.
(B) Single station smoke detectors as required by the International Fire Code shall be used in
dwelling spaces and sleeping rooms.
(C) Horn/strobe annunciation devices shall be provided in all dwelling spaces, retail spaces,
basements and all egress areas.
(D) Fire alarm control panels shall be located in an area accessible to Fire Department
personnel.
(E) Access to building and dwelling spaces shall be provided to Fire Department personnel by
keys installed in an approved key box.
(F) Fire alarm systems required by this section shall be monitored by an approved central,
proprietary or remote station service.
(G) Maintenance, repair and testing. Maintenance, repair and testing shall be conducted and
performed as outlined in the Minnesota State Fire Code. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.26 FIRE DEPARTMENT KEY BOX.
Any building with a fire alarm system as required by this section shall be equipped with an
approved key box. This key box shall be installed in a location approved by the Fire Marshal. This
key box shall contain keys providing access to all areas of the building. An application to purchase a
key box can be obtained through the Hastings Fire Marshal. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-
2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.27 KEY HOLDER.
The Hastings Fire Department shall maintain a list of key holders. This list shall contain a
minimum of 3 valid key holders that can respond to the building when requested by the Fire
Department. This list of key holders will be shared with the following agencies: the Hastings Police
Department and the Dakota County Sheriff’s Office. This key holder list will not be shared with any
other agencies or individuals. Once the fire alarm system is operable, it shall be the responsibility of
the building owner to inform the Fire Department of any key holder changes. (Ord. 565, 2nd Series,
passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
55
§ 93.28 EFFECTIVE DATE.
(A) All new construction structures that meet the intent of this ordinance where building permits
were issued on or after May 31, 2007.
(B) All existing structures that meet the intent of this ordinance effective May 31, 2011.
(Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-15, 3rd Series, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 93.30 PROPANE CYLINDER EXCHANGE OPERATIONS
(A) Propane cylinder exchange operations shall be allowed subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The sale of propane exchange cylinders shall be allowed only within areas of the C-3
Zoning District located south of 10th Street and all areas of the C-4 Zoning District of the City.
(2) A site plan shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal for approval, indicating size of cage,
location as well as separation distances.
(3) Only one exchange cabinet per business/property with a maximum capacity of 18 20-
pound propane cylinders.
(4) Exchange cabinet must be stored outdoors and on property owned/leased by occupant.
(5) If the property is leased, written authorization from property owner must be obtained prior
to approval.
(6) No smoking signs shall be posted on the exchange cage and within 25 feet of the
surrounding area.
(7) Propane cage shall not be located within 20 feet of any doorway or opening in a building,
within 20 feet of a motor vehicle fuel dispenser or within 20 feet of any combustible material.
(8) The propane cage shall be designed so that containers cannot be stacked on top of each
other and designed so that containers are positioned upright with the pressure-relief valve in direct
communication with the vapor space of the container.
(9) Cylinder outlet valves shall be closed and plugged when in storage.
(10) Defective containers or containers showing denting, bulging or excessive corrosion shall
be immediately removed from service and properly disposed.
(11) Exchange cabinets are not allowed on public property.
(12) Exchange cabinet is the only place acceptable for the storage of propane cylinders.
(13) Business owner shall supply the city a key holder list with a minimum of three
individuals who can respond 24/7 within 20 minutes of being contacted. It shall be the owner’s
responsibility to maintain this key holder list and provide any updates to the city in a timely manner. In
56
addition, a sign listing exchange procedures, company name and a 24 hour emergency phone number
shall be posted within 10 feet of the cage.
(14) Signs requiring that customers leave LPG containers outside the building shall be posted
on the building entrance(s). The signs shall read “DO NOT BRING LP-GAS CYLINDERS INTO THE
BUILDING.” The lettering must be a minimum 1” in height with a minimum stroke of 1/4 inch.
(15) All employees with access to the exchange cage shall be trained in the proper handling
and operating procedures, including the procedure for handling defective containers. Documentation of
this training shall be provided to a fire department representative upon request.
(16) A minimum of one 2A20BC fire extinguisher shall be located within 50 feet, but not less
than 25 feet from the propane cage.
(17) An approved NFPA 704 hazard identification sign/placard shall be posted on the cage.
This sign/placard shall be a minimum one foot square.
(18) The Fire Marshal has the authority to require vehicular barrier protection.
(Ord. No. 2015-03, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-15)
§ 93.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he or
she perform an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 565, 2nd Series, passed 5-7-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
91. ANIMALS
92. RENTAL HOUSING
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
56
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
94.01 Definition
94.02 Park curfew
94.03 Authorized persons
94.04 Glass beverage containers prohibited
94.05 Additional unlawful acts
94.06 Special regulations for Lake Rebecca Park
94.98 Violations
57
§ 94.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PARK. A park, playground, swimming pool, lake, pond, stream, trail, nature area, open space
area, or recreational center, including adjacent parking areas, owned or operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 9.84)
§ 94.02 PARK CURFEW.
It is unlawful for unauthorized persons or vehicles to enter or remain in parks between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for Veterans Athletic Complex, where it is unlawful for
unauthorized persons or vehicles to enter or remain in the complex between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. (Prior Code, § 9.84) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. No. 2014-08, 3rd Series Adopted 4-
21-14)
§ 94.03 AUTHORIZED PERSONS.
All persons are authorized persons if:
(A) A participant in, or bona fide spectator at, an activity at an indoor ice arena, lighted tennis
court, or a city-sponsored and supervised activity;
(B) Participating in an activity sponsored by an individual or group association to whom the city
has issued a written permit;
(C) Custodial or maintenance personnel performing their official duties. (Prior Code, § 9.84)
§ 94.04 GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to bring into, use, or discard, in any city park, any glass beverage
containers, including but not limited to pop, beer, and water bottles, drinking glasses, and drinking
cups. (Ord. 486, passed 2-3-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.05 ADDITIONAL UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is unlawful in any park for any person to:
(A) Build or maintain a recreational fire in any park except in places or facilities provided;
58
(B) Drive or operate any motorized vehicle of any type whatsoever in any area of a park other
than parking lots and designated roadways, it being specifically prohibited hereby to operate any
motorized vehicles on any bicycle path, hiking trail, or walkway;
(C) It is unlawful for any person to consume or be in possession of intoxicating liquor in any
City park at any time. It is unlawful for any person to consume or be in possession of intoxicating
malt liquor, wine or 3.2% malt liquor, wine or 3.2% malt liquor in any City park between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. ; the following provisions also apply:
(1) Veterans Athletic Complex where possession or consumption of intoxicating liquor is
prohibited at all times, however; wine or intoxicating malt liquor shall be permitted between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(2) Special Events in any City park; sales, possession or consumption of intoxicating liquor
is prohibited at all times, however; wine or intoxicating malt liquor shall be permitted between 8:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. when such sales, possession and consumption are in conjunction with the issuance
of a temporary on-sale wine and beer liquor license issued to a qualified entity as part of a community
wide festival; such sale, possession and consumption is in a confined area approved by the City
Council; and in compliance with all other conditions the council reasonably deems necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2012-04, 3rd Series, passed 4-16-2012) (Ord. 2014-09, 3rd
Series, passes on 4-21-14)
(D) Commit any nuisance or any offense against decency or public morals;
(E) Paste, affix, or inscribe any handbill or poster on any structure or property on any place,
square, or roadway surrounding a park;
(F) Disturb or interfere with any birds, animals, animal habitat, or nesting area in a park;
(G) Sell or offer for sale any articles, food, or beverage without a permit, lease, or concession
granted by the city;
(H) Allow his or her unleashed cat or dog to be in any city park or field to pick up animal waste
as required by § 91.34;
(I) Write upon or mark or deface in any manner, or use in any improper way any property or
thing pertaining to or in a park;
(J) Refuse to obey all orders or directions of authorized city personnel;
(K) Break, cut, mutilate, injure, remove, or carry away any tree, plant, flower, shrub, rock,
soil, sand, fence, benches, tables, or any other city property;
(L) Schedule and hold large gatherings without a written permit from the city;
(M) Be in possession of any explosive, bow and arrow, or other similar device; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the discharge of fireworks by an organization
59
or group of organizations authorized in writing by the City Council; or Ord. No. 2011-12, 3rd Series,
passed 06-06-11
(N) Engage in any on-sale 3.2% intoxicating malt liquor, 3.2% malt liquor or wine in the
Veterans Park Athletic Complex without first obtaining the necessary license from the City.
(Prior Code, § 9.84)
(O) Set up any tent, temporary shelter, camp trailer, concession wagon or horse trailer without
written permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(P) Discharge any pollutants into any body of water in any park. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.06 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR LAKE REBECCA PARK.
Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to
do any of the following acts or things in Lake Rebecca Park:
(A) Operate any type of motor powered boat upon Lake Rebecca except that electric powered
boats shall be allowed;
(B) Suffer or permit any dog, cat, or other pet whatsoever within the beach area of Lake
Rebecca;
(C) Bring into, be in possession of, or use any glass beverage containers, whatsoever; and/or
(D) The feeding of waterfowl within Lake Rebecca Park is prohibited. (Prior Code, § 9.84)
Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. No. 2014-09 3rd Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
§ 94.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person who violates a section or division of this chapter by performing thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or by failing to do an act hereby required, or when the person fails to act when
the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, shall upon conviction be punished as for a
misdemeanor. (Prior Code, § 9.84) (Am. Ord. 554, 2nd Series, passed 5-15-2006) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
91. ANIMALS
92. RENTAL HOUSING
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. PARKS AND RECREATION
95. HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
60
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Health and Safety Provisions
95.01 Obstruction
95.02 Toilet installation required
95.03 Display of address identification numbers
95.04 Tree diseases and tree threatening pests
95.06 Alarm registration Permit
Nuisances
95.20 Public nuisance
95.21 Public nuisances affecting health
95.22 Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
95.23 Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
95.24 Duties of city officers
Open Burning
95.40 Definitions
95.41 Prohibited materials
95.42 Permit required for open burning
95.43 Purposes allowed for open burning
95.44 Permit application for open burning; permit fees
95.45 Permit process for open burning
95.46 Permit holder responsibility
95.47 Revocation of open burning permit
95.48 Denial of open burning permit
95.49 Burning ban or air quality alert
95.50 Rules and laws adopted by reference
61
§ 95.01 OBSTRUCTION.
It is unlawful for any person to oppose or obstruct any health officer or physician charged with
the enforcement of health laws, in performing any legal duty, or obstruct or hinder the entry of the
health officers upon premises or into buildings or other places where contagion, infection, filth, or
other source or cause of preventable disease exists or is reasonable suspected to exist. (Prior Code,
§ 9.02) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.02 TOILET INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property within the city, having a dwelling
house or business building situated thereon, which property is within 500 feet of any municipal water
and sewer mains, to install a toilet in the dwelling or business building and make connection thereof
with the water and sewer mains. Whenever the non-compliance of the owner or occupant of the
property is reported to the Building Official, he or she shall forthwith make the investigation as he or
she deems necessary or proper and report his or her findings to the Council. If the Building Official
or designee finds and reports that in his or her opinion the lack of toilet facilities is an unhealthful or
unsanitary condition, the city shall forthwith serve written notice upon the owner or occupant
requiring the installation of toilet facilities upon premises described in the notice, and connection
thereof with the sewer and water mains, all of which shall be done within 30 days after service of the
written notice. Whenever any owner or occupant shall default in compliance with the written notice,
the Council may by resolution direct that a toilet be installed and connection made with the water and
sewer mains and that the actual cost of the installation be paid in the first instance out of the General
Revenue Fund, and assessed against the property so benefitted. After the installation and connection
is completed by order of the Council, the city shall serve a written notice of intention to make an
assessment therefore. If the assessment is not paid within 10 days the city shall certify the amount
thereof to the County Auditor in the same manner as with other special assessments, provided that
the Council may be resolution provide that the assessment be spread over a term of 3 years upon
written request by the owner of the property. (Prior Code, § 9.08) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.03 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS.
(A) Purpose. It is determined by the City Council that the general welfare and public safety will
be served by requiring assigned address identification numbers to be placed on all residential,
commercial, and industrial buildings in the city.
(B) Requirements. The owners of all residential, commercial, or industrial buildings in the city
shall affix the assigned address identification numbers to the front of the building. When a building
is occupied by more than 1 dwelling unit, business, or industry, each entrance shall display the
address identification number.
(C) Placement. All assigned address identification numbers shall be affixed to the building so as
62
to be clearly visible at all times from the public street in front of the building when traveling in either
direction.
(D) Specifications. Address identification numbers shall be at least 4 inches high, at least 1/2-
inch wide and in Arabic numeral form. The color of the address identification numbers shall contrast
with the color of the principal building.
(E) Compliance. All buildings existing on the effective date of this section shall be in
compliance by 7-1-1989. All buildings presently under construction or constructed after the effective
date of this section shall comply with this section before a certificate of occupancy is issued by the
city.
(F) Violations. No property owner will be subject to prosecution for violating this section until
after 2 written warnings, at least 1 week apart, have been sent to the owner by the city. Thereafter,
any violations of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor. (Prior Code, § 9.33) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.04 TREE DISEASES AND TREE THREATENING PESTS.
(A) Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public nuisances whenever they
may be found within the city:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch
Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark
beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps, firewood, or other elm
material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark
beetle insecticide;
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Oak Wilt
fungus Ceratocystis Fagacearum;
(4) Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the designated officer
constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak
material which has not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;
(5) Any other shade tree with an epidemic pest or disease. Pests include Emerald Ash Borer
(Agrilus Planipennix) or other insect or microorganism that is harmful to trees; and
(6) All wood from shade trees with an epidemic pest, such as Emerald Ash Borer, shall be
stored and/or moved only in accordance with state and federal guidelines.
(B) Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as
defined in division (A) of this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within
the city. The nuisance may be abated as provided in § 95.24.
63
(C) Record of costs. The City Clerk shall keep a record of the costs of abatement done under
this section for all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the
description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
(D) Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable
under this section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the
property involved as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection
the following year along with the current taxes. (Am. Ord. 2010-07, 3rd Series, passed 4-5-2010)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.
(A) Purpose. The City of Hastings supports the use of alarm systems to protect life and
property. It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide incentive to owners of alarm systems to have
properly working systems to effectively perform as intended; to reduce the number of false alarms
which result in city services being used to respond to unnecessary alarms; and to provide added benefit
to property owners by maintaining up to date information relating to alarm systems.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings set forth in this subsection except where the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
ALARM COMPANY. The business of any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity
involved in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing; repairing, altering, replacing, moving, monitoring,
or installing any alarm system at an alarm site located within the city or causing to be sold, leased,
maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any
building, structure, facility, or other alarm site located within the city.
ALARM REGISTRATION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Hastings Police Department to an
alarm system owner as defined in this ordinance.
ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment devices, including but not limited to systems
interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signal, arranged to emit or
transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal, indicating an alarm condition to which the
police or fire-fighting personnel are intended to respond, including but not limited to, burglary, holdup,
panic, and fire alarm systems.
ALARM SYSTEM USER. A person, employee, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other entity,
which uses or is in control of an alarm system at an alarm site, regardless of whether the user owns or leases the alarm system.
ANNUNCIATOR. The instrumentality in or on the premises of an alarm system through which
audible, visual and/or electric signals are communicated to any person.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device which utilizes the public primary telephone trunk
lines or other dedicated lines to select a predetermined or assigned telephone number and which
64
transmits, by a prerecorded voice message or code signal, to the Hastings Police Department or
Hastings Fire Department, a message that an incident of the kind noted in the definition of "alarm
system" has occurred.
DESIGNATED CONTACT PERSON. A person designated by the alarm system user as
contact person for the purpose of alarm-related matters and who can provide for twenty fourhours-
per-day availability and has the ability to control the alarm system.
FALSE ALARM, The activation of an alarm system which is intended to summon a
police response or fire response by the alarm system, through intentional misuse; mechanical
failure or malfunction; improper installation, maintenance or supervision; or negligence. The term
does not include alarms caused by force majeure, or other conditions which are clearly beyond the
control of the alarm user. Alarm systems must be equipped with a working battery backup system
that will power the system in the event of a power outage. Alarms caused by a power outage
lasting long enough to exhaust the battery back up will be reviewed on a case by case basis.
(C) Alarm system registration.
(1) Permit required,. term. Upon the effective date of this section, every alarm system
user shall register each alarm system with the City of Hastings. Upon proper registration, an
alarm registration permit will be issued which shall be valid for a one (1) year period and
which will expire on December 31 annually provided a new permit issued on or after July 1 of
any year shall be valid for the remainder of the current year plus the following year and shall
expire on December 31 of the following year. Any alarm system user requesting renewal of a
permit must apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the existing alarm permit expires.
(2) Permit; exemption.
(a) Alarm registration; renewal. Alarm system users operating alarm systems
existing on the effective date of this section shall obtain an alarm registration permit
within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section. Alarm system users
operating newly installed alarm systems shall obtain an alarm registration permit
within thirty (30) days after the new alarm system is operational. Alarm system users
more than sixty (60) days delinquent in renewing an existing alarm registration permit,
and alarm system users more than ninety (90) days delinquent in obtaining a new
alarm registration permit shall be charged and shall pay a late fee as set by ordinance,
(b) Exemption. An alarm system user which is a political subdivision of the
federal or state government, including the County, City and school districts, shall not
be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(3) Application; requirements, Any alarm system user registering an alarm system
shall complete a registration application form which shall include, at a minimum, the following
65
information:
(a) Accurate and complete contact information for the alarm system user(s),
designated contact person(s), and designated alarm company(ies),
including names, addresses, and phone numbers;
(b) The physical address and location within the building where the alarm
system is installed and maintained;
(c) The type and brand name of the alarm system installed and/or used;
(4) Registration and issuance of permit. Upon its receipt of a complete application and
determination that all requirements of this section are met, the Hastings Police Department will
issue an alarm registration permit to the alarm system user.
(5) Denial of registration permit. In the event an application for grant, issuance or
renewal does not meet all the requirements of this section, the alarm registration permit shall
not be issued. An alarm system user that is denied a permit may appeal the decision to the
Board of Adjustment and Appeals as provided in § 30.02(C) of the City Code. The appeal must
be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, and must be submitted to the city clerk
within ten business days of the decision that is the basis of the appeal.
(6) Alarm registration permit to be displayed. The alarm registration permit shall be
conspicuously displayed upon the premises where the alarm system is located, and readily
visible from the exterior thereof.
(D) Public nuisance; false alarms; operating without a permit; penalty.
(1) Public nuisance. It is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance for any alarm system
user to maintain or have actual physical control over any alarm system that:
(a) Emits, by an annunciator, an audible or visual alarm system signal
with more than twenty (20) minutes of continuous duration;
(b) Emits, through the reactivation of an annunciator of an alarm system, an audible
or visual signal which occurs more than twice in a one-hour period; or
(c) Signals a false alarm.
(2) False alarms; fee schedule. An alarm system user operating an alarm system in
violation of Subsections D(1)(a) or (b) by permitting a public nuisance shall immediately
modify the alarm system components to abate the public nuisance. Any alarm system user
found to be in violation of Subsection D(1)(c) by permitting a public nuisance shall be issued a
warning for the first two (2) of such violations thereof within any calendar year. For each false
alarm in excess of two (2) per calendar year, a fee shall be imposed on the alarm system user
and immediately paid by the alarm system user to the City of Hastings. The fee shall be set by
ordinance. Any fees not paid by the alarm system user within 30 days after a notice of
delinquency is sent to the alarm system user may be certified to the county auditor in the county
in which the alarm system user owns real property as provided in Minnesota Statutes §
66
366.012, or any amendments thereto, and the fees shall then be collected together with property
taxes levied against the property owned by the alarm system user.
(3) Use of alarm system without an alarm registration permit; penalty. It shall be
unlawful for an alarm system user to operate an alarm system without a current alarm
registration permit issued for the alarm system under this section. When the Police or Fire
Department respond to an alarm signal from an alarm system at a location for which there is no
current alarm registration permit issued by the Police Department, the Hastings Police or Fire
Department may issue a citation to the alarm system user for violation of this section. Alarm
systems users who are more than sixty (60) days delinquent in renewing their alarm system
registration permit shall be considered to be using an alarm system without an alarm system
registration permit in violation of this section. Any person or responsible party who violates
any provision of this ordinance is subject to the penalty as provided under § 10.99 of the City
Code. Ord. 2011-6, 3rd Series, passed 4-18-11
§ 95.20 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the
following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the
safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-ofway,
or waters used by the public; or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§ 95.20, 95.21, or 95.22, or any
other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.21 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
(B) All diseased animals running at large;
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(E) Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;
67
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so
maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by
sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
(H) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
(I) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
(J) All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
(K) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.22 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as otherwise authorized by
federal, state, or local law;
(B) Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in those occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling
houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or
where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating
liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all
liquor and other property used for maintaining that place; and
(E) Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.23 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 48 hours after the snow or other
precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;( 2011-04, 3rd Series, passed 2-7-11)
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear
view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
68
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(E) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
(F) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic, and the free use of the
street or sidewalk;
(G) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, so
situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;
(H) The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any
street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(I) Any barbed wire fence less than 6 feet above the ground and within 3 feet of a public
sidewalk or way;
(J) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on
private property as to attract the public;
(K) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
(L) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances,
automobile bodies, or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or
vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health, or safety hazards from accumulation;
(M) Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in another condition as to
constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
(N) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter,
or ditch with trash of other materials;
(O) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public property of any glass,
tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any
pneumatic tire when passing over the substance;
(P) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private
property;
(Q) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of
anyone;
69
(R) (1) Prohibited Noises.
(a) General Prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and
loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects
their property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of this
section. All noises in violation of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Rules, Chapter 7030, as
they may be amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference into this code,
are prohibited.
(b) Nuisance Factors-Noises. The characteristics and conditions which shall be
considered in determining whether a noise unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of
property or affects their property’s value for the purposes of paragraph (a) of this subsection, shall
include, without limitation, the following:
(i) The time of day or night when the noise occurs;
(ii) The duration of the noise;
(iii) The proximity of the noise to a sleeping facility, residential area, church,
school,
institution of learning or hospital
(iv) The land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and
the area where it is perceived;
(v) The number of people and their activities that are affected or are likely to be
affected by the noise; and
(vi) The sound peak pressure level of the noise, in comparison to the level of
ambient noise.
(c) Noisy Assembly.
(i) Defined. The term “noisy assembly” shall mean a gathering of more than one
person in a residentially zoned or used area or building that would be likely
to cause significant discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of ordinary
sensitivities present in the area, considering the time of day and the residential
character of the area, due to loud, disturbing or excessive noise.
(ii) Permitting Noisy Assembly. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person
having dominion, care or control of a residentially zoned or used area or
building knowingly to permit a noisy assembly.
(iii) Remaining at a Noisy Assembly. It shall be a violation of this section to
participate in, visit or remain at a gathering knowing or having reason to
know that the gathering is a noisy assembly, except any person(s) who has/
have come to the gathering for the sole purpose of abating the noisy assembly.
70
(d) Animals. It shall be a violation of this section to own, keep, have in possession or
harbor any animal or animals which make any noise to the reasonable annoyance of another person
or persons. The phrase “to the reasonable annoyance of another person or persons” shall include,
but is not limited to, the creation of any noise by any animal or animals which can be heard by any
person, including the animal control officer or a law enforcement officer, from a location outside of
the premises where the animal or animals are located and which animal noise occurs repeatedly over
at least a five-minute period of time with no more than a one-minute lapse of time between each
animal noise during the five-minute period.
(e) Amplified Sound. It shall be a violation of this section to play, operate or permit
the playing, use or operation of any radio, tape player, disc player, loud speaker or other electronic
device used for the amplification of sound, unless otherwise permitted by law, located inside or
outside, the sound of which carries to points of habitation or adjacent properties, and is audible
above the level of conversational speech at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the point of
origin of the amplified sound.
(f) Motor Vehicles.
(i) Generally. It shall be a violation of this section to use any automobile, truck,
motorcycle, motorboat, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile, recreational vehicle,
other vehicle, or stationary internal combustion engine which causes or would
be likely to cause significant discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of
ordinary sensitivities present in the area due to loud, disturbing or excessive
noise.
(ii) Amplified Sound from Motor Vehicles. It shall be a violation of this section
to play, operate or permit the playing, use or operation of any radio, tape
player, disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the
amplification of music or other entertainment, which is located within a
motor vehicle on a public street or alley, or in a commercial or residential
parking facility, which is audible by any person from a distance of fifty (50)
feet or more from the motor vehicle. When sound violating this section is
produced or reproduced by any such device that is located in a motor vehicle,
the motor vehicle’s owner, if present when the violation occurs, is guilty
of the violation. If the motor vehicle’s owner is not present at the time of the
violation, the person who has dominion, care or control of the motor vehicle
at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation. In addition to an owner
or a driver, any person who controls or assists with the production,
reproduction, or amplification of sound in violation at this section is guilty
of the violation.
(iii) Horns and Other Signals. It shall be a violation of this section to sound any
horn
or signal device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except
as a danger signal or traffic warning, which would be likely to cause
significant discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of ordinary
sensitivities in the area.
71
(iv) Application of the MPCA Rules. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the
City in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency Rules, Sections 7030.1000 through 7030.1060.
(2) Hourly restriction of certain operations.
(a) Domestic Power Equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power
hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill, or other similar domestic power
maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal equipment
is exempt from this provision.
(b) Refuse Hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any
residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
(c) Construction Activities. No person shall engage in or permit construction activities
involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
(3) Noise impact statements. The Council may require any person applying for a change in
zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation or
alteration or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact
statement on a form prescribed by the Council. It shall evaluate each such statement and take its
evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning
change requested.
§ 95.24 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
For purposes of § 95.24, the Police Department, or Sheriff or person designated by the City
Council under § 10.20, if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the provisions
relating to nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall have the power to inspect private
premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public
nuisances. Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police
officer or designated person shall enter private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing
public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident, or other person in control of the
property, unless the officer or person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of
competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry, as provided in § 10.20.
OPEN BURNING
§ 95.40 DEFINITIONS.
72
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire protection services
to the city.
OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products are emitted
directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney, except a recreational
fire as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood
smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three feet in
height, contained within the border of a RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE using dry, clean wood;
producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line; conducted with an adult
tending the fire at all times; for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes;
extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors,
burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health, or safety hazards will not be created. No more
than 1 recreational fire is allowed on any property at 1 time.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a 3-foot diameter circle (measured
from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-combustible and nonsmoke
or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile, or blocks or ferrous
metal only and which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included
are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a RECREATION FIRE
SITE as defined herein. RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 25 feet to
any structure.
STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or charcoal fire
starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only.
Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to
start an open burn.
WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs, ” charcoal, cord
wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include wood that is green with leaves or
needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be
used for recreational fires when cut into 3-foot lengths.
73
§ 95.41 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
(A) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics,
chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as
tires, railroad ties, treated, painted, or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation,
composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
(B) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage
operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or
from a service or commercial establishment or building material generated from demolition of
commercial or institutional structures.
(C) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of discarded material resulting from
the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving, or consumption of food.
(D) No person shall conduct, cause, or permit open burning of any leaves or grass clippings.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.42 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city without first having
obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire which is a recreational
fire as defined in § 95.40. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.43 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
(A) Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
(1) Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other practical means;
(2) Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
(3) Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the
development and maintenance of land and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading,
or other alternative methods are not practical;
(4) Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected nursery stock,
diseased bee hives; and
(5) Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes generated from
construction, where recycling, reuse, removal, or other alternative disposal methods are not
practical.
74
(B) Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.44 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
(A) Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form prescribed the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire Department. The permit
application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for
reviewing and processing those applications.
(B) An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees shall be in the
amount established by the City Council from time to time. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.45 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit fee, the Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the
proposed burn site, note special conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire
safety considerations.
§ 95.46 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
(A) Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for confirming that no
burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by
the permit holder or his or her competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire safety plan.
(B) The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or his or her
representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available
for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR
forest officer.
(C) The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all general
conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as established in the permit issued. The
permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not
limited to fire suppression and administrative fees. Penalty, see § 10.99
75
§ 95.47 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR forest officer, the Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals. Reasons for revocation include but are not limited
to a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the
permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing
during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame present. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.48 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not met during review of the
application, it is determined that a practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or
a pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the
satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals, these officers may deny the
application for the open burn permit.
§ 95.49 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has officially declared
a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air
Quality Alert. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.50 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 through 88.22, as they may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
2
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Applications
110.03 Action on application for license
110.04 Carrying or posting
110.05 Penalty for property owners
110.06 Responsibility of licensee
110.07 Posting and distributing printed matter
110.09 Bowling
110.10 Dances
110.11 Pawn brokers
110.15 Lodging tax
110.16 Kennel; animal shelter
110.17 Lawful gambling
110.19 Late payments
Cross-reference:
Additional regulations on kennels, see § 91.31
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the
applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite
to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either
licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.
LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him or her to carry on and
transact a business.
LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
3
license to transact and carry on a business.
LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a valid, current,
unexpired, and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on a business.
SALE, SELL, and SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise
to persons. (Prior Code, § 5.01)
§ 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
All applications shall be made as follows.
(A) All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk upon forms that have been adopted
by resolution of the Council.
(B) All initial applications shall be accompanied by payment of a fee established by ordinance to
cover the cost of investigation as herein provided for.
(C) All the applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Applicant’s name, age, and citizenship;
(2) Applicant’s present address and length of time he or she has lived at that address;
(3) Applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;
(4) Applicant’s addresses and occupations for the 3 years next preceding the date of
application;
(5) Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any, for the 3 years next preceding the
date of application;
(6) Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, or misdemeanor, including
violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of
conviction and the nature of the offense;
(7) Type of license and location of premises for which application is made;
(8) At least 4 character references if applicant has not resided in the city for 2 years next
preceding the date of application; and
(9) Any other information as the Council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the
business for which license application is made.
4
(D) It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any
application form. Any false statement in the application, or any willful omission to state any information
called for on the application form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood work an automatic refusal of
license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no
effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part hereof.
(E) The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each applicant completed in accordance herewith,
forthwith investigate the truth of the statements made therein and the moral character and business
reputation of each applicant for license to the extent as he or she deems necessary. For the investigation
the City Clerk may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police. The Council shall not consider an application
before the investigation has been completed.
(F) Applications for renewal licenses may be made in the abbreviated form as the Council may by
resolution adopt. (Prior Code, § 5.02)
§ 110.03 ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period of the remainder of the then
current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license
periods, must be consistent with this chapter.
(B) Issuing. If an application is granted, the Mayor and City Clerk shall forthwith issue a license
pursuant thereto in the form adopted by resolution of the Council and upon payment of the license fee.
Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall be pro rated on the basis of 1/12 for each calendar
year, month, or the part thereof remaining in the then current license term. Licenses shall be valid only
at one (1) location and on the premises therein described.
(C) Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons. No license shall be transferable to
a different location without prior consent of the Council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate
license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this division (C).
(D) Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
(E) Grounds for revocation. Any licensee violating any provision of the City Code, or codes
herein adopted, shall be subject to revocation of the license. After revocation it shall be within the
discretion of the Council to determine whether or not it will reissue.
(F) Refusal and revocation. The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause,
refuse to grant any application, or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of
questionable moral character or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall
give notice to the licensee and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the
exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for the hearing.
(G) Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Clerk, without
action by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee
5
of $2 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked DUPLICATE.
(Prior Code, § 5.03) (Am. Ord. 2009-05, 3rd Series, passed 4-20-2009)
§ 110.04 CARRYING OR POSTING.
All transient merchants, peddlers, and solicitors shall at all times when so engaged, carry their
license on their person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their places of business near the
licensed activity. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.
(Prior Code, § 5.04) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.05 PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him or
her to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.05) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit is issued shall be
deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or herself. (Prior Code, § 5.06)
§ 110.07 POSTING AND DISTRIBUTING PRINTED MATTER.
(A) Posting. It is unlawful for any person to attach any printed matter of any kind to any public or
private building, bridge, fence, railing, utility pole, or any other public or private property in the city, or
paint any advertising matter or sign upon any sidewalk without first having obtained a license
therefore. The Council may from time to time designate the places within the city where billboards may
be placed, and specify size, dimensions, and any restrictions that they deem necessary. Any person
desiring to attach any printed matter to any billboard shall first obtain a license from the City Clerk. The
fee for the license shall be $5 per year and the license document shall specify the location of the
billboards for which it is issued. Every billboard so licensed shall be kept in good repair by the licensee
at his or her own expense so that its appearance will at all times by neat and clean. It is unlawful for any
person to willfully deface or otherwise injure or destroy any billboards designated by the Council or any
handbills or printed matter thereon.
(B) Distribution. It is unlawful for any person to distribute any printed matter door-to-door or
place-to-place within the city without first having obtained a license therefore. The license fee for
distribution of printed matter on an annual basis shall be $10. The license for making a single
distribution shall be $5.
(C) Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person to attach any printed matter to a vehicle not owned
6
or controlled by him or her without the permission of the owner, or insert printed matter in the vehicle
without the permission.
(D) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to posting notices required by law,
or to the distribution of newspapers, periodicals, or local merchants or farmers distributing handbills,
advertising their own goods or businesses; or to churches, lodges, schools and colleges distributing bills
advertising meeting or athletic or other event, or to any fair association distributing its own advertising
matter. (Prior Code, § 5.07) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.09 BOWLING.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any bowling alley (bowling
lane), available for public use without first having obtained a license from the city.
(B) License fees. The annual fee for each bowling alley (lane) shall be established by ordinance.
(C) Term. All bowling alley (lane) licenses shall be for the period of one (1) year and shall expire
on June 30 of each year, regardless of when the license was originally issued. Thereafter, all licenses
eligible for renewal, will be renewed for one (1) year. (Prior Code, § 5.31) (Am. Ord. 2009-05, 3rd
Series, passed 4-20-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2012-09, 3rd Series, passed 6-4-2012)
§ 110.10 DANCES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment, directly or
indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing, which fee may be in the form of a club membership,
or payment of money, directly or indirectly.
PUBLIC DANCING PLACE. Any room, place, or space open to public patronage in which
dancing, wherein the public may participate, is carried on and to which admission may be had by the
public by payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a
public dance, without first having obtained a license therefore from the city. Provided that this section
shall not be applicable to any dance sponsored by a local school, church, or the city and held on its
property and no license shall be required for any such sponsored dance.
(C) License fee. The license fee for each public dance shall be established by ordinance .
(D) Dance regulations.
7
(1) Sale of liquor prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or
indirectly, any intoxicating liquor or permit or suffer the same to be sold or given away in any public
dancing place unless the premises are properly licensed therefore.
(2) Obscenity and immorality prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to dance, or for a
licensee to permit or suffer any person to dance, at any public dance in an indecent or immodest manner.
It is also unlawful for any person at a public dance to speak in a rude, boisterous, obscene, or indecent
manner or for any licensee to suffer to permit any person so to act or speak in any public dancing place.
(Prior Code, § 5.32) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.11 PAWN BROKERS.
(A) Purpose. The City Council finds that services provided by pawn brokers provide an
opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because pawn businesses have the
ability to easily and quickly receive and transfer property stolen by others. The City Council also finds
that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving pawn brokers. The City
Council further finds that the pawn industry has outgrown the city’s current ability to effectively or
efficiently identify criminal activity related to pawn shops. The purpose of this section is to prevent
pawn businesses from being used as facilities for the commission of crimes and to assure that the
businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. To help the Police Department better regulate
current and future pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the
pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn industry through the timely
collection and sharing of pawn transaction information, this section also implements and establishes the
required use of the automated pawn system.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawn broker
except renewals, redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and
continuously in the licensee’s possession is a billable transaction.
PAWN BROKER. Any natural person, partnership, or corporation, either as principal, or
agent or employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other
valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition
of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent
that a pawn broker’s business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or
selling it on consignment, the provisions of this section shall be applicable.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawn broker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment, or trade, or in which a pawn is
renewed, extended, or redeemed, is reportable except:
8
(a) The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of the
merchandise, provided the pawn broker must maintain a record of the purchase or consignment which
describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.
(b) Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase,
and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expired.
(C) License required. No person shall engage in the business of pawn broker at any location
without a pawn broker license for that location. No pawn broker license may be transferred to a
different location or a different person. Issuance of a license under this section shall not relieve the
licensee from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at the same or any other
locations.
(D) License classifications. Licenses renewed under provisions of this section shall be classified
according to the number of billable transactions submitted annually to the Hastings Police Department
during the 12-month period ending March 31 prior to renewal. The classifications shall be:
(1) Class A - Licensees that submitted 400 or more transactions; and
(2) Class B - Licensees that submitted fewer than 400 transactions.
(E) License fees.
(1) The annual license fees for each class of licenses issued under this section shall be
established by ordinance of the Hastings City Council. The annual license fee shall be payable semiannually
in accordance with procedures established by the City Council.
(2) The billable transaction fee shall be classified according to the medium by which daily
reports required by division (I) below are submitted to the Hastings Police Department. These
classifications shall be as follows:
(a) Modem - Required of all Class A licensees, optional for Class B licensees; and
(b) Manual - Required of all Class B licensees who do not fulfill Class A reporting
requirements.
(3) The billable transaction fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions from the
respective classifications and other related regulatory expenses as determined by the City Council, and
shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, at least every 6 months. Licensees shall be notified in
writing 30 days before any adjustment is implemented. The billable transaction fee for modem
transactions shall not exceed the billable transaction fee for manual transactions.
(4) Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30 days.
Failure to pay billable transaction fees when due is a violation of this section and will result in the
following monetary penalties in addition to any license suspension or revocation imposed by the City
9
Council following notice and an opportunity for hearing:
(a) Fees past due up to thirty (30) days shall result in a $250 penalty.
(b) Fees past due more than thirty (30) days shall result in an additional $500 penalty.
(F) Investigation fee. An applicant for a new license under this section, or for the renewal of an
existing license that is more than 6 months past due, shall deposit $1,500 with the City Clerk at the time
an original application is submitted to cover the costs involved in verifying the license application and to
cover the expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this section. If the
investigation process is conducted solely within the State of Minnesota, the fee shall be $500 and the
remainder of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the investigation. If the
investigation is conducted outside the State of Minnesota, the city may recover the actual investigation
costs not exceeding $10,000.
(G) Expiration of license. All licenses shall expire on July 1.
(H) Application required.
(1) Contents. An application form provided by the City Clerk and consumer services must be
completed by every applicant for a new license or for renewal of an existing license. Every new
applicant must provide all the following information.
(a) If the applicant is a natural person:
1. The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and phone number of
applicant;
2. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien;
3. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places used;
4. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name, or
style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S.
§ 333.01, as it may be amended from time to time;
5. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding 5 years;
6. The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the
applicant has been engaged during the preceding 5 years and the name(s) and address(es) of the
applicant’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding 5 years;
7. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of
any ordinance other than a traffic offense. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time,
place, and offense of all the convictions;
10
8. The physical description of the applicant;
9. Applicant’s current personal financial statement and true copies of the applicant’s
federal and state tax returns for the 2 years prior to application; and
10. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or
other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in
divisions (H)(1)(a)1. through (H)(1)(a)8. above.
(b) If the applicant is a partnership:
1. The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all
information concerning each general partner required in division (H)(1)(a) above;
2. The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the
licensed business;
3. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application.
If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may
be amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate must be attached to the application;
4. A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the 2 years
prior to application; and
5. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or
other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in
divisions (H)(1)(a)1. through (H)(1)(a)8. above.
(c) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
1. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the state of
incorporation;
2. A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or
association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign
corporation, a certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended from time to
time, must be attached;
3. The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent required in divisions (H)(1)(a)1. through
(H)(1)(a)8. above;
4. A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of 5% in the
organization or business form or who are officers of the corporation or business form and all
information concerning the persons required in division (H)(1)(a) above. This division (H)(1)(c)4.,
however, shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and is
11
applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.
(d) For all applicants:
1. Whether the applicant holds a current pawn broker, precious metal dealer, or
secondhand goods dealer license from any other government unit;
2. Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or suspended,
a pawn broker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer license from any other governmental unit;
3. The location of the business premises;
4. If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete copy of
the executed lease;
5. The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
6. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for
the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;
7. Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under construction or
undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans
showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed; and
8. Any other information as the City Council may require.
(2) New manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the named
manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the
appropriate application, on forms provided by the Hastings City Clerk, within 14 days. The application
must include all appropriate information required in this division (H)(2). Upon completion of an
investigation of a new manager, the licensee must pay an amount equal to the cost of the investigation to
assure compliance with this section. If the investigation process is conducted solely within the State of
Minnesota, the fee shall be $500. If the investigation is conducted outside the State of Minnesota, the
issuing authority may recover the actual investigation costs not exceeding $10,000.
(3) Application execution. All applications for a license under this section must be signed and
sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a natural person, it must
be signed and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a
partnership, by 1 of the general partners; and if that of an incorporated association, by the manger or
managing officer thereof.
(4) Investigation. The Hastings Police Department must investigate the truthfulness of the
statements set forth in the application and shall endorse the findings thereon. The applicant must furnish
to the Police Department the evidence as the department may reasonably require in support of the
statements set forth in the application.
12
(5) Persons ineligible for a license. No licenses under this section will be issued to an
applicant who is a natural person, a partnership if the applicant has any general partner or managing
partner, a corporation or other organization if the applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in
charge of the business to be licensed, if the applicant:
(a) Is a minor at the time that the application is filed; or
(b) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, and has not shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee
under this section as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(I) Records required; reportable transactions. At the time of any reportable transaction other
than renewals, extensions, or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English the
following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record
approved by the City Clerk. Every form or computerized record must be consecutively numbered. Any
forms or computer records voided shall be reported as well:
(1) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark
on such an item;
(2) The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefore;
(3) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual
interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;
(4) Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique
alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the
licensee’s records;
(5) Full name, residence address, residence telephone number, date of birth and accurate
description of the person from whom the item of the property was received, including: sex, height,
weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair;
(6) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
(a) Current valid Minnesota driver’s license;
(b) Current valid Minnesota identification card; and
(c) Current valid photo driver’s license or identification card issued by another state or
province of Canada.
13
(7) The signature of the person identified in the transaction;
(8) Effective 90 days from the date of notification by the Hastings Police Department, the licensee
must also take a color photograph or color video recording of each customer involved in a reportable
transaction and every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or identification number
permanently engraved or affixed. If a photograph is taken, it must be at least 2 inches in length by 2
inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched
and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. The photographs must be
available to the Chief of Police, or the chief’s designee, upon request. The major portion of the
photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up of the person who pawned or sold the item.
Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is
being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If a
video photograph is taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so
as to include an identifiable close-up of that person’s face. Items photographed by video must be
accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so that they
can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. The
licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped orally and by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape
for 60 days;
(9) Effective 90 days from the date of notification by the Hastings Police Department, Class A
licensees must and Class B licensees may, fulfill the color photograph requirements in division (I)(8)
above by submitting them as digital images, in a format specified by the police department, electronically
cross-referenced to the reportable transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital
images may be captured from required video recordings, this provision does not altar or amend the
requirements in division (I)(8) above;
(10) For renewals, extensions, and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original
transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
(11) The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Police Department.
Data entries shall be retained for at least 3 years from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital
images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.
(J) Records required; nonreportable transactions. The following information must be kept for
any property on the pawn shop premises which was obtained through any means other than a reportable
transaction. This includes, but is not limited to, property which was obtained at auctions, property
which was found, or property purchased at wholesale or retail:
(1) For property obtained at an auction, the date, place, name of auction company, price paid
and a receipt for each item; and
(2) For property found or purchased at wholesale or retail, the date and location where the
item was found or purchased; the name of the person obtaining the item and a detailed description of the
item and a receipt for purchased items which also shows where the item was purchased.
14
(K) Daily reports to police.
(1) Method. Licensees must provide to the Police Department the information required in
division (I) above, in writing, on forms approved by the business day following the date of the
transaction. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, and in a conspicuous place in the
premises, so as to inform all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.
Effective 90 days from the date of notification by the Police License Inspector, licensees must submit
every reportable transaction to the Police Department daily in the following manner.
(a) Class A licensees must, and Class B licensees may, provide to the Police Department
the information required in division (I) above, by transferring it from their computer to the Police
Department via modem. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the
close of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the issuing
authority using a dial-callback protocol or other procedures that address security concerns of the
licensees and the issuing authority. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous
place in the premises, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police
Department daily.
(b) Class B licensees who do not fulfill requirements of division (K)(1)(a) above must
provide to the Police Department the information required in division (I) above, in writing on forms
approved by the Police Department, by 12:00 p.m. the first business day following the date of the
transaction. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises,
which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police Department daily.
(2) Billable transaction fees. Licensees, regardless of class, will be charged for billable
transactions at the current rate for the medium by which they were reported to the Police Department
except:
(a) If a Class A licensee, or a Class B licensee who has consistently reported via modem,
is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Police
Department printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s) for that date, by
12:00 the next business day, and must be charged at the modem rate for billable transactions;
(b) If the problem is determined to be in the licensee’s system and is not corrected by the
close of the first business day following the failure, the licensee must provide the required reports as
detailed in division (K)(2)(a) above, and must be charged at the modem rate for transactions through the
close of the first business day following the failure, and at the manual rate for all subsequent billable
transactions until the error is corrected; or
(c) If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee’s system, the licensee must
provide the required reports in detail in division (K)(2)(a) above, and will be billed at the modem rate for
billable transactions until the error is corrected;
(d) If a Class A licensee, or a Class B licensee who has consistently reported via modem,
is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in division (I) above, the licensee
must immediately take all required photographs with a still camera, immediately develop the pictures,
15
cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and deliver them to the Police Department
by 12:00 p.m. the next business day. Billable transactions will be charged at the modem rate for
transactions through the close of the first business day following the failure, and at the manual rate for
all subsequent billable transactions until the error is corrected;
(e) Second and subsequent occurrences of circumstances detailed in division (K)(2)(a),
(K)(2)(b), or (K)(2)(d) above, within any 6 consecutive months, will be charged at the manual rate for
billable transactions until the error is corrected; and
(f) Division (K)(2)(a) through (K)(2)(e) above notwithstanding, the Police Chief or
designee may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, extend the period that a qualifying
licensee is billed at the modem rate for billable transactions.
(L) Receipt required. Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for 3 years. The receipt must
include at least the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the license business;
(2) The date and time the item was received by the licensee;
(3) Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction;
(4) An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an
item;
(5) The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the
transaction;
(6) The amount advanced or paid;
(7) The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges;
(8) That last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger
without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that
date;
(9) The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, and date of birth of the
pledger or seller;
(10) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
(a) Current valid Minnesota driver’s license;
16
(b) Current valid Minnesota identification card; and/or
(c) Current valid photo driver’s license or identification card issued by another state or
province of Canada.
(11) Description of the pledger or seller including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color
of eyes and color of hair;
(12) The signature of the pledger or seller;
(13) The printed statements required by M.S. § 325J.04, Subdivision 2, as it may be amended
from time to time, as follows:
(a) The statement that “Any personal property pledged to a pawn broker within this state
is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of not
less than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is
necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods.”;
(b) The statement that “The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no liens
or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item.”;
(c) The statement that “This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom the receipt
was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property
identified in the receipt, or a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of property to persons other
than the original pledgor must be maintained along with the original transaction record”; and
(d) A blank line for the pledgor’s signature.
(14) Licensee shall keep a receipt for every item on the premises regardless of how that item
was obtained, i.e. by pawn, auction, purchase, or otherwise.
(M) Redemption period. Any person pledging, pawning, or depositing an item for security
must have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be
forfeited and sold. No pawn broker shall fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide
compensation as set forth in Minn. Stat. § 325J.09, as amended, upon payment of the full amount due
the pawn broker unless either the date of redemption is more than 60 days past the date of the pawn
transaction, renewal, or extension and the pawn broker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to Minn.
Stat. § 325J.06, or the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement
officer or agency. During the 60-day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed
location except as provided in division (T) below and as follows:
(1) the pawn broker is permitted to return pledged goods to the borrower at any time
before the expiration of the 60-day redemption period;
(2) the pawn broker is permitted to sell the pledged goods or remove the pledged goods
from the pawnshop premises or other storage at any time after the expiration of the
17
60-day redemption period; and
(3) a pawn broker purchasing goods not involving a pawn transaction is permitted to sell
or remove the purchased goods from the pawnshop premises or other storage 31 days
or later from the purchase transaction date.
Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom
the receipt was issued or, to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to
redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger
at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with approval of the Police
License Inspector. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than original
pledger must be maintained along with original transaction record in accordance with division
(I) above. (Ord. 2012-11, 3RD Series, passed 06-18-12)
(N) Holding period. Any item purchased by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred
for 30 days from the date of the transaction. An individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item
was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
(O) Police order to hold property.
(1) Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a
licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative
hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for
15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order
to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to division (O)(2) below, whichever comes first.
(2) Order to hold. Whenever the Chief of Police, or the chief’s designee, notifies a licensee
not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to
be released by the Chief or the Chief’s designee. The order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date it
is placed unless the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee determines the hold is still necessary and
notifies the licensee in writing.
(3) Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the
Chief or Chief’s designee may physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written
order from the chief or the chief’s designee, or place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in
division (O)(2) above, and leave it in the shop. When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall
provide identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone
number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.
When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of police or chief’s designee shall so
notify the licensee.
(P) Inspection of items. At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow
officers of the Hastings Police Department to enter the premises where the licensed business is located,
including all off-site storage facilities as authorized in division (T) below, during normal business hours,
except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the items, ware and
merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with this section or other applicable laws.
18
(Q) Label required. Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction or otherwise brought into the store
by any means, i.e. auction, pawn, trade or purchase. Permanently recorded on this label must be the
number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of
the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the Police
Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable.
Labels shall not be re-used.
(R) Prohibited acts.
(1) No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods
with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.
(2) No licensee may receive goods from a person who is obviously intoxicated or obviously of
an unsound mind.
(3) No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in the form of a
valid driver’s license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card, or current valid photo driver’s
license or identification card issued by the state or province of residency of the person from whom the
item was received.
(4) No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated serial
number or operation identification number or any item of property that has had its serial number
removed.
(5) No person shall provide any false information when pawning any item.
(6) No licensee shall knowingly provide any false information to the automated pawn system.
(7) No person shall pawn the property of another without the owner’s written consent.
(S) Denial, suspension, or revocation. Any license under this section may be denied, suspended,
or revoked for 1 or more of the following reasons.
(1) The proposed use does not comply with the Hastings zoning ordinances.
(2) The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance, or
other provisions of city code or state law.
(3) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with 1 or more provisions of this section.
(4) The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of
information.
(5) Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
19
(6) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in the application and investigation for,
or in the course of, the applicant’s business.
(7) Violation within the preceding 5 years, of any law relating to theft, damage, or trespass to
property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a business.
(8) The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license under
the terms of this section.
(T) Business at only 1 place. A license under this section authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. However, upon written
request, the City Council may approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall
permit inspection of the facility in accordance with division (P) above. All provisions of this section
regarding record keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in
compliance with all provisions of the City Code. The licensee must either own the building in which the
business is conducted, and any approved off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the business
premises which extends for more than 6 months.
(U) Violations. A person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior Code, § 5.45) (Am. Ord. 2009-3, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2009) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.15 LODGING TAX.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The City of Hastings.
LODGING. The furnishing for consideration of lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house,
tourist court, bed and breakfast, or resort, other than the renting or leasing of lodging for a continuous
period of 30 days or more.
OPERATOR. Any person or any officer, agent, or employee of the person, who provides
lodging to another person.
RENT. The total consideration, valued in money, charged for lodging, whether paid in money
or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing
lodging other than the room charge itself.
(B) Imposition of tax. Pursuant to Minnesota state statutes, there is hereby a tax imposed on the
rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any person. A tax of 3% shall be imposed
beginning on the effective date of this section. The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by
the operator to the city and shall be satisfied only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax
imposed upon any operator by this section, exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized
20
and required by this section to collect from a lodger.
C) Collection. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section at the time rent is paid.
The tax collected shall be held in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be
separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging.
(D) Advertising no tax. It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or state to the public or
any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to rent, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. In
computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than $.01 shall be rounded up to the next cent.
(E) Payments and return. The taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the operator to the
city, not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected.
(1) At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a return upon the forms and containing
the information as the city may require. The form shall contain the following minimum information:
(a) The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the
return;
(b) The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
(c) The signature of the person filing the return or that of their agent duly authorized in
writing;
(d) The period covered by the return; and
(e) The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax.
(2) The operator may offset against the taxes payable in any reporting period, the amount of
taxes imposed by this section previously paid as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which
became uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of the
consideration which became uncollectible.
(F) Examination of return. After a return is filed, the city shall examine it and make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed
necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of the examination shall be the
tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the city
within 10 days after receipt of a notice thereof given personally or sent by registered mail to the address
shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded
to the person who paid the tax to the city within 10 days after determining the need for such a refund.
(G) Refunds. Any operator may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid in excess of the amount
legally due for a prescribed period. Provided that no application for a refund shall be considered unless
it is filed within 1 year after the tax was paid to the operator, or within 1 year from the filing of the
return, whichever period is longer. The city shall examine the claim and make and file written findings
21
thereon, denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part, and shall mail notice thereof, by registered
mail, to the operator at the address stated in the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the
city shall credit the amount of the refund against any taxes due under this section from the operator, and
the balance of the refund, if any, shall be paid by the city to the operator.
(H) Failure to file a return. If any operator fails to file a return within the time prescribed or shall
make an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file
the return or corrected return within 5 days of receipt of the written notice and shall, at the same time,
pay any tax due. If the operator fails to file the return or corrected return, the city shall make a return or
corrected return for the operator from the knowledge and information as the city can obtain and assess a
tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments therefore made on account of the tax for the
taxable period covered by the return) shall be paid upon within 5 days of the receipt of written notice
and demand for the payment. Any such tax assessment made by the city shall be deemed to be prima
facie correct and valid, and the person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity
in any action or proceeding in respect thereto. If any portion of a tax imposed by this section, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the City Attorney may
institute the legal action as may be necessary to cover the amount due, plus interest, penalties, and the
costs and disbursements of any action. Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator
one 30-day extension in which to file a return and make payment of taxes, as required by this section,
provided that interest during the period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10%
per annum.
(I) Penalties. If any tax imposed by this section is not paid within the time required by this
section, there shall be added thereto a penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid. The
amount of the tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this section, shall accrue
interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the time the tax should have been paid. Any interest and
penalty shall be added to the tax and collected as part thereof.
(J) Use of proceeds. Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this section shall be used in accordance with the M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from
time to time, and the Tourism Bureau Agreement between the city and the Hastings Chamber of
Commerce, as both may be amended from time to time, to fund a local Tourism Bureau for the purpose
of marketing and promoting the City of Hastings as tourist destination. The remaining 5% shall be
retained by the city to cover its administrative expenses.
(K) Appeals. Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order, or determination made by the city
under this section may file a petition for review of the notice, order, or determination detailing the
operator’s reason for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name
of the petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging subject to the order, notice, or
determination. The petition for review shall be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days after the notice,
order, or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person
requesting review. Upon receipt of the petition, the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee, shall set a
date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least 5-days’ prior written notice of the date, time, and place
of the hearing. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the
notice, order, or determination shall be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by
counsel of petitioner’s choosing at petitioner’s own expense. The hearing shall be conducted by the City
22
Council. The City Council, in consultation with the City Attorney, shall make written findings of fact
and conclusions based upon the application sections of this section and the evidence presented. The
City Council may affirm, reverse, or modify the notice, order, or determination made by the city.
(L) Violations. Any operator who willfully fails to make a return required by this section or who
shall fail to pay the tax, penalty, or interest imposed by this section, or after written demand for
payment, or who shall refuse to permit the city to examine the books, records, and papers under the
operator’s control, or who shall willfully make an incomplete, false, or fraudulent return, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Prior Code, § 5.64) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.16 KENNEL; ANIMAL SHELTER.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMAL. Any live creative, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility operated for the purpose of impounding or caring for
animals.
KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person is engaged in the business of boarding, breeding,
buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling animals.
OWNER. Any person, partnership, or corporation owning or operating a kennel/animal
shelter.
PERSONNEL. Any person employed or active within a kennel/animal shelter organization.
(B) Licenses for kennel/animal shelters.
(1) No person, partnership, or corporation shall operate a kennel/animal shelter without first
obtaining a license from the city.
(2) The annual license fee for a kennel will be established by ordinance.
(C) Kennel/animal shelter license issuance and revocation. The city may revoke any
kennel/animal shelter license if the licensee refuses or fails to comply with applicable provisions of city
code, state laws and rules, or federal laws and regulations governing the protection and keeping or
animals.
(D) Regulations governing kennels/animal shelters.
(1) Kennels/animal shelters must comply with all applicable law and rules, including, but not
limited to, all applicable rules of the Minnesota Department of Health, Minnesota Board of Animal
Health, and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
23
(2) Animal carcasses must be properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on site garbage
facilities, on site burying or incineration, and carcasses must be properly refrigerated during periods
prior to disposal.
(3) No kennel or animal shelter shall be constructed or operated within 500 feet of any
residential dwelling.
(4) No kennel or animal shelter shall permit any animal to create any incessant noise by
barking, howling, or screeching, nor create any disturbance or nuisance of any kind whatsoever which
disrupts the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the surrounding area by other residents or property
owners.
(5) Any building or room within a building in which animals are housed shall be adequately
soundproofed to minimize problems of noise on adjoining properties.
(6) No kennel/animal shelter shall allow any animal to run unrestrained on any street or public
property or any private property not owned by the licensee.
(7) The city shall be permitted to inspect all animals, and the premises where animals are kept,
at any time.
(8) All animals with, or are suspected of having infectious diseases, must be individually caged
to prevent the spread of disease to healthy animals.
(E) Kennel/animal shelter design.
(1) All kennel and animal shelter floors and walls shall be constructed out of impervious and
easily cleanable materials and all structures, areas, and appurtenances shall be designed to facilitate
frequent and easy cleaning. All areas shall be adequately and properly ventilated. Every kennel shall be
suitably enclosed or fenced in such a manner as to prevent the running at large or escape of animals
confined therein. The premises shall be provided with adequate and safe sewer and water connections,
plumbing, and plumbing fixtures.
(2) The premises shall be fenced on the perimeter of the site with fencing that is at least 8 feet
high and must be of such a quality as to contain dogs and/or cats.
(F) Kennel/animal shelter operation.
(1) Every kennel and animal shelter shall be maintained in a clean, healthful, sanitary, and safe
condition and so as not to create a health hazard or public nuisance. The places shall be operated in a
humane manner, and the owner and personnel shall not deprive the animals of necessary food, water, or
shelter, or perform any act of cruelty to the animals, or in any way further any acts of cruelty toward
them, or any act tending to produce the cruelty.
(2) All cages, pens, benches, boxes, or receptacles in which the animals are confined shall be
kept clean, sanitary, and in good repair and shall be properly sized for the humane confinement of the
24
animals. All show or display cases, windows, counters, and shelves used in handling the animals shall be
kept clean, sanitary, free from dust and dirt, and in good repair. All plumbing fixtures and other
appurtenances shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair.
(3) All refuse and animal wastes shall be removed frequently and stored in rodent free and flytight
containers that do not emit foul and disagreeable odors.
(4) There shall be no dumping of any effluent garbage, rubbish, wastewater, excrement, or
other noxious substance upon any public or private property. (Prior Code, § 5.75) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.17 LAWFUL GAMBLING.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the conduct of lawful gambling
(gambling) in the City of Hastings and to insure that profits derived therefrom in the City of Hastings
(City) are devoted to worthy public and private projects which benefit the community.
(B) Prohibition of gambling. No person shall conduct gambling within the city except those
organizations which have obtained a premises permit from the Gambling Control Board of Minnesota
and have complied with this section.
(C) Lawful gambling permitted.
(1) Lawful gambling is permitted in the city if the organization conducting the gambling meets
the following criteria:
(a) Is licensed by the Minnesota Gambling Control Board;
(b) Is a tax-exempt organization pursuant to 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or has
a 501(c) application pending with the Internal Revenue Service; and/or
(c) Has been in continuous existence holding meetings as a non-profit corporation or as a
501(c) tax-exempt organization for at least 3 or more consecutive years prior to the approval of the
license.
(2) The maximum number of locations where lawful gambling may be conducted within the
city is 18. Council shall, by resolution, establish the maximum number of locations in the city where one
organization can conduct lawful gambling. Non-local organizations that are conducting lawful gambling
in the city on the effective date of this section, may continue to do so. Once a non-local organization,
however, stops conducting lawful gambling in the city, it must thereafter, comply with the requirements
of this section.
(D) Approval of premises permit.
(1) Any organization applying to the City Council for a premises permit, renewal of a premises
permit, bingo hall license or renewal of a bingo hall license shall file the following information with the
25
City Clerk at the time of the application:
(a) A duplicate copy of the application submitted to the Minnesota Gambling Control
Board, along with all supporting documents;
(b) A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the organization;
(c) The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the organization and the
gambling manager;
(d) A copy of the organization’s written procedures and/or criteria for distribution of
funds derived from lawful gambling, its standardized application form, and its written fiscal control
procedures;
(e) A copy of the Internal Revenue Service’s tax-exempt letter;
(f) The applicant’s federal and state employer identification numbers; and
(g) Other information the city deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
(2) Upon receipt of the materials required by division (D)(1)(a) above, city staff shall
investigate the applicant and make a recommendation for approval or denial of the application. The City
Council shall approve or disapprove an application for a premises permit or bingo hall license by
resolution. Copies of any other reports or documents which are required to be subsequently filed by the
organization with the Gambling Control Board, including monthly financial statements, shall be filed
simultaneously with the City Clerk. An organization holding a Premises Permit must notify the City
Clerk in writing within 10 days whenever any material change is made in the information required by
division (D)(1) above.
(E) Investigation fee. Organizations applying for or renewing a license to conduct lawful gambling
in the City of Hastings shall pay an investigation fee as established by ordinance. This fee shall be paid
at the time the application is submitted to the City Clerk.
(F) Lawful expenditure requirement.
(1) Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 349.213, as it may be amended from time to
time, any organization conducting lawful gambling within the city must spend at least 50% of its
expenditures for lawful purposes conducted or located within the city’s trade area. The city’s trade area
is defined to be all areas within the city’s corporate boundaries and the boundaries of all cities and
townships contiguous to the city at the time of expenditure.
(2) The requirements imposed by this subdivision shall be effective for all expenditures for lawful
purposes made after 3-1-2008.
(G) Exemptions.
26
(1) The following bingo and raffle activities are exempt from the lawful gambling requirements
of this section.
(a) Bingo may be conducted without a premises permit if it is in connection with a civic
celebration and if it is not conducted for more than four consecutive days in a calendar year. A civic
celebration is an event that celebrates a recognized national holiday or occasion celebrating an event
proclaimed by the Hastings City Council.
(b) Bingo may be conducted without a premises permit if it is conducted by an
organization that conducts 4 or fewer bingo occasions in a calendar year.
(c) Bingo may be conducted without a premises permit within a nursing home, senior
citizens home, or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a single game do not exceed $10, total
prizes awarded at a single occasion do not exceed $200, no more than 2 occasions are held each week,
only members or residents are allowed to play, no compensation is paid for persons conducting the
bingo, and a manager is appointed who is registered with the Gambling Control Board.
(d) Raffle may be conducted without a premises permit if it is conducted by an
organization and if the value of all raffle prizes awarded in a calendar year does not exceed $750; or if
the raffle is conducted by a tax-exempt health or social service organization under contract to the state
or a political subdivision and the prizes awarded are real or personal property donated by an individual,
firm, or other organization.
(e) Lawful gambling may be conducted within the city without a premises permit if the
organization conducts a gambling on five or fewer days in a calendar year, does not award more than
$50,000 in prizes in a calendar year, receives prior City Council approval and receives an exemption
from the Gambling Control Board.
(2) An application for an exemption from the provisions of this section, together with a fee
established by ordinance, shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least 30 days prior to the date that an
exempt gambling activity is to be conducted. The application shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the organization;
(b) The place where the gambling will occur;
(c) The total value of prizes to be awarded; and
(d) The dates the proposed exempt gambling will occur.
(3) Within 30 days of filing any reports with the Gambling Control Board, the organization
shall file a copy of the same reports with the City Clerk.
(H) Video games of chance. Video games of chance as defined by Minnesota Statutes are
prohibited in the city. (Prior Code, § 5.80) (Am. Ord. 2008-04, 3rd Series, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty,
see § 10.99
27
§ 110.19 LATE PAYMENTS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish penalties for failure to pay annual license
fees or failure to submit required license documents within the time required by the City of Hastings.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LICENSE FEES. Those fees which are imposed by the city for a variety of licenses,
including, but not limited to, liquor, gambling, tobacco, amusement, and rental property licenses.
PENALTY. The fee charged by the City of Hastings to those individuals or entities that do not
deliver REQUIRED LICENSE DOCUMENTS to the city by the applicable due date, or do not pay the
invoiced LICENSE FEES by the due date noted on the invoice sent to the licensee.
REQUIRED LICENSE DOCUMENTS. All documents a license applicant is required by the
City Code or other applicable law to submit to the city for application and issuance of a new or renewal
license. REQUIRED LICENSE DOCUMENTS include, but are not limited to: complete license
applications, insurance and bond certificates, and approvals from other government bodies or agencies.
(C) Penalty established. A penalty in the amount of 10% of the license fee invoiced or $30,
whichever amount is greater, is established for any license applicant or licensee that does either or both
of the following:
(1) Fails to deliver required license documents to the city by the applicable due date; or
(2) Fails to pay the invoiced license fees by the date noted on the invoice sent to the licensee.
(D) Failure to pay penalty. Failure to pay any penalty imposed by this section shall be grounds for
the suspension or termination of any license issued by the city.
(E) Violation a misdemeanor. Every person who violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or
provision of this section when they perform an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to
act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as for a misdemeanor. (Ord. 492, passed 4-21-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-2, 3rd Series, passed 2-
4-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
28
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
111.01 Provisions of state law adopted
111.02 Definitions
111.03 License required
111.04 Types of licenses
111.05 License applications
111.06 License fees
111.07 Persons ineligible for license
111.08 Premises ineligible
111.09 Liability insurance
111.10 Suspension or revocation of license
111.11 Hours and days of sale
111.12 Nudity prohibited
111.13 Conditions of license
Alcohol Offenses
111.25 Consumption of beer or liquor on streets and public property
111.26 Consumption of beer or liquor on private parking lots
111.98 Violations
29
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
Except to the extent the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive, the provisions of M.S.
Chapter 340A, now in effect and as it may be amended from time to time, relating to the definition of
terms, licensing, consumption, sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale,
distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, and wine, are adopted and made
a part of this chapter as if set out here in full. (Prior Code, § 3.1) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
The terms in this chapter shall have the same definitions given in M.S. Chapter 340A, now in effect,
as it may be amended from time to time. (Prior Code, § 3.2) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized under state law, shall
directly or indirectly deal in, sell, keep for sale, or deliver any intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, or
wine, whether on-sale or off-sale, without first having received a license to do so, as provided in this
chapter. Furthermore, no private club or public place shall directly or indirectly allow the consumption
or display of intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, or wine, or serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing
with intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, or wine, without first obtaining a license from the city as
provided in this chapter. (Prior Code, § 3.3) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.04 TYPES OF LICENSES.
(A) Generally. The following licenses may be issued after compliance with this chapter and state
law.
(B) Specifically.
(1) On-sale intoxicating liquor license. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be issued
only to restaurants, brew pubs, and hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on the
premises and shall permit the on-sale of intoxicating liquor or wine, if approved by the City Council.
(2) On-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses may be issued only
to clubs, restaurants, and hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on the premises.
On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses shall only permit the sale for consumption on the premises.
30
(3) On-sale wine license.
(a) On-sale wine licenses may be issued for the sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol
by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. An onsale
wine license may be issued only to a restaurant having facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one
time.
(b) The city may issue an on-sale wine license to a state-licensed bed and breakfast facility
for sale only to registered guests of the facility.
(c) On-sale wine licensees who also hold an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license, and whose
gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food, are authorized to also sell intoxicating
malt liquor at on-sale. The license holders, as a further condition of their license, must provide to the
city, upon demand, the documentation that the city deems to be necessary to demonstrate the amount of
annual sales related to food. License holders who sell intoxicating malt liquor must further comply with
all insurance requirements imposed by city code and state statute for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor.
(Ord. 489, passed 4-21-2003)
(4) Club license. Club on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be issued only to clubs which
have been in existence for 3 years or more and which meet requirements of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time; or to congressionally chartered veterans’ organizations which have
been in existence for 3 years or more, and which meet the requirements of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(5) Sunday liquor license. On-sale Sunday liquor licenses shall be issued only to hotels,
restaurants, microdistilleries, or clubs which have facilities for serving food to not less than 30 guests at
one time and which have been issued an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, on-sale brew pub license, or
on-sale cocktail room license. On-sale Sunday liquor licenses may be issued to brewery taprooms which
have been issued an on-sale brewery taproom license. Brew pubs holding a valid off-sale brew pub
license may sell off-sale on Sundays during the hours allowed for Sunday off-sale of intoxicating liquor
malt liquor produced on-site and shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in M.S. §
340A.24. Small brewers holding a valid off-sale brewery taproom license may sell off-sale on Sundays
during the hours allowed for Sunday off-sale of intoxicating liquor malt liquor produced on-site and
shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in M.S. § 340A.28 and M.S. § 340A.285.
(Ord. No. 2017-04, 3rd Series, Passed on 6-19-17)
(6) Bottle club license. Bottle club licenses may be issued to establishments as allowed by
M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for the consumption or display of
intoxicating liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor. This
provision shall not apply to any person or premises otherwise licensed by the city for the sale of
intoxicating liquor.
(7) Off-sale intoxicating liquor license. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be granted
for the off-sale of intoxicating liquor.
(8) Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses shall permit only the
31
sale of 3.2% malt liquor at retail, in the original package, for consumption off the premises.
(9) Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license. A temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor
license may be granted as provided herein.
(a) Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization, duly
incorporated as a nonprofit or religious corporation under the laws of Minnesota, and having its
registered office and principal place of activity within the city, may qualify for a temporary on-sale
intoxicating liquor license in connection with a social event within the city, sponsored by the applicant.
(b) Term. The city may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for not more than 3
consecutive days, and may authorize sales on premises other than premises the applicant owns or
permanently occupies.
(c) Insurance. No temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be issued for the
sale of liquor until the applicant provides the city with proof of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts required by M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, now in effect. An
applicant for a temporary on-sale liquor license for the sale of wine only shall not be required to provide
the city with proof of liability insurance.
(d) Other restrictions. Any temporary license issued under this chapter is subject to all
state laws and rules, and city ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor. All temporary
licenses issued by the city under this chapter shall not be valid until approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety of the State of Minnesota.
(10) Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.
(a) Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization, duly
incorporated as a nonprofit or religious corporation under the laws of Minnesota, and having its
registered office and principal place of activity within the city, may qualify for a temporary on-sale 3.2%
malt liquor license.
(b) Other restrictions. The applicant for a temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license
shall comply with all other state laws and rules and city ordinances governing the sale of 3.2% malt
liquor within the city.
(c) Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance evidencing liquor liability (dram
shop) coverage as outlined in § 111.09. (Prior Code, § 3.4) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002)
Penalty, see § 10.99
(11) On-sale brew pub license. On-sale brew pub licenses may be issued for a restaurant
operated in the place of manufacture and shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in
M.S. § 340A.24. A brew pub holding a valid on-sale intoxicating liquor license need not also obtain an
on-sale brew pub license for on-sale of malt liquor produced on-site provided all such sales and
32
operations shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in M.S. § 340A.24.
(12) Off-sale brew pub license. Off-sale brew pub licenses may be issued to brew pubs holding
a valid on-sale brew pub license and shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in M.S.
§ 340A.24 and M.S. § 340A.285.
(13) On-sale brewery taproom license. On-sale brewery taproom licenses may be issued for the
on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
brewery location owned by the brewer and shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in
M.S. § 340A.26.
(14) Off-sale brewery taproom license. Off-sale brewery taproom licenses may be issued to
small brewers subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in M.S. § 340A.28 and M.S. §
340A.285.
(15) Off-sale microdistillery license. Off-sale microdistillery licenses may be issued to
microdistilleries for the off-sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of product
manufactured on-site and shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in M.S. § 340A.22.
(16) On-sale cocktail room license. On-sale cocktail room licenses may be issued to
microdistilleries for the on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the distiller for consumption on the
premises of or adjacent to one distillery location owned by the distiller and shall be subject to all
conditions and restrictions contained in M.S. § 340A.22.
(2015-14, 3rd Series passed 12-21-15)
§ 111.05 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
(A) Forms. All applications shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk, upon forms required by
the Commissioner of Public Safety, together with the additional application forms as approved by
resolution of the City Council.
(B) Investigation fee.
(1) At the time of filing an original application for any license that can be issued under this
chapter, except a temporary intoxicating liquor license or a temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, the
applicant shall pay the city an investigation fee in the amount established by ordinance of the City
Council.
(2) This investigation fee shall be a non-refundable fee and shall be used to cover the city’s
cost in processing the application and investigation of the applicant.
(3) At the time of filing an application for a temporary intoxicating liquor license or a
temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, the applicant shall pay the city an investigation fee in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council. Any investigation fee shall be a non-refundable fee and
shall be used to cover the city’s cost in processing the application and investigation of the applicant, up
33
to the maximum amounts as established by law, if applicable.
(4) At the time of a renewal of a liquor license, the investigation will be included in the
renewal license fee, which will be established by ordinance of the City Council.
(C) False statements or omitted information. Any false statements or information omitted from an
application for any type of license under this chapter shall be grounds for rejection of the application by
the city. Any false statement or omitted information discovered after a license has been issued shall be
grounds for termination of the license.
(D) Renewal applications. Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made in a
timely fashion and shall be made on the forms required by the Commissioner of Public Safety, together
with the additional forms as approved by resolution of the City Council and shall state whether
everything in the prior, original, master application remains true and correct, except as otherwise
indicated. If, in the judgement of the City Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant
for its failure to file for a renewal within the time provided, the Council may, if the other provisions of
this section are complied with, accept the application.
(E) Expiration of license. Every license issued under this chapter, except temporary licenses, shall
expire on June 30 of each year, regardless of when the license was issued. Temporary licenses shall
expire according to their terms. Any bottle club license issued under this chapter shall expire on March
31 of each year, as per Minnesota state statute, as may be amended.
(F) Background investigation.
(1) At the time of making an initial application, renewal application, or request for a new
operating officer, the applicant shall file a completed application form with the City Clerk. The
applicant shall authorize the Hastings Police Department and other city departments, as deemed
necessary by the City Clerk, to investigate all information in the application and to conduct a thorough
background and criminal record investigation on the applicant. The applicant shall authorize the police
to release information received from the investigation to the City Council.
(2) Upon completion of the background investigation, the Hastings Police Department shall
file with the City Clerk a written report of its investigation.
(3) Upon receipt of the investigation results, the City Clerk shall forward a recommendation to
the City Council for approval or denial.
(4) No license will be issued or renewed if the results of the background investigation show to
the satisfaction of the City Council that issuance of a license would not be in the public interest.
(G) Premises under construction. When a license is granted for a premise where the building is
under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy, the Clerk shall not issue the license until
notified by the Department of Building Safety, or applicable department responsible for the duties, that
the building is ready for occupancy.
34
(H) Criteria for issuance, transfer, or renewal. No license may be issued, transferred, or renewed
if the results of the investigation or other evidence given to the Council through any means, shows to the
satisfaction of the Council, that the issuance, transfer, or renewal would not be in the public’s interest.
(I) Applications for 2:00 a.m. closing time license.
(1) The City of Hastings allows for the sale of alcohol until 2:00 a.m. by licensed
establishments.
(2) Licensees desiring to apply for a liquor license to be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages
until 2:00 a.m. on all days of the week must apply for a special 2:00 a.m. license from the State Alcohol
and Gambling Enforcement Division and pay a fee as established. The 2:00 a.m. special license will run
12 months from the date of approval by the Alcohol and Gambling Enforcement Division.
(3) Licensees desiring to apply for a liquor license to be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages
until 2:00 a.m. on all days of the week must also notify the City Clerk of the City of Hastings
of submission of application to the State of Minnesota. (Ord. 504, passed 10-6-2003) (Prior
Code, § 3.5) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002)
(J) Applications for sidewalk cafés.
(1) Any restaurant issued a license under this chapter may also apply for a sidewalk café license
pursuant to Chapter 110 to expand the operation of that restaurant onto a part, and only that part, of the public
sidewalk that is compact and contiguous with the licensed premises in the manner authorized by and subject to the
restrictions of this chapter and Chapter 110 for sidewalk cafés.
(2) An application for a sidewalk café may be submitted at the time of making an initial application or
renewal application for a license under this chapter, or at any other time.
(3) An applicant for a sidewalk café license shall file a sidewalk café application pursuant to Chapter
110 on forms provided by the City Clerk which shall include, in addition to other information
required by the City, all additional information required of applicants who intend to serve alcohol
within the sidewalk café.
(4) While a licensee under this chapter also holds a valid and unsuspended sidewalk café license under
Chapter 110 for the same licensed premises, the licensee’s license to serve liquor, wine or beer shall extend to the
compact and contiguous space licensed under the sidewalk café license. No licensee shall serve, or allow to be
served, liquor, wine or beer within any sidewalk café while the applicable sidewalk café license or license issued
under this chapter is expired, suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series, passed 6-1-15)
35
§ 111.06 LICENSE FEES.
(A) Annual fees. The annual fees for licenses issued under this chapter are as follows.
(1) On-sale intoxicating liquor license. The annual fee for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license will be established by ordinance. As determined by Council resolution, the annual fee for an onsale
intoxicating liquor license may be paid in 2 equal semi-annual installments.
(2) On-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. The annual fee for an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license
will be established by ordinance and will be payable in full at the time of issuance or renewal of the
license.
(3) On-sale wine license. The annual fee for an on-sale wine license will be established by
ordinance.
(4) Club license. The annual fee for a club license shall be set by state law.
(5) Club membership fee.
(a) Two hundred members or less - $300;
(b) Two hundred and one members to 500 - $500;
(c) Five hundred and one members to 1,000 - $650; and
(d) One thousand and one members to 2,000 - $800.
(6) Sunday liquor license. The annual fee for a Sunday liquor license will be established by
ordinance.
(7) Bottle club. The annual fee for a bottle club license will be established by ordinance.
(8) Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license. The annual fee for an off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license
will be established by ordinance.
(9) Off-sale of intoxicating liquor. The annual fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license
will be established by ordinance.
(10) Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The annual fee for a temporary on-sale
intoxicating liquor license will be established by ordinance.
(11) Sidewalk café license. The annual fee for a sidewalk café license will be established by
ordinance. (Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series passed on 6-1-15)
(12) On-sale brew pub license. The annual fee for an on-sale brew pub license will be
36
established by ordinance.
(13) Off-sale brew pub license. The annual fee for an off-sale brew pub license will be
established by ordinance.
(14) On-sale brewery taproom license. The annual fee for an on-sale brewery taproom license
will be established by ordinance.
(15) Off-sale brewery taproom license. The annual fee for an off-sale brewery taproom license
will be established by ordinance.
(16) Off-sale microdistillery license. The annual fee for an off-sale microdistillery license will be
established by ordinance.
(17) On-sale cocktail room license. The annual fee for an on-sale cocktail room license will be
established by ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series passed on 6-1-15) (Ord. 2015-14, 3rd Series passed on 12-21-15)
(B) Payment of fees.
(1) Initial application. All licenses issued under this chapter, except bottle club licenses, shall
be from July 1 through June 30. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other than on the
first day of the license year, the license fee shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Provided,
however, the pro rata share shall not be less than ½ of the annual license fee. The fee for a bottle club
license shall be set by state law. All license fees must be paid before the license will be issued by the
city.
(2) Annual fees. When renewing any existing license, except an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license, the entire annual fee shall be paid when filing the application for renewal. When renewing an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license, ½ of the annual fee shall be paid when filing for renewal. The second
half shall be paid on or before January 1 of the year following renewal of the license. All license fees
shall be paid into the general fund of the city.
(3) Refund. No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this chapter shall be refunded,
except as authorized under M.S. Chapter 340A.408, as it may be amended from time to time, now in
effect.
(4) Duplicate licenses. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Clerk,
without action by the City Council, upon the licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost and upon
payment of a fee set by ordinance for the issuance of the duplicate license. All duplicate licenses shall be
clearly marked, DUPLICATE. (Prior Code, § 3.6) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002) (Ord. 2015-07,
3rd Series, passed 6-1-15)
§ 111.07 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
37
No license may be granted to or held by any person:
(A) Who is under 21 years of age;
(B) Who is not of good moral character and repute;
(C) Who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler;
(D) Who has had an intoxicating liquor license or 3.2% malt liquor license revoked within 5 years
of the license application, or to any person, who at the time of the violation, owns any interest, whether
as a holder of more than 5% of the capital stock of a corporation licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in
the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association,
enterprise, business, or firm in which any person is in any manner interested;
(E) No new retail license may be issued to, and the governing body of a municipality may refuse to
renew the license of, a person who, within 5 years of the license application, has been convicted of a
felony or a willful violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale,
distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of an alcoholic beverage;
(F) Who, if a corporation, does not have a manager who is eligible pursuant to the provisions of
this section;
(G) Who is not the real party-in-interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be
operated, under the license;
(H) Who, at the time of the application for a license or renewal of a license, owns delinquent real
estate or personal property taxes on the premises, fixtures, or equipment associated with the use of the
license;
(I) Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is sought;
(J) Who has been convicted of any crime for illegal acts of ill repute, including but not limited to
gambling, prostitution, and/or sale of illegal narcotics, deemed by the Hastings Police Department as
being related to the type of license being sought;
(K) Who has been convicted of a violent felony within the last 15 years; or
(L) Who has been convicted of a felony within the last 10 years. (Prior Code, § 3.7) (Am. Ord.
488, passed 5-20-2002) (Ord. No. 2016-08, passed on 08-01-16)
§ 111.08 PREMISES INELIGIBLE.
No license authorized by this subchapter shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises
38
on which any real estate taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent or
unpaid. (Prior Code, § 3.8) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 111.09 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
(A) Every applicant for any type of license authorized to be issued under this chapter must, as a
condition to the issuance of the license, provide proof of liability insurance in the form and amounts as
required by M.S. Chapter 340A, now in effect, and as it may be amended from time to time. Where the
licensed premise includes area within a sidewalk café, the required liability insurance shall also cover the sidewalk
café area and shall name the city as an additional insured. Applicants for an annual on-sale wine license or an
annual 3.2% malt liquor license who, by affidavit, establish that they have had sales of less than $25,000
of wine or 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year, will not be required to provide proof of liability
insurance, as required by this section and M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
Applicants for an annual off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license who, by affidavit, establish that they have had
sales of less than $50,000 of wine or 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year, will not be required to
provide proof of liability insurance, as required by this section and M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time. Applicants for any temporary license issued under this chapter must
provide proof of liability insurance in the form and amounts as required by M.S. Chapter 340A, now in
effect and as may be amended from time to time, regardless of the amount of sales in the preceding year.
(B) Proof of the required liability insurance shall be in the form of a certificate of insurance or some
other form acceptable to the City Attorney and City Clerk. All liability and insurance policies required
herein shall provide that there shall be no cancellation of the policy for any cause, by the insured or by
the insurance company, without first giving 10-days’ written notice to the city, addressed to the City
Clerk. Liquor sales by a licensee without required liability insurance coverage, shall be grounds for
immediate suspension or revocation of the license. (Prior Code, § 3.9) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-
2002) (Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series, passed 6-1-15)
§ 111.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) Suspending license. The City Council may suspend any retail license for up to 60 days or
revoke any retail license for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon the violation of any provision or
condition of this chapter or of any state or federal law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages. The
City Council shall revoke the license for any willful violation, which under the laws of this state, is
grounds for mandatory revocation.
(B) Notice to suspend. Before the Council shall suspend or revoke any license issued under this
chapter, the licensee shall be given at least 10-days’ notice stating the time and place of the hearing and
the charges against the licensee. The notice shall also state that the licensee may have a hearing
conducted under M.S. §§ 14.57 through 14.69 of the Minnesota Administrative Procedures Act, as they
may be amended from time to time.
(C) Presumptive civil penalties. The following process and presumptive penalties shall apply only
to liquor license violations involving failure of routine alcohol sales, compliance checks or sales of
39
alcohol to underage persons. There shall be no presumptive penalties for liquor license violations of
other types and the City Council may impose any penalties allowed by law for those violations after the
notice and opportunity for hearing provided in division (B) above.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a standard by which the City Council
determines the length of license suspensions and the propriety of revocations, and shall apply to all onsale
and off-sale licensed premises. These penalties are presumed to be appropriate for every case;
however, the Council may deviate in an individual case where the Council finds that there exist
substantial reasons making it more appropriate to deviate. When deviating from these standards, the
Council shall provide written findings that support the penalty imposed.
(2) Best Practices Program. The Best Practices Program (BPP) is a program offered by the
City with the intent to eliminate sales of alcohol to youth. Participation in the BPP is voluntary, it is
offered to both off-sale and on-sale liquor establishments and offers incentives to participating licensees
to undertake certain practices with the objective of avoiding sales to minors. The City will assist
participating businesses with training and a different set of presumptive penalties will apply to those who
choose to participate, should an illegal sale to a minor occur. Licensees may enroll at any time during
their license period, and will be offered an opportunity at the time of annual license renewal. Interested
licensees will provide written intent to participate, and will be categorized as a Best Practices Business
once they have successfully completed the requirements of the program. It is the licensee’s responsibility
to ensure continued compliance with the program; the City may conduct random verification checks,
and recertification will be required during annual renewal of a liquor license. If a Best Practices Business
has two (2) or more violations within a three (3) year period, the City Council may choose to disregard
a business’ participation in the program and apply penalties different than the BPP presumptive
penalties.
Required Items
A minimum of 75% of alcohol selling employees (at any one time) have attended alcohol
training conducted by Hastings Police Department (or other training pre-approved by
the City)
Business has an internal program in place for providing ongoing training of both new
and current alcohol selling employees (copy of program and tracking must be provided)
Business has an internal policy requiring identification checks for anyone appearing to be
40 years old or under (copy of program and tracking must be provided)
Electives (Must Have 40 Points)
10 Business has an internal employee reward/recognition program for employees who catch
any underage customer attempting to purchase alcohol
10 Business uses an automated ID card scanner system or
40
20 Business uses an automated ID card scanner system that is integrated into register
system*
10 Business has an internal policy setting a minimum age of 21 for employees to sell alcohol
products
10 Business agrees to meet immediately with city staff following a violation (instead of
waiting for criminal court proceedings)
Total electives selected
* Cannot elect both automated ID systems
(3) Underage sales and compliance check failures. The following presumptive penalties apply to
liquor license violations involving failure of routine alcohol sales compliance checks or sale of alcoholic
beverages to an underage person(s).
Violation Best Practices Business Non-Best Practices Business
1st $500 civil penalty $1,000 civil penalty and 3 day
license suspension
2nd (within 24 months of first
violation)
$750 civil penalty and 3 day
license suspension
$1,500 civil penalty and 6 day
license suspension
3rd (within 24 months of first
violation)
$1,000 civil penalty and 6 day
license suspension
$2,000 civil penalty and 9 day
license suspension
4th (within 24 months of first
violation)
Revocation Revocation
“Best Practices” designation applies to those license holders who at the time of the violation are
registered with the city to participate and are in compliance with its alcohol “Best Practices Program”.
(a) Multiple violations. At a licensee’s first appearance before the City Council, the
Council shall act upon all of the violations that have been alleged in the notice sent to the licensee. The
Council in that case shall consider the presumptive penalty for each violation under the 1st Violation
column in division (3) above. The occurrence of multiple violations shall be a basis for deviation from
the presumptive penalties in the Council’s discretion.
(b) Subsequent violation. Violations occurring after the notice of hearing has been sent
to the licensee, but prior to the hearing, shall be treated as a separate violation and treated as a
subsequent violation before the City Council, unless the City Administrator and licensee agree in writing
to add the violation to the appearance and hearing on the initial violation for which notice was sent. The
same procedure shall apply to a second, third or fourth violation considered before the Council.
(c) Subsequent appearances. Upon a second, third or fourth appearance before the City
Council by the same licensee, the Council shall impose the presumptive penalty for the violation or
41
violations giving rise to the subsequent appearance without regard to the particular violation or
violations that were the subject of the first or prior appearance. However, the Council may consider the
amount of time elapsed between appearances as a basis for deviation from the presumptive penalties
imposed by this section.
(d) Computation of violations. Multiple violations are computed by reviewing the time
period of the two (2) years immediately prior to the date of the most current violation.
(e) Stipulations in lieu of hearing. When a liquor license violation involves a licensee’s
failure of a routine alcohol sales compliance check or sale of alcohol to an underage person or persons
to which these presumptive penalties apply, documentation of the illegal sale shall be sent to the City
Council by either the Chief of Police or the City Administrator, together with notice of the applicable
presumptive penalty. If no Council member objects to application of the presumptive penalty or
otherwise requests that the matter be brought before the Council within 7 days, the City Administrator
or City Attorney may enter into a written stipulation with the licensee which shall include a waiver of
further notice and hearing by the licensee, a recitation of stipulated facts describing the alleged violation,
and setting forth the applicable presumptive penalty to be imposed, provided that all such stipulations
shall be subject to the approval of the City Council and if the approval is not granted, the licensee shall
have the right to withdraw its waiver of hearing and to demand a hearing before the Council.
(f) Other penalties. Nothing in this section shall restrict or limit the authority of the City
Council to suspend a liquor license up to 60 days, to revoke the license, to impose a civil fee not to
exceed $2,000 to impose conditions, or to take any other action in accordance with law; provided that
the license holder has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing in the manner provided by this chapter.
(D) Costs. Once a notice of intent to revoke or suspend a license has been mailed to the licensee,
the licensee becomes responsible for all reasonable costs of investigation, administration and hearings
associated with the action as a condition of reinstatement, termination of suspension or dismissal of the
allegations prior to a hearing. (Prior Code, § 3.10) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002; Am. Ord. 509,
passed 4-5-2004; Am. Ord. 2009-07, 3rd Series, passed 7-6-2009)
§ 111.11 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
(A) Generally. Liquor licenses issued under this chapter are subject to the hours and days of sale
as outlined in M.S. § 340A.504, as applicable, and as it may be amended from time to time. Hours and
days not specified in state statute will be set by Council resolution. The closing hours listed below are
assuming the licensee has obtained the necessary approvals from the state for a 2:00 a.m. closing. If
required approvals are not received, then the closing shall be at 1:00 a.m. for closing times listed in
divisions (B), (C)(1), and (C)(2) below. (Am. Ord. 504, passed 10-6-2003)
(B) On-sale or off-sale of 3.2% malt liquor. No on-sale or off-sale of 3.2% malt liquor may be
made:
(1) Between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday; or
42
(2) Between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday. (Am. Ord. 504, passed 10-6-2003)
(D) Off-sale of intoxicating liquor. No off-sale of intoxicating liquor may be made:
(1) On Sundays except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(2) Before 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday;
(3) After 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;
(4) On Thanksgiving Day;
(5) On December 25; or
(6) After 8:00 p.m. on December 24.
(Ord. No. 2017-04, 3rd Series, Passed on 6-19-17)
(E) Closure of premises. All on-sale licensed establishments, clubs, and bottle clubs shall be closed
to the public or to members not later than ½ hour after the required time for stopping sales as provided
in this chapter, and shall remain closed until the commencement of sales is permitted under this chapter.
It is unlawful for any person other than the licensee and employees of the licensee to be in the licensed
premises during the closed periods. (Prior Code, § 3.11) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty,
see § 10.99 (2015-14, 3rd Series, passed 12-21-15)
§ 111.12 NUDITY PROHIBITED.
(A) Purpose. The City of Hastings does hereby ordain that it is in the best interest of the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City of Hastings that nudity, as hereinafter
defined, be prohibited upon the premises of establishments holding an intoxicating liquor license, a 3.2%
malt liquor license, a wine license, a club license, or a bottle club license, so as to best protect and assist
the owners and operators and employees thereof, as well as the patrons thereof, and the public in
general. Further, the city does ordain that the particular combination of alcoholic beverages and nudity
constitutes a specific threat to the interest of the city in protecting order and morality, while promoting
the public degradation and debasement of the individual, and promoting the commercial exploitation of
sex. The city does ordain that the standards set herein are reflective of the prevailing community
standards in the City of Hastings.
(B) Nudity defined for purposes of this section. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less
than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breasts with less than fully opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
43
discernibly turgid state.
(C) Licensee prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any intoxicating liquor license, a
3.2% malt liquor license, a wine license, a club license, or a bottle club license, within the City of
Hastings, to permit or to allow nudity in the licensed premises. (Prior Code, § 3.12) (Am. Ord. 488,
passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.13 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
(A) Generally. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the conditions of
this section and all other sections of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance of the city, state
law, or federal law.
(B) Specifically.
(1) Posting. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at
all times.
(2) Additional conditions. The Council may, upon a finding of necessity, place the conditions
and restrictions upon the license as it, at its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified to protect the
public interest.
(3) Licenses limited to certain areas. No on-sale or off-sale license of any type shall be
effective beyond the compact and contiguous space described on the license.
(4) License nontransferable. No license shall be transferable between persons or to a different
location, without the prior consent of the Council.
(5) Gambling prohibited. No gambling or gambling devices shall be permitted on any licensed
premises, except those allowed by state law.
(6) Inspection by peace officers or health officers. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall
hinder or prevent a peace officer, health officer, building official, fire official, or any other employee so
designated by the City Council or City Administrator from entering upon and inspecting the licensed
premises during business hours, without a search warrant, and the officer may seize all illegal
intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor on the licensed premises.
(7) Responsibility of licensee. Every licensee, whether actually present on the licensed
premises or not, shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensed premises and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order on the licensed premises.
(8) Illegal sales. No intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor shall be sold, furnished,
delivered, or provided to any obviously intoxicated person, to any underage person, or to any person to
whom the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor is prohibited by state law.
44
(9) Restriction on employment of minors. No person under 18 years of age shall be employed
to sell or serve intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in any on-sale license premises. Provided,
however, that a person who has attained the age of 17 years may be employed in any restaurant licensed
to sell intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor, in which the principal part of the business is serving food.
(10) Minors prohibited on premises. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, it is
unlawful for a licensee to permit any person under the age of 21 to be in or upon a licensed premises,
unless accompanied by at least 1 parent or guardian.
(11) Restriction on licenses. No licensee shall apply or possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealer’s special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
(12) Changes of ownership of licensee. Changes in the corporate or association officers,
corporate charter or articles of incorporation, or any change in ownership of 10% or more of the stock
of the corporation, bylaws, or partnership agreement, as the case may be, shall be submitted to the City
Clerk, in writing, within 10 days after the changes are made. Any change of beneficial interest in stock
entitled to vote which results in a change in voting control of the licensee will be deemed equivalent to a
transfer of the license to the corporation and any such license shall be revoked 30 days after any such
change of ownership or beneficial interest of shares unless the City Clerk has been notified of the change
in writing and the City Council has approved the change. (Prior Code, § 3.13) (Am. Ord. 488, passed
5-20-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.25 CONSUMPTION OF BEER OR LIQUOR ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to consume or to possess in an
unsealed container, beer or liquor, as those terms as defined in this code, on any street or other public
property except within licensed sidewalk cafés or city parks during the hours when the parks are open to
the public or except when specifically prohibited by other ordinance of the City of Hastings as to
particular parks. Provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in
a motor vehicle on streets or public property when the container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle if it is
equipped with trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passengers, if the motor is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the same area occupied by the driver or passengers.
Provided, further, that the City Council may grant, at its sole discretion, permits for the conduct of
single occasions of variance from the terms of this section to bona fide, nonprofit civic organizations
having their principal place of business within the City of Hastings for the sole purpose of allowing
community civic festivals and celebrations and entertainment in connection therewith. The permits shall
be issued only for a particularly designated street or public way and shall be valid for the activities only
within the area so limited by the terms of the permit. The permit shall be issued only upon due
application to the City Council, through its clerk, no less than 30 days prior to the anticipated date of
use of the permit by the organization, and shall be accompanied by the information and material
concerning the proposed use of the permit from the organization as the City Council, through its Clerk,
shall deem appropriate. The Council may, at its sole and exclusive discretion, impose the conditions the
limitations upon the uses allowed under the permit for the protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare. (Prior Code, § 9.72) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2015-07, 3rd Series, passed 6-1-15)
45
§ 111.26 CONSUMPTION OF BEER OR LIQUOR ON PRIVATE PARKING LOTS.
It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an unsealed container, beer or liquor, as
those terms are defined in this code, on any privately-owned parking lot which is clearly sign posted
prohibiting the possession and consumption. Provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession
of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on privately-owned parking lots when the container is kept
in the trunk of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not
normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For
the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area
occupied by the driver or passengers. (Prior Code, § 9.73) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, division, paragraph, or provision of this chapter when they perform
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 3.99) (Am. Ord. 488, passed 5-20-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
46
CHAPTER 112: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
112.1 Purpose
112.2 Definitions and interpretations
112.3 License
112.4 Fees
112.5 Basis for denial of a license
112.6 Prohibited sales
112.7 Vending machines
112.8 Self-service sales
112.9 Responsibility
112.10 Compliance checks and inspections
112.11 Illegal acts
112.12 Civil enforcement
112.13 Hearings and appeals
112.14 Exceptions and defenses
47
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
To further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people
from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time, this
chapter regulates the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related
devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws. (Prior Code, § 5.34)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
Except as otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the
singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, and vice versa. The term “shall”
means mandatory and the terms “may” means permissive. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those
authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying
with the requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may involve the use of minors as
authorized by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt
to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for education, research and training
purposes as authorized by state and federal laws.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be
limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or
others packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described in this subdivision shall not be considered individually
packaged.
LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address, store front or other
48
type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include,
but to be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s
employees. The assistance or intervention shall involve the actual physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Selfservice
merchandising shall not include vending machines, nor any case or storage unit secured and
inaccessible to the general public.
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, including, but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques;
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish;
plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco or tobacco products excludes
any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes,
and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. Ord. No. 2011-12, 3rd Series,
passed 06-06-11
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICE. Any tobacco product as well as pipe, rolling papers, or other
device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enable the chewing, sniffing, or
smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic, or other type of device which
dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related device and includes vending machines equipped manual, electric, or
electronic locking devices. (Prior Code, § 5.34)
INDOOR AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by walls, doorways, or
windows; whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent of the combined surface area of the
vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage
door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent. (Ord. 2014-01, 3rd Series passed on
1-06-14)
SMOKING. Inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any
other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product. Smoking includes carrying a lighted or heated cigar,
49
cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation.
(Ord. 2014-01, 3rd Series passed on 1-06-14)
§ 112.03 LICENSE.
(A) Generally. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the City of Hastings.
(B) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the
business for which the license is sought, a copy of the educational materials the applicant intends to use
to educate employees and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of
completed application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the Council for action at a City
Council meeting. If the Clerk determines an application is incomplete, the Clerk shall return the
application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
(C) Action. A background check on the applicant is required before an application will be
forwarded to the Council. The Clerk shall forward the application to the Police Department within a
reasonable period of time. The application and investigation results will be forwarded to the Council for
action. If the Council approves the license, the Clerk shall issue the license to the applicant. If the
Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant’s right to appeal the Council’s decision.
(D) Term. All tobacco licenses shall be for a period of one (1) year and shall expire on June 30 of
each year, regardless of when the license was originally issued. Thereafter, all licenses eligible for
renewal, will be renewed for one (1) year. All tobacco licensees, despite when the license is issued, will
be subject to an annual compliance check.
(E) Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
as provided in this chapter.
(F) Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued only for the premises to which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any
license to another person or location shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.
(G) Movable place of business. No license shall be issued to a movable place of business. Only
fixed-location business shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
(H) Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
licensed premise.
(I) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more
50
than 60 days before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license under this chapter
shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder
to an automatic renewal of the license. (Prior Code, § 5.34) (Am. Ord. 2009-05, 3rd Series, passed 4-
20-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99
(J) Smoking. Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke within the indoor area
of any establishment with a retail tobacco license. Smoking for the purposes of sampling tobacco and
tobacco related produces is prohibited. (Ord. 2014-01, 3rd Series, passed 01-06-2014)
§ 112.04 FEES.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate fee shall be paid in full. The fee
for a license under this chapter shall be set by ordinance. (Prior Code, § 5.34)
§ 112.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF A LICENSE.
(A) Generally. The following shall be grounds for denying issuance or a renewal of a license under
this chapter. Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for
denial does not mean that the city must deny the issuance or renewal of the license. If a license is
mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon discovery the person was ineligible
for the license under this section.
(B) Specifically.
(1) The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(2) The applicant has been convicted within the past 5 years of any violation of a federal, state,
or other law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or
tobacco-related devices.
(3) The applicant had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices
revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application.
(4) The applicant fails to provide information required in the application, or provides false or
misleading information.
(5) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or other
regulation, from holding such a license.
(6) The applicant or license holder has outstanding fines, penalties, or property taxes owed to
the city. (Prior Code, § 5.34)
51
§ 112.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, furnish, or
otherwise deliver any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices:
(A) To any person under the age of 18 years;
(B) By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter;
(C) By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or
written request to an employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device between the licensee or the licensee’s employee unless 90% of the licensee’s
total annual sales volume consists of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related services.
(D) By means of loosies as defined in § 112.02;
(E) Containing opium, morphine, jimpson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or
other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and substances found
naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process; or
(F) By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal,
state, or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation. (Prior Code, § 5.34) (Am. Ord. 2010-
04, 3rd Series, passed 3-15-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.07 VENDING MACHINES.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times
prohibited from entering the licensed establishment. (Prior Code, § 5.34) Penalty, see § 10.99
52
§ 112.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products,
or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to the items without
having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a
physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device between the licensee or
his or her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall
either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other
storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling, tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with this section
within 60 days following the effective date of this chapter. This section shall not apply to any licensee
whose total annual sales volume of tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco-related devices is 90% or
more. (Prior Code, § 5.34) (Am. Ord. 2010-04, 3rd Series, passed 3-15-10) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for their employees in regard to the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices on the licensed premise, and the sale of such an
item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the licensed holder. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate
under this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. (Prior Code, § 5.34)
§ 112.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection to the city police or other authorized city official
during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct
unannounced compliance checks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The
compliance checks shall utilize, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the
age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premise to attempt to purchase tobacco,
tobacco products or tobacco-related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall
be approved and supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other designed city
personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of the unlawful purchase or attempt to
purchase tobacco, unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco-related devices when
the items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall
attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a
compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her
employee and shall produce any identification, if it exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or
training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. (Prior Code,
§ 5.34)
53
§ 112.11 ILLEGAL ACTS.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this chapter.
(B) Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or otherwise provide
any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices to any minor.
(C) Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to have in his or her
possession any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device. This division (C) shall not apply
to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
(D) Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or
otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device and it shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain the items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be
a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise
obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This subdivision shall not apply
to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
(E) Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase or attempt
to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device, and it shall be
a violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain the items on behalf of a minor.
It shall further be a violation to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise
obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This division (E) shall not apply
to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
(F) Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to attempt to
disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that
of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older than the actual age of the person. (Prior Code, § 5.34) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.12 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
The license holder shall be responsible for the conduct of its agents or employees while they are on
the licensed premises. Any violation of this chapter shall be considered an act of the license holder for
purposes of imposing a civil penalty, license suspension, or revocation. Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.(Prior Code, § 5.34)
§ 112.13 HEARINGS AND APPEALS.
(A) Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged
violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
54
(B) Generally. Following receipt of a notice of denial issued under this chapter or notice of
violation and penalty issued under this section, or a notice of revocation, an applicant or license holder
may request a hearing before the City Council. A request for a hearing shall be made by the applicant or
license holder in writing and filed with the City Clerk within 10 days of the mailing of the notice of
denial or alleged violation. Following receipt of a written request for hearing, the applicant or license
holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the City Council.
(C) Findings. If after the hearing, the applicant is found ineligible for a license or is found to have
violated this chapter, the City Council may affirm the denial, impose a fine, issue a suspension or
revocation, or impose any combination thereof. The decision shall be in writing and shall set forth the
reasons for the findings of the City Council. Copies shall be provided to the applicant or license holder.
Likewise, if the City Council finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, the findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the applicant or license holder.
(D) Decision. If the City Council determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that
decision, along with the City Council’s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under this chapter, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused
violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, the findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused
violator.
(E) Default. If the applicant or license holder has been provided written notice of the denial or
violation and if no request for a hearing is filed within the 10-day period, then the denial, penalty,
suspension, or revocation imposed pursuant to this section shall take effect immediately by default. The
City Clerk shall mail the notice of the denial, fine, suspension, or revocation to the applicant or license
holder.
(F) Hearings. If a person accused of violating this section so requests, a hearing shall be
scheduled, the time and place of which shall be provided to the accused violator.
(G) Hearing officer. The hearing shall be held before the City Council and shall be open to the
public.
(H) Appeals. Any appeal of the decision of the City Council must be filed with the District Court
within 10 days of the mailing of the City Council’s decision.
(I) Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter. If the city elects to seek
misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative monetary penalty shall be imposed. If the city elects to
seek misdemeanor prosecution, the city is not precluded from suspending or revoking the license of a
licensee as provided by this chapter.
(J) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in a violation occurs or continues, shall
constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code, § 5.34) Penalty, see § 10.99
55
§ 112.14 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an
affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age
as described by state law. (Prior Code, § 5.34)
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
56
CHAPTER 113: FIREWORKS
Section
113.1 Purpose
113.2 Definition
113.3 License required
113.4 License application
113.5 Sales and storage of fireworks
113.6 Processing application
113.7 Terms and conditions of fireworks license
113.8 Discharge rules and regulations
113.9 Citations and fines
113.10 Right of hearing
113.11 License term and fee
113.12 Application
113.98 Violations
57
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the sale, storage, display, and possession of permitted
consumer fireworks in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
(B) The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to license and regulate the
sale, distribution, storage, and display of fireworks permitted under state law:
(1) Consumer fireworks contain pyrotechnic chemical compositions that are combustible;
accordingly, the unregulated accumulation, storage, display, use, and sale of these items present a fire
safety hazard;
(2) The improper disposal of consumer fireworks presents environmental hazards; and
(3) Due to their short-term and mobile nature, it is more difficult and demanding of city staff
and public safety resources to enforce compliance with city ordinances and state law for temporary and
transient sales of consumer fireworks than it is for established, permanent businesses. (Prior Code,
§ 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003)
§ 113.02 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Will have the same definition as contained in M.S. § 624.20,
Subdivision 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time. Wire or wood sparklers of not more than
100 grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and
contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes,
these include:
(1) Cylindrical fountain. Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks or smoke and sometimes
a whistling effect is produced.
(2) Cone fountain. The effect is the same as that of a cylindrical fountain. When more than 1
cone is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 500 grams.
58
(3) Illuminating torch.
(4) Wheel. Pyrotechnic device intended to be attached to a post or tree by means of a nail or
string. Upon ignition, the wheel revolves, producing a shower of color and sparks and sometimes, a
whistling effect.
(5) Ground spinner. Small device venting out an orifice usually on the side of the tube.
Similar in operation to a wheel but intended to be placed flat on the ground and ignited. The rapidly
spinning device produces a shower of sparks and color.
(6) Flitter sparkler. Narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire that produces color and
sparks upon ignition. The paper at one end of the tube is ignited to make the device function.
(7) Flash/strobe. Emit a bright light.
(8) Novelty items such as snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which
include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not
more that 25 hundredths grains of explosive mixture. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3- 15-
2003; Am. Ord. 2008-9, 3rd Series, 8-18-2008)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall sell or possess for sale or store consumer fireworks, as defined in this chapter,
without first having obtained a license from the City of Hastings. It is unlawful to sell fireworks in the
City of Hastings in violation of M.S. §§ 624.20 through 624.25, as they may be amended from time to
time, inclusive, which are adopted by reference (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
The application for a license for the storage and sale of fireworks shall be made to the City Clerk on
the form(s) approved by the City of Hastings and shall include:
(A) The name, address, and phone number of the applicant;
(B) The address of the proposed location where the fireworks are to be sold or stored, if different
locations;
(C) If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and correct copy of the current,
executed lease, as well as the written authorization of the property owner for the applicant’s use of the
property for the sale of permitted fireworks;
(D) A sketch of the sales location showing where the fireworks are proposed to be displayed, the
proposed amount of fireworks to be on the premises at any one time (including but not limiting a list
documenting the name, weight, and quantity of fireworks, accompanied by applicable Material Safety
59
Data Sheets), and any other information deemed relevant by the City’s Fire Marshal regarding fire safety
on the premises. This information shall also be made available to all employees and produced
immediately upon request from any public safety official;
(E) Completion of applicable release forms which authorizes the City of Hastings of conduct a
background criminal record check on the applicant(s); and
(F) The Fire Marshal will perform a fire code compliance inspection of the entire property prior to
issuance of license. The Fire Marshal shall have 30-days’ notice to perform inspections. If 30-days’
notice is not given, an application may not be approved. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-
15-2003)
§ 113.05 SALES AND STORAGE OF FIREWORKS.
(A) No person shall sell or store fireworks within100 feet of any fuel dispensing apparatus.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any seller of any fireworks to permit smoking at any site containing
fireworks. At least 2 “No Smoking” signs must be conspicuously posted and approved fire
extinguishers must be readily available and operational.
(C) There shall be at least 2 fully accessible exits from all buildings from which fireworks are stored
or sold.
(D) The proposed premises must be in compliance with the State Building Code and the State Fire
Code.
(E) The sale of consumer fireworks is only permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 zoning
districts.
(F) There shall be no storage or sale of consumer fireworks from structures of mixed occupancy
when one of the occupancies is an ‘R’ (residential).
(G) Transient sales of consumer fireworks are prohibited unless the applicant is able to comply with
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1124.
(H) Where consumer fireworks storage is located in a building containing other tenants, the
consumer fireworks storage area shall be separated from the other tenants by fire barriers having a fire
resistance rating of not less than 2 hours (NFPA 1124 sect. 6.4.3.1).
(I) Openings in the fire barriers shall not be permitted (NFPA 1124 sect. 6.4.3.1.1).
(J) Doors in the means of egress shall be at least 36 inches wide and kept free of obstructions
(NFPA 1124 sect. 6.8.3.2).
(K) Exit doors shall be equipped with panic hardware (NFPA 1124 sect. 6.8.3.3).
60
(L) Exit doors shall be unlocked when the building is occupied (NFPA 1124 sect. 6.8.3.4).
(M) The operator of each consumer fireworks storage or work building shall prepare a written
emergency response plan that provides specific directions to be followed in the event of a fire (NFPA
1124 sect. 6.11.7).
(N) Consumer fireworks retail sales and storage areas shall not be located within 300 feet of any
aboveground bulk storage or bulk dispensing area for the following:
(1) Flammable or combustible liquid;
(2) Flammable gas; and/or
(3) Flammable liquefied gas (NFPA 1124 sect. 7.7.3.2).
(O) Cooking equipment of any type shall not be permitted within 20 feet of tents, canopies, or
membrane structures used for the storage or sale of consumer fireworks (NFPA 1124 sect. 7.11.4.1).
(P) Open flame cooking equipment of any type shall not be allowed within 50 feet of tents,
canopies, or membrane structures used for the storage or sale of consumer fireworks (NFPA 1124 sect.
7.11.4.2).
(Q) Sale displays of consumer fireworks shall not be placed near business exits.
(R) When approved by the Fire Marshal, continuous storage of consumer fireworks over 100 lbs.
net of pyrotechnic composition or 400 lbs. gross weight shall be allowed in an approved structure within
the Hastings Industrial Park. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003)
§ 113.06 PROCESSING APPLICATION.
The application must be filed, together with the full license fee and any other applicable fees, with
the City Clerk. Following an inspection of the premises proposed to be licensed, the application shall be
forwarded to the City Council of the City of Hastings for approval or denial.
(Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003)
§ 113.07 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FIREWORKS LICENSE.
A license for the storage or retail sale of consumer fireworks will be issued upon the applicant
meeting the following terms and subject to the following conditions.
(A) Neither the applicant nor the responsible party for the license shall have been convicted of a
felony, unless the conviction was discharged pursuant to; and/or the applicant or responsible party shall
not have had a license to sell fireworks revoked within the last 3 years.
61
(B) The license is non-transferable, either to a different party or a different location.
(C) The license must be clearly and publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
(D) The applicant must be at least 18 years of age when application is made.
(E) Consumer fireworks must not be sold to persons under the age of 18. Photo identification
must be checked with each sale.
(F) All sales must take place in a building which meets all applicable provisions of the State
Building Code and the State Fire Code.
(G) In buildings without an approved, automatic fire sprinkler system throughout, consumer
fireworks will be limited to 125 lbs. net pyrotechnic composition or 25% of gross package weights if
pyrotechnic mixture weight is not known.
(H) In buildings with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system throughout, consumer fireworks
will be limited to 250 lbs. net pyrotechnic composition of 25% of gross package weight if pyrotechnic
mixture weight is not known or 25% of retail floor space or 600 square feet, whichever is less and the
authority having jurisdiction approves the increase.
(I) All licensees shall be responsible for the actions of their employees with regards to the sale of
consumer fireworks on the licensed premises, and for purposes of this chapter, the sale of consumer
fireworks by an employee will be considered a sale by the license holder.
(Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-9, 3rd Series, 8-18-2008)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.08 DISCHARGE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(A) It is unlawful to throw or toss any consumer fireworks at any person, animal, vehicle, thing, or
object.
(B) It is unlawful to throw or toss any consumer fireworks from a moving vehicle.
(C) Juveniles may not possess consumer fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a
responsible adult.
(D) The Fire Chief or Fire Marshal may ban consumer fireworks displays and use of consumer
fireworks if it is deemed that safety conditions exist.
(E) It is unlawful to use or discharge any consumer fireworks along the route of and during any
parade or at any place of public assembly or in any commercial/industrial district.
(F) It is unlawful to use or discharge any consumer fireworks on public property without prior
written consent of the Fire Marshal.
62
(G) It is unlawful to use or discharge consumer fireworks of any kind inside of any structure.
(H) It is unlawful to use or discharge consumer fireworks of any kind between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.09 CITATIONS AND FINES.
(A) Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter, or pursuant to a compliance check, the licensee
will be issued an administrative citation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues, will constitute a separate offense.
(B) For purposes of determining the number of occurrences of violations, the City Council shall
consider a violation as a second occurrence if it occurred within 18 months of the first violation and
shall consider a violation a third violation if it occurred within 30 months of the second violation. The
City Council shall consider a violation a fourth violation if it occurred within 30 months of the third
violation.
(1) First violation - the licensee shall pay a civil fine established by ordinance.
(2) Second violation - the licensee shall pay a civil fine established by ordinance.
(3) Third violation - the licensee shall pay a civil fine of established by ordinance and shall
have its license suspended for 3 consecutive days.
(4) Fourth violation - the licensee’s license shall be revoked.
(C) All administrative fees imposed by this chapter are to be paid within 60 days of the date of
citation or not later than 30 days after the date of any written decision following the appeal process.
Failure to pay any fee imposed herein within the time limits established will result in a license suspension
until the date of payment.
(D) Nothing in this chapter prevents the City Council from imposing a harsher penalty than those
established by ordinance or resolution herein.
(E) In addition to any administrative citation and penalty imposed herein, the city reserves the right
to also issue a criminal citation to any person who violates a provision of this city code section or any
state law regarding the storage, display, or sale of consumer fireworks. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord.
510, passed 3-15-2003)
§ 113.10 RIGHT OF HEARING.
Within 20 calendar days of the date of the written notice of violation, any cited party may request
63
an opportunity to appeal the violation. The request for appeal must be in writing and must be submitted
to the City Clerk. The City Clerk will place the item on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting. Upon review, the City Council may affirm, modify, or overrule the initial
determination of penalty. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-15-2003)
§ 113.11 LICENSE TERM AND FEE.
(A) Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis.
(B) License fees will not be prorated.
(C) License fees will be established by ordinance. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510, passed 3-
15-2003; Am. Ord. 2009-3, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 113.12 APPLICATION.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all applications of any nature to sell consumer
fireworks which are pending on the effective date of this chapter, as well as those applications which
may have been granted prior to the effective date of the chapter. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510,
passed 3-15-2003)
§ 113.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person who violates a provision of this chapter when they perform an act thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or fails to act when that failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. (Prior Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 510,
passed 3-15-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
64
CHAPTER 114: ADULT USES
Section
RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
Adult Uses
114.20 Authority, purpose and intent
114.21 Definitions
114.22 Applications
114.23 Hours of operation
114.24 Operation
114.25 License required
114.26 License applications
114.27 Disqualifications and re-qualifications
114.28 Expiration and renewal
114.29 Suspension
114.30 Revocation
114.31 Procedures for appeal
114.32 Posting
114.33 Fees
114.34 Inspections
114.35 Transfer of license
114.98 Severability
114.99 Penalty
65
§ 114.20 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) Authority. The United States Supreme Court has ruled that sexually-explicit speech, including
nude dancing, is entitled to some level of protection under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution. As a result, municipalities may not ban adult establishments. However, the Supreme Court
has ruled that cities may adopt content-neutral zoning and licensing provisions to regulate and control
the adverse secondary effects of adult establishments on the community.
(B) Findings of the City Council. The Minnesota Attorney General’s Office and the cities of St.
Paul, Alexandria, and Rochester, Minnesota, as well as St. Croix County, Wisconsin have conducted
studies of the impact of adult establishments on their respective communities. These studies have
concluded that adult establishments have an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods. Those
impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight
and potential health risks. The City Council of the City of Hastings is relying on the studies, many of
which were conducted in larger cities, recognizing that the same or similar adverse impacts could occur
in a smaller city such as the City of Hastings. The findings are based on the experiences of other cities
where such businesses have located. Based on these studies, the City Council makes the following
findings regarding the need to regulate adult establishments:
(1) Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth above.
(2) The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult
establishments are governed by location and licensing requirements.
(3) The City may adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
(4) The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by regulations
governing adult establishments.
(5) Adult establishments can contribute to increased criminal activity and police calls in the
area in which they are located, taxing law enforcement services.
(6) Adult establishments can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity. The
experience of other cities indicates that the proper management and operation of such businesses can,
however, minimize this risk.
(7) Adult establishments can cause or contribute to public health problems by the presence of
live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the same premises.
(8) Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult establishments are located
as less safe than other areas that do not have such uses.
66
(9) The adverse impact that adult establishments have on the surrounding area diminishes as
the distance from the adult establishments increases.
(10) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of
reasonable regulation on the owners, operators, employees and performers of the adult establishment. A
licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the adult establishment is run in a
manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the
citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually-oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities
occurring therein.
(11) The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually-related
crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of
this Ordinance.
(12) The barring of individuals with sexually-related criminal convictions from the management
and operation of adult establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct
which may lead to the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases.
(13) The general health, safety, and welfare of the community is promoted by prohibiting nudity
in adult establishments. This prohibition is based on concerns of potential adverse effects such as
prostitution, the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases, exposure to minors, obscenity and
unsanitary conditions in public areas.
(14) Small cities experience many of the same adverse impacts of adult establishments present
in larger communities.
(C) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate adult establishments to promote the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to:
(1) Prevent criminal activity within the City;
(2) Allow for efficient and effective law enforcement services in the City;
(3) Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequences adverse effect on real estate
values of properties within the neighborhood;
(4) Locate adult establishments away from residential areas, schools, parks and places of
worship;
(5) Provide a content-neutral, objective, licensing scheme that allows the City to monitor adult
establishments for violations of building and health codes; and
(6) Prevent ownership of adult establishments by persons with prior, relevant criminal
convictions.
67
(D) Reasonable Opportunity. The provisions of this Ordinance do not prohibit adult
establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the City. This Ordinance is not for the
purpose of, nor is it intended to, impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this
Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by distributors or exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their
intended market. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.21 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Ordinance the terms defined in this section have the meanings given them.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.
(1) Any business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in
trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its floor area
(not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open
to the public) to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from items,
merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas; or
(2) Any business that engages in any adult use as defined in this section 114.21 (B).
ADULT USE. Any of the activities and businesses described below:
(1) ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business that provides the
service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of
a patron when the person is nude.
(2) ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment or business used for the barter, rental, or sale
of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, movies, or motion
picture film if a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly-displayed
merchandise consists of, or if a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) is
devoted to, or if a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues is derived from items,
merchandise, devices or materials that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas.
(3) ADULT CABARET. A business or establishment that provides dancing or other live
entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on: (a) the depiction of nudity, Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; or (b) the presentation, display, or depiction of matter
68
that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
(4) ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A business or establishment that
provides the service of engaging or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(5) ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A business or establishment that provides
the services of engaging or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(6) ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport club that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(7) ADULT HOTEL or MOTEL. A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(8) ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB. A massage parlor or health club that
provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(9) ADULT MODELING STUDIO. A business or establishment that provides live models
who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, engage in Specified Sexual
Activities or display Specified Anatomical Areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched,
drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
(10) ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated
still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas.
(11) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A motion picture theater that as a prevailing
practice presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons.
(12) ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. An establishment or business that devotes a substantial
or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise or devotes a
substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms,
basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or
significant portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, or devices that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis of material depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas, or items of merchandise or devises that simulate Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas, or are designed for sexual stimulation.
69
(13) ADULT SAUNA. A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(14) ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY. A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing,
relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
NUDE or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means;
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks,
anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES means;
(1) An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including genitalgenital,
anal-genital, or oral-genital intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human
being and an animal;
(2) Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or
clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restricted on the part of one so clothed;
(3) Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any explicit, close-up
representation of a human genital organ clothed or unclothed; and
(4) Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed pubic areas or
buttocks of a human male or female, or breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION means; 10% or more of floor area or 350 square feet,
whichever is less, or 20% of gross receipts.
PREMISES means; the real property and all building and structures located on the real property.
ACCESSORY ADULT ESTABLISHMENT; Any business which maintains any inventory, stock in
trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise, or devotes any portion of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public)
to, or derives any portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, devices or other materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and which is not an adult
establishment as defined 114.21 (A) above. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
70
§ 114.22 APPLICATIONS.
(A) Other laws. No Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment shall engage in any
activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in the establishment
that is prohibited by an ordinance of the City of Hastings, the laws of the State of Minnesota, or the
laws of the United States of America. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as authorizing or
permitting conduct that is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including but not
limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or distribution of specified materials to
minors.
(B) Existing adult establishments. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, existing Adult
Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments must comply with all requirements of this
Ordinance immediately upon its effective date. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.23 HOURS OF OPERATION.
No Adult Establishment shall be open to the public from the hours of 1:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m.
weekdays and Saturdays, and from the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. (noon) on Sundays.
(Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008) Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.24 OPERATION.
Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments are subject to the following business
regulations.
(A) Off-site viewing. An Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment must prevent offsite
viewing of its merchandise or any materials depicting, describing or relating to “Specified Sexual
Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” by any visual or auditory media, including display,
decoration, sign, show window, sound transmission or other means.
(B) Prohibition on liquor.
(1) Adult Establishments shall not sell or dispense intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor nor
shall the Adult Establishment be located in a building or on a premises that contains a business that sells
or dispenses intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.
(2) The sale and consumption of alcohol is prohibited on the premises of an Adult
Establishment, including, but not limited to, any parking areas or lots that are owned or leased by the
Adult Establishment or its owner, or used by patrons when they are at the Adult Establishment.
(3) No Adult Establishments may be operated in a building or structure lying immediately
71
adjacent to, or having a common wall with, a business that sells or dispenses intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquor.
(C) Entrances. All entrances to an adult establishment, with the exception of emergency fire exits
that are not useable by patrons to enter the business, shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
(D) Layout. The layout of any display areas shall be designed so that the management of the Adult
Establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the store can observe all patrons while they
have access to any merchandise offered for sale or viewing including but not limited to books,
magazines, photographs, video tapes, or any other materials, or any live dancers or entertainers. Booths,
partitions and curtains which interfere with such observations are prohibited. Accessory Adult
Establishments must maintain all inventories of items, merchandise, devices or other materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or
relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas in a separate room in clear view of
management personnel to prevent access by minors.
(E) Illumination. Illumination of the premises exterior of Adult Establishments shall be adequate
to observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
(F) Signs. Signs for Adult Establishments shall not contain representational depiction of an adult
nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operation. Interior and exterior advertising of
Accessory Adult Establishments is prohibited. An Adult Establishment must prominently display at the
entrance of the business, or no more than two feet from the door-opening device of the establishment, a
sign that states “This business sells or displays materials containing adult themes. Persons under eighteen
(18) years of age shall not enter.” The sign must contain letters between three-eighths inch and two
inches in height.
(G) Access by minors. No minor shall be permitted on the premises of an Adult Establishment.
Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold, transferred, conveyed, given or bartered to a minor,
or displayed in a fashion that allows them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the
licensed premises.
(H) Additional conditions for adult cabarets. The following additional conditions apply to adult
cabarets:
(1) No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years old.
(2) All dancers, live entertainers and performers must be licensed pursuant to this Ordinance.
(3) All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose and
which is raised at least 2 feet from the level of the floor and which provides at least 10 feet of separation
between the patrons and all dancers, live entertainers and performers.
(4) No dancer or performer shall fondle, caress, or touch any patron or other dancer or
performer and no patron shall fondle, caress, or touch any dancer or performer.
72
(5) All soliciting, payment and exchange of gratuity, exchange of money or any other items
between performers, patrons, or others involved in live entertainment is prohibited.
(I) No nudity. No person may be nude on the premises of any Adult Establishment or Accessory
Adult Establishment. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008) Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.25 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) License required - Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment. It is unlawful for
any person or entity to own, lease, rent, manage or operate an Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult
Establishment without a valid license issued by the city pursuant to this Ordinance.
(B) License required - Dancer, Live Entertainer or Performer. It is unlawful for any person to
perform as a dancer or live entertainer within an Adult Establishment without a valid license issued by
the city pursuant to this Ordinance.
(C) Existing Businesses. Within ten (10) working days of the effective date of this Ordinance, any
existing Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment must apply for a license from the City.
Failure to apply for a license is a violation of this Ordinance and is subject to penalty under § 114.36. An
existing Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment may continue to operate pending review
of the license application by the City. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.26 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
An application for an Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment license must be made
on a form provided by the City. The completed application must contain the information in (A) to (E)
below:
(A) All applicants. For all applicants:
(1) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership, or other form of
organization.
(2) The legal description of the premises to be licensed, along with a sketch or diagram
showing the floor plan of the premises. The floor plan of the premises shall detail all internal operations
and activities, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(3) The name and street of the business. If the business is to be conducted under a designated
name, or style other than the name of the applicant, a certified copy of the certificate required by M.S. §
333.1 shall be submitted.
73
(4) Whether the applicant has had a previous Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult
Establishment license suspended or revoked.
(B) Applicants who are natural persons. If the applicant is a natural person:
(1) The name, place, and date of birth, street, city and mailing address, and phone number of
the applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places where
used.
(3) The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding two
years.
(4) The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has
been engaged during the preceding two years and name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s
employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding two years.
(5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or felony or any
crime relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or Adult Establishments.
(C) Applicants that are partnerships. If the applicant is a partnership:
(1) The name(s) and address(es) of the partnership, the name(s) and address(es) of all partners
and all of the information concerning each partner that is required of applicants in paragraph(B) of this
section.
(2) Whether the partnership is general or limited.
(3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the
partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, a certified copy
of the certificate shall be attached to the application.
(D) Corporate or other applicants. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
(1) The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the date and state of
incorporation.
(2) A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Incorporation or Association
Agreement and Bylaws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
Certificate of Authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, shall be attached. If the entity is a limited liability
company, then true and accurate copies of the Articles of Organization and any Membership
Agreements shall be attached to the application.
74
(3) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the business and
all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or agent that is required of the applicants in
paragraph (B) of this section.
(4) Accurate and complete business records showing the names, addresses, and dates of birth
of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders for the business.
(5) The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
(E) Changes in information provided on the application. Changes in the information provided
on the application or provided during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the City by
the applicant or licensee. If such a change takes place during the investigation, it must be reported to the
city clerk in writing. A failure by an applicant or licensee to report such a change may result in denial or
revocation of a licensee.
(F) License Application - Dancer, Live Entertainer or Performer. An application for a Dancer,
Live Entertainer or Performer license must be made on a form provided by the City. The completed
application must contain the following information:
(1) Proof of the applicant’s age.
(2) The name, place, and date of birth, street, city and mailing address, and phone number of
the applicant.
(3) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places where
used.
(4) The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding two
years.
(5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or felony or any
crime relating sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or Adult Establishments. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series,
passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.27 DISQUALIFICATIONS AND RE-QUALIFICATIONS.
(A) The City will issue an Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment license to an
applicant within 30 days of the application unless one or more of the following conditions exist:
(1) The applicant is under age 21;
(2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application;
75
(3) The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application;
(4) The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity
offenses, or Adult Establishments, a gross misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or
Adult Establishments, or a felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, Adult Establishments.
(5) The Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment is not in full compliance with
the Hastings City Code and all provisions of state and federal law;
(6) The applicant has not paid the required license fee;
(7) The applicant has been denied a license by the City or any other Minnesota municipal
corporation to operate an Adult Establishment, or such license has been suspended or revoked, within
the preceding 12 months;
(8) The applicant is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued; or
(9) The Adult Establishment premises holds an intoxicating liquor, beer or wine license, or a
license as a tanning, tattoo, pawn shop or therapeutic massage premises.
(B) An Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment license applicant may qualify for a
license:
(1) After one year has elapsed in the case of a previous license revocation;
(2) After two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement in the case of a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offense;
(3) After five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, in the case of a felony offense; or
(4) After five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is later, if the conviction is of two or more
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
(C) The City will issue a Dancer, Live Entertainer or Performer license to an applicant within 30
days of the application unless one or more of the following conditions exist:
(1) The applicant is under age 18;
(2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application;
(3) The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application;
76
(4) The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity
offenses, or Adult Establishments, a gross misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or
Adult Establishments, or a felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or Adult Establishments;
(5) The applicant has not paid the required license fee; or
(6) The applicant is shown to have committed an act which resulted in suspension or
revocation of an Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment license.
(D) A Dancer, Live Entertainer or Performer license applicant may qualify for a license:
(1) After one year has elapsed in the case of a previous license revocation;
(2) After two years have elapsed since the date of a conviction or the date of release from
confinement in the case of a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offense;
(3) After five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, in the case of a felony offense; or
(4) After five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is later, if the conviction is of two or more
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any 24-month period. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.28 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
(A) Expiration. All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter expire at the end of the calendar year.
(B) Renewal. A licensee may renew a license by completing an application as provided in §
114.26. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.29 SUSPENSION.
(A) Causes of suspension. The City may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 60 days if it
determines that the licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this Ordinance;
(2) Allowed or engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic beverages while on the Adult
Establishment premises other than at an Adult Hotel or Motel;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult
Establishment as authorized by this Ordinance; or
77
(4) Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by a person on the Adult Establishment premises.
(B) Notice. A suspension by the City shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a
public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten (10) days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing
and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the
licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises with the person in charge
thereof, or by mailing the notice by U.S. Mail to the last known address of the owner or agent
authorized to receive legal notices for the business, as listed on its license application.
(Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.30 REVOCATION.
(A) Suspended licenses. The City may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in § 114.29 occurs
and the license has been suspended at least once before within the preceding 14 months.
(B) Causes of revocation. The City may revoke a license if it determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the City during
the application process;
(2) A licensee or an employee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the Adult Establishment or Accessory
Adult Establishment during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in the applicable provisions of § 114.27,
for which the time period required in § 114.27 has not elapsed; or
(6) Except in the case of an Adult Hotel or Motel, a licensee or an employee knowingly
allowed an act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the
licensed premises.
(C) Appeals. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of
the license.
(D) Granting a license after revocation. When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an Adult Establishment license, an Accessory
Adult Establishment license, or a Dancer, Live Entertainer or Performer license for one year from the
date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license is revoked due to a criminal
78
conviction under the applicable provisions of § 114.27, an applicant may not be granted another license
until the appropriate number of years required under § 114.27 have elapsed. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series,
passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.31 PROCEDURES FOR APPEAL.
Non-renewals and revocation of all licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter are governed by the
following:
(A) Notice and hearing. In the event that the City proposes not to renew or revoke a license, the
City will notify the licensee in writing of the basis for the action. The Council will hold a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether or not to renew or revoke the license. The hearing must be held within
30 days of the date of the notice. The City Council must determine whether or not to renew or revoke a
license within 30 days after the close of the hearing or within 60 days of the date of the notice,
whichever is sooner. The Council must notify the licensee of its decision within that period.
(B) Revocation. If the Council determines to revoke a license, the revocation is not effective until
15 days after notification of the decision to the licensee. If, within that 15 days, the licensee files and
serves an action in state or federal court challenging the Council’s action, the revocation is stayed until
the conclusion of such action.
(C) Non-renewal. If the City Council determines not to renew a license, the licensee may continue
its business for 15 days after receiving notice of such non-renewal. If the licensee files and serves an
action in state or federal court within the 15 days for the purpose of determining whether the City acted
properly, the licensee may continue in business until the conclusion of the action.
(D) Prompt judicial review. After denial of an application or a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of
such action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The court shall promptly review such action.
(Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.32 POSTING.
The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or entity to whom it is granted,
the expiration date, and the address of the adult establishment or accessory adult establishment, if
applicable. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the Adult
Establishment or Accessory Adult Establishment. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.33 FEES.
The annual license fee for Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments is $2,000. The
annual fee for a Dancer, Live Entertainer or Performer license is $100. If eight (8) months of any
79
licensing year have elapsed when an application is made, the fee shall be reduced to one-half of the
regular amount. The fee is non-refundable. The City may also require the applicant to escrow
additional funds sufficient for the City’s cost of research and performing background checks.
(Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.34 INSPECTIONS.
(A) Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials, representatives of the police
department, fire department, and building inspector, to inspect the premises of an Adult Establishment
or Accessory Adult Establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business. The licensee is at all times responsible for the conduct, activity and
operation of the business.
(B) Refusal to permit inspections. Refusal to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health
officials, representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, or Building Inspector at any time it
is occupied or open for business is a violation of this Ordinance. Refusal to permit inspections may
result in non-renewal, suspension or revocation of the license.
(C) Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an Adult Hotel or Motel
that are currently being rented by a customer for use as permanent or temporary habitation. Temporary
habitation is defined as a period of time of at least 12 hours. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-
2008)
§ 114.35 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
A licensee shall not transfer a license to another, nor shall a licensee operate an Adult Establishment
or Accessory Adult Establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.98 SEVERABILITY.
Every section, provision, or part of this §§ 114.20 through 114.35 is declared severable from every
other section, provision or part thereof to the extent that if any section, provision, or part of §§ 114.20
through 114.35 be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall not invalidate any other
section, provision, or part thereof. (Ord. 2008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of §§ 114.20 through 114.35 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each
80
day the violation continues shall be considered a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a separate
misdemeanor penalty. The city may also enforce any provision of §§ 114.20 through 114.35 by
mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 20008-11, 3rd Series, passed 9-15-2008) (Ord. No. 2014-03 3rd Series, Adopted 5-21-14)
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
81
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
115.1 Definitions
115.2 Exceptions to definitions
115.3 Licensing; exemptions
115.4 License ineligibility
115.5 License suspension and revocation
115.6 License transferability
115.7 Registration
115.8 Prohibited activities
115.9 Exclusion by placard
115.98 Violations
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly
accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the
dissemination of religious, political, and other ideas.
PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or
any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise or other
personnel property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same
as the term HAWKER.
PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership or association. As applied
to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each member, officer,
partner, associate, agent, or employee.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose of
conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business days.
SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or
any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be carrying or transporting
samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall
occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision
if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.
82
The term SOLICITOR shall mean the same as the term CANVASSER.
SPECIAL EVENT. A festival, city-wide celebration or other happening which is designated as a special
event by resolution of the City Council, which resolution shall define the dates and locations of the special event.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT (MFU) mean (1) a self-contained food service operation, located in a readily movable
motorized wheeled or towed vehicle that is readily movable without disassembly and that is used to store, prepare,
display, or serve food intended for individual portion service; or (2) a mobile food unit as defined in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 157.15, Subdivision 9.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent,
other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting
to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property and who does not remain or
intend to remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT
shall mean the same as TEMPORARY MERCHANT or TEMPORARY VENDOR and shall include Mobile Food
Units. (Am. Ord. 562, passed 2-20-
2007)
§ 115.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANT shall not apply to:
i) any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or other
personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler; or
ii) any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products such asbaked
goods and milk; or
iii) to any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her
established regular delivery route ;or
iv) persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales;
or
v) those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market; or
vi) anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or
vii) any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from complying with any
other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
(B) Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY.
Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register as solicitors.
§ 115.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
83
(A) County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
within the city limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S.
Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for the activity.
(B) City license or registration required. Except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person shall
conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city.
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to § 115.07. Transient Merchants must
be licensed but shall not be subject to background check requirements or fees.
(C) Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant shall
be made at least 10 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application
for a license shall be available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall include the following
information:
(1) Applicant’s full legal name;
(2) All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially
answers;
(3) Complete and current personal contact information for applicant
(4) Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for
which the applicant is an employee or agent;
(5) Complete and current business contact information for applicant (if any)
(6) The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license;
(7) The term of license being applied for;
(8) The date(s) during which the applicant intends to conduct business. If the applicant is applying for
a daily license, the number of days he or she intends to conduct business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive
days, except for Mobile Food Units and those meeting the requirements of § 155.07(G)); Special Provisions –
Transient Merchant – Extended Stay)
(9) The location or locations where an applicant intends to set up business;
(10) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last 5 years of any
felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance.
(11) A list of the 3 most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler or
transient merchant;
(12) Proof of any requested county license;
(13) Certificate of Insurance
(14) A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided;
84
(15) All additional information deemed necessary by the CityCouncil;
(16) A color copy of the applicant’s driver’s license or other acceptable formof photo identification;
(17) The license plate number, registration information, description, and vehicle identification number for
any vehicle(s) to be used in conjunction with the licensed business; and
(18) If the applicant will have employee(s) working, then all additional employee(s) are required to
successfully complete a background investigation prior to being authorized to work under any license issued to an
applicant, unless a background investigation is not required.
(D) Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee established by
ordinance.
(E) Procedure.
(1) Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee and background check fee
if required, the City Clerk, within 2 regular business days, must determine if the application is complete. An
application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided.
(2) If the City Clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that ismissing.
(3) If the application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including background
checks if required, necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten regular
business days of receiving a complete application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist
grounds for denying the license under § 115.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license.
(4) If the City Clerk denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the
reason for denial, and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving
notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council.
(5) The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request. The decision of the
City Council following the public hearing can only be appealed by filing an appeal in the Dakota County
District Court within 30 days of the final decision by the City Council.
(F) Duration. All licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on
the license. Transient merchant licenses other than for Mobile Food Units are limited to 14 consecutive days or
must meet the requirements of § 155.07(G) - Transient Merchant – Extended Stay.
(G) License exemptions.
(1) No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take
orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.
(2) No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-tobusiness,
street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person’s state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except
that this exemption may be lost if the person’s exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a
commercial activity.
85
(3) Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or group shall not be
exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
(H) Any license issued under this chapter shall not be valid during and within the parameters of any special
event designated by resolution of the City Council. Separate peddler’s and transient merchant’s licenses shall be
required for operation during and within the parameters of any special event.
(I) Special event. The following standards apply to all special events designated by resolution of the City
Council.
(1) Only those peddler and transient merchant licenses issued specially for the special event shall be
valid during the term and location of the special event as designated by resolution of the City Council. All other
peddler and transient merchant licenses shall be invalid within the parameters set by the resolution of the City
Council creating the special event.
(2) To protect the public safety by having an orderly placement of peddlers and transient merchants
within the location of the special event, peddlers and transient merchants, including Mobile Food Units, applying
for a license for the special event shall be required to obtain a permit from the entity sponsoring the special event.
The sponsoring entity may charge a fee for its permit. (Am. Ord. 562, passed 2-20-2007; Am. Ord. 2010-08, 3rd
Series, passed 6-21-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
(J) Location of Event. The following apply to all applicants:
(1) Private Property—if the applicant intends to conduct temporary sales on private property, a letter
of consent from the property owner or the property owner’s agent must be submitted with the application
materials.
(2) Public (City) Property—sales on public (City) property or streets are not permitted except under
the following circumstances:
a) As part of a Special Event as designated by the City Council;
b) As part of a recreational tournament sanctioned by the City and occurring on public (City)
property.
c) As specifically allowed for parking of license Mobile Food Units.
(K) Special Provisions for Mobile Food Units. The following apply to all Mobile Food Units:
(1) MFU’s shall not be located or operated on any portion of Second Street East or on that portion of
Sibley Street from the Levee Parking lot south to East Third Street unless City Council approval is granted as a
designated Special Event and in that case all of the standards in this Chapter applicable to Special Events shall
apply.
(2) MFU’s shall not occupy more than two parking spaces on any municipal parking lot or any side
street with parallel parking designated.
(3) MFU’s must obtain prior written approval from the City’s Parks & Recreation Director, or
designee, prior to operating in any city park.
86
(4) MFU’s may not be parked overnight and no equipment associated with an MFU may be stored
overnight on any city street or in any public right-of-way.
(5) MFU operators must clean around their unit and remove all trash generated from the operation of
the MFU and its customers.
(6) MFU operators must supply their own electrical power.
(7) MFU operators must conspicuously display on the MFU their Minnesota Department of Health or
Department of Agriculture license along with their city issued license to operator the MFU.
(8) MFU operators must provide to the city and maintain at all time of operation a minimum insurance
requirements established by the city.
(9) MFU’s and any associated generators and equipment must be located and operated in a manner
to minimize noise, exhaust and odors impacting the public and surrounding public and private properties and so
as not to create a public or private nuisance.
(10) Service of intoxicating or alcoholic beverages by MFU’s is prohibited.
§ 115.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
(A) The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county license;
(B) The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city as a part
of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application;
(C) The conviction of the applicant within the past 5 years from the date of application for any violation of
any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person’s
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner. Those
violations shall include but not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices,
and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person;
(D) The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant; and/or
(E) The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall
include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than 3 complaints against the applicant with the Better
Business Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency,
within the preceding 12 months, or 3 complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding 5 years.
§ 115.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the
87
City Council for violation of any of the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form or ; during the course
of the licensed activity;
(3) Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied under § 115.04;
(4) Violation of any provision of this chapter; and/or
(5) Violation of any conditions imposed on a permit issued by a sponsoring entity of a special event.
(B) Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose
of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee
shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to conduct business as a peddler or
transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.
(C) Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city shall provide the
license holder with written notice of the alleged violation(s) and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing
on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed
on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
(D) Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in this section, the licensee shall have the right to
request a public hearing. If no written request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within 10 business days
following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of
mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public
hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the
request. Within 3 regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of itsdecision.
(E) Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public
may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council
may immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing
as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
(F) Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to
appeal that decision in court. (Am. Ord. 562, passed 2-20-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the
license was issued. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.07 REGISTRATION.
All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter under § 115.03, shall be
required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The
term DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the
88
dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a
license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City
Clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of
registration shall be non-transferable. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
(A) Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle,
ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure;
(B) Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public right-of-way expect as allowed by ordinance for a licensed sidewalk café or mobile food unit.
(C) Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any individualor
the general public;
(D) Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. expected as allowed by ordinance for a licensed
sidewalk café or mobile food unit.
(E) Failing to provide proof of City license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using the
license or registration of another person;
(F) Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue
statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person; and/or
(G) Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a
manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall
enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least 4 inches long and 4 inches wide with print of at least
48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient
Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall
remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section. Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2012-
16, 3rd Series, passed 4-16-12)
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
111. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
112. TOBACCO REGULATIONS
113. FIREWORKS
114. ADULT USES
115. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
116. MASSAGE THERAPY
89
CHAPTER 116: MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSES
116.1 Statement of purpose
116.2 Location of therapeutic massage establishments
116.3 Definitions
116.4 Massage therapist license and massage therapy establishment license application
116.5 License term and license fee
116.6 General provisions for massage therapist and massage therapy establishment licenses
116.7 Grounds for revocation of license
90
§ 116.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to protect against the transmission of
diseases, the City Council deems it necessary to provide for the regulation and licensing of persons who
administer massages and the establishments where massages are administered. (Prior Code, § 5.71)
(Am. Ord. 482, passed 11-11-2002) (Ord. 2014-03 3rd Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
§ 116.02 LOCATION OF THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
(A) Licensed therapeutic massage enterprises may be operated as a home occupation in accordance
with the provisions as set forth in Chapter 155 of the Hastings City Code, provided the operation clearly
exists as a secondary or accessory use of the premises.
(B) Licensed therapeutic massage enterprises may be located where permitted by Chapter 155 of
the Hastings City Code. (Prior Code, § 5.71) (Am. Ord. 482, passed 11-11-2002) (Ord. 2014-03 3rd
Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
§ 116.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person who, for compensation, practices and provides therapeutic
massage, and is a person other than a licensed medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath, podiatrist, nurse,
physical therapist, or physical therapist aide working under the direct supervision of a physical therapist,
athletic director or trainer or beautician or barber who confines treatment to the scalp, face and neck.
MASSAGE THERAPY or THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE. A scientific health care or health
maintenance technique or procedure carried out by a massage therapist, involving the massaging and
kneading of human skin, muscles, and tissues for the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the
breaking up of fatty tissues and muscle spasms and the improvement of circulation through the body.
MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT. Any room or rooms where persons may, for a fee or
other consideration paid either directly or indirectly, receive a therapeutic massage. (Prior Code,
§ 5.71) (Am. Ord. 482, passed 11-11-2002) (Ord. 2014-03 3rd Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
91
§ 116.04 MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE AND MASSAGE THERAPY
ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE APPLICATION.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to practice therapeutic massage therapy without
a license from the city.
(B) License application. All initial applications shall be made at City Hall to the City Clerk by
filing an application form which has been approved by the City Council and which shall contain the
following information:
(1) A description and the location of the premises where the licensed activity is to be
conducted. If the premise is not constructed and furnished at the time the application is submitted,
detailed plans of the premises and furnishing shall be attached to the application. No license will be
issued for a massage therapy establishment until a final certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
City of Hastings;
(2) Names and addresses of the applicant, together with the names and addresses of the
property owner (if different), the business owner (if different), the lessee (if different), the manager or
operator (if different), and, if a corporation, all the names and addresses of the officers of the
corporation where the licensed activity will take place;
(3) A description of any crime or other offense, including the time, date, place, and
disposition, for which any of the persons named above have been arrested or convicted;
(4) A description of the services offered by the massage therapist or the massage therapy
establishment;
(5) Accompanied by a non-returnable investigation fee in an amount established by ordinance;
(6) All necessary release forms to allow for the required background, education, and criminal
checks;
(7) Any premises proposed to be licensed shall be first inspected by the city’s Building Official
and fire marshal. These premises must comply with all applicable building codes, fire codes, and health
codes of the City of Hastings and State of Minnesota; and
(8) Applications shall contain such other information as the Council may require.
(C) Review of application; approval or denial. The application will be reviewed by the Police
Department, Planning Department, and such other departments as deemed necessary. Background,
criminal conviction, and educational checks will be conducted. The departments will thereafter submit
their reports and recommendations to the City Clerk, who will submit all of the reports and
recommendations from the other departments, together with his/her report and recommendation, to the
92
City Council. The City Council shall either grant or deny the license after receipt of the reports and
recommendations from city staff.
(D) Notice to property owners and occupants. At least 15 calendar days before City Council
consideration of an application for a massage therapy establishment license, the city shall notify, by mail,
all owners and occupants who own property or reside within 350 feet of the establishment to be
licensed.
(E) Hearing; considerations. The City Council shall afford the applicant and all interested parties
an opportunity to be heard and shall have the discretion to consider in granting, denying, renewing, or
transferring the license, any reasonable fact or circumstance relating to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(F) Basis for denial. The Council may deny an application, or deny an application for transfer or
renewal because the public health, safety, or welfare would be adversely affected.
(G) Conditions. The City Council may impose reasonable conditions upon the license to preserve
the public peace and to protect and promote good order and security.
(H) Certificates. A massage therapist applicant must provide proof of the following:
(1) A diploma or certificate of graduation from a school approved by the American Massage
Therapist Association or other similar reputable massage association and has completed 100 hours of
training in massage; and
(2) Certificate of professional liability insurance in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.
(Prior Code, § 5.71) (Am. Ord. 482, passed 11-11-2002) (Ord. 2014-03 3rd Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
§ 116.05 LICENSE TERM AND LICENSE FEE.
(A) Generally.
(1) All massage therapist licenses issued shall be for a one (1) year period and terminate on
December 31 of each year, regardless of when the license was issued. Any licensee requesting renewal
of a license must apply for a renewal in a timely manner.
(2) All massage therapy establishment licenses issued shall be a three (3) year period and
terminate on December 31. The first licenses issued under this provision will be for the period of January
1, 2008 through December 31, 2010. All licenses issued shall have the same end date, regardless of
when the license was issued. Any licensee requesting renewal of a license must apply for a renewal in a
timely manner.
(3) The annual license fee for a massage therapist and massage therapist establishment license
shall be set by ordinance. The fee for the first year of the license shall be prorated from the date it is
issued. All license fees must be paid before the license will be issued by the City.
93
(B) Eligibility for license; conditions.
(1) All applicants shall be at least 18 years of age.
(2) Licenses may be granted only in compliance with the zoning code as determined by the
City Council and the laws of the State of Minnesota and the ordinances of the City of Hastings.
(3) Licenses shall be granted only to establishments which can meet the safety and sanitary
requirements of the City Council and the building code regulations of the City of Hastings and the State
of Minnesota.
(4) The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place on the licensed premises at all
times.
(5) Licenses may be issued only to persons free from convictions of crimes which involve
moral turpitude or which relate directly to the person’s ability, capacity, or fitness to perform the duties
and discharge the responsibilities of the occupation. (Prior Code, § 5.71) (Am. Ord. 482, passed 11-
11-2002; Am. Ord. 2008-8, 3rd Series, passed 6-2-2008) (Ord. 2014-03 3rd Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
§ 116.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR MASSAGE THERAPIST AND MASSAGE THERAPY
ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES.
(A) Whenever a therapeutic massage is given, it shall be required by the massage therapist, that the
person who is receiving the massage shall have his or her breasts, buttocks, anus, and genitals covered
with an appropriate nontransparent covering.
(B) Any massage therapist performing a massage shall, at all times, have their anus, buttocks,
breasts, and genitals covered with a nontransparent material.
(C) Therapeutic massages can only be given in a licensed massage therapy establishment, or the
place of business or residence of the person receiving the therapeutic massage. For the purpose of
Chamber of Commerce sponsored events, a special license may be issued by the City of Hastings to
massage therapists licensed by the city to operate off their licensed premises for the duration of the event
only.
(D) All massage therapist and massage therapy establishment licensees shall comply with the
provisions of this section now in effect and as it may be amended in the future. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be grounds for revocation of any massage therapist license.
(E) No doors of massage rooms, when occupied by 1 or more persons, shall be locked. All locks,
if any, shall be keyed only from the exterior of the massage rooms.
(F) All premises licensed under this section shall, at all times, be open to inspection by any health
officer or police officer, to verify compliance with this section and any other applicable city or state laws.
All persons issued a massage therapy establishment license agree, as a condition of being issued a
94
license, to consent to the inspections, without a warrant, by any health officer or police officer.
(G) It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee, to hinder or prevent a health
officer or police officer from making an inspection of the licensed premises.
(H) No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted at any time on the licensed premises as a
customer, guest, or employee, unless accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other responsible
adult identified by name and date of birth in a written authorization containing the notarized signature of
the minor’s parent or guardian and maintained in the permanent records of the massage therapist.
(I) This section shall not apply to a health care facility owned by the state of Minnesota, or any of
its agencies or any health care facility licensed by the state of Minnesota.
(J) Every licensee, whether actually on the licensed premises or not, shall be responsible for all
actions which take place on the licensed premises. (Prior Code, § 5.71) (Am. Ord. 482, passed 11-11-
2002) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2014-03 3rd Series, Adopted 4-21-14)
§ 114.07 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) It shall be grounds for revocation of a license granted to any person under this chapter if:
(1) The person fails to comply with any of the ordinances of the city or the statutes of the
state;
(2) The owner, manager, lessee, or any of the employees are found to be in control or
possession of any alcoholic beverages or narcotic drug or controlled substance, as defined by state
statutes, on licensed premises;
(3) The owner, manager, lessee, or any of the employees fail to comply with any of the
ordinances of the city or states of the state pertaining to the possession, transfer, sale, or distribution of
any alcoholic beverages;
(4) The owner, manager, lessee, or any of the employees is convicted of any ordinance or state
statute violation arising within the business establishment to which the license was granted under this
chapter;
(5) The premises do not comply with the health, safety, and building regulations of the city
and state; and/or
(6) If the licensed business is located in a residential district, the applicable provisions of the
City of Hastings Code relative to home occupations shall be complied with; failure to comply with the
applicable regulations shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
(B) Violation of any law or regulation relating to the building, safety, health, or sanitation shall be
grounds for revocation of any license issued under this section. (Prior Code, § 5.71) (Am. Ord. 482,
95
passed 11-11-2002) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2014-03, 3rd Series Adopted 4-21-14)
1
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES, AND OFFENSES
2
Section
130.01 Dangerous weapons and articles
130.02 Dangerous trespasses and other acts
130.03 Disorderly conduct
130.04 Roller blades, roller skates, roller skis, and skateboards
130.05 Interfering with religious observance
130.06 Flags
130.07 Vagrancy
130.08 Disorderly house or place of public resort
130.09 Destructive devices
130.10 Open pits, basements, and other excavations
130.11 Placement of garbage containers by alleys or curbsides
130.12 Use of explosives within city limits
130.13 Issuance of citations
130.14 Vehicle sales in residential districts
130.15 Curfew for minors
130.16 Drug paraphernalia
130.98 Violations
' 130.01 DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND ARTICLES.
(A) Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to:
(1) Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the
safety of another;
(2) Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being and
whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
Section
Section
(3) Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a slung-shot or sand club;
(4) Manufacture, transfer, or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade knife opening
automatically;
(5) Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as
a weapon against another;
(6) Sell or have in his or her possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge
of a firearm; or
(7) Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun, ammunition, or explosive
without the written consent of his or her parent or guardian or of the Police Department.
3
(B) Exception. Nothing in division (A) above shall prohibit the possession of the articles herein
mentioned if the purpose of the possession is for public exhibition by museums or collectors of art.
(C) Discharge of firearms and explosives. It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any bow
and arrow, cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air riffle,
or other similar device commonly referred to as a BB gun.
(D) Exceptions. Division (C) above shall not apply to the discharge of firearms or fireworks by an
organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by the City Council, and, as to discharge of
firearms, division (C) above shall not apply to:
(1) A peace officer in the discharge of their duties;
(2) A person in the lawful defense of their person or family;
(3) A peace officer or a member of the Hastings Police Department or its reserves and the
participants in a firearm safety program approved by the Hastings Police Department.
(4) Individuals hunting for small game or wild turkey within the area designated and managed
by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources as the “Gores State Wildlife Management Area
(WMA)” while the hunter is in compliance with all Minnesota Statutes and Rules for regulated harvest of
wildlife and WMA use and provided that the method of taking is restricted to use of shotguns with fine shot
(No. BBB or smaller diameter shot); or
(5) Participants in Minnesota Department of Natural Resources administered controlled deer
management hunts within the Gores State Wildlife Management Area (WMA) and State Aquatic
Management Area (AMA), as authorized in writing by the City Council and by the Commissioner of the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, provided the hunter is in compliance with all current
Minnesota Statutes and Rules for regulated harvest of wildlife and WMA and AMA use, including the
provisions of the aforementioned controlled deer management hunts as to limits on the number of hunters,
the length of the hunt and the use of shotguns with slugs.
(E) Use of bow and arrow. It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except for:
(1) Participants in the Physical Education Program of a school supervised by a member of its
faculty, a community-wide supervised class, or an event specifically authorized by the Chief of Police; or
(2) Any person who has been issued a valid archery hunting license by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources for small game, deer or wild turkey harvest while hunting within the
Gores State Wildlife Management Area (WMA), provided the permitted hunter is in compliance with all
current Minnesota Statutes and Rules for regulated harvest of wildlife and WMA use. (Prior Code,§ 9.20)
(Ord. 2008-13, 3rd Series, passed 10-20-2008) Penalty, see§ 10.99
4
§ 130.02 DANGEROUS TRESPASSES AND OTHER ACTS.
It is unlawful for any person to:
(A) Smoke in the presence of explosives, or inflammable materials, or in a building, or area, in which
ANo Smoking@ notices have been permanently posted;
(B) Interfere with or obstruct the prevention or extinguishing of any fire, or disobey the lawful orders
of a law enforcement officer or firefighter present at the fire;
(C) Show a false light or signal or interfere with any light; signal or sign controlling or guiding traffic
upon a highway, railway track, navigable water, or in the air;
(D) Place an obstruction upon a railroad track;
(E) Expose another or his or her property to an obnoxious or harmful gas, fluid or substance, with
intent to injure, molest, or coerce;
(F) Trespass or permit animals under his or her control to trespass upon a railroad track;
(G) Permit domestic animals or fowl under his or her control to go upon the lands of another within
the city;
(H) Interfere unlawfully with any monument, sign, or pointer erected or marked to designate a point of
boundary, line of political subdivision, or a tract of land;
(I) Trespass upon the premises of another and, without the claim of right, refuse to depart there from
on demand of the lawful possessor thereof;
(J) Enter the premises of another with intent to take or injure any fruit, fruit trees, or vegetables
growing thereon without the permission of the owner or occupant; or
(K) Without the permission of the owner tamper with or get into or upon a motor vehicle, or ride in or
upon the motor vehicle knowing it was taken and is being driven by another without the permission of the
owner. (Prior Code,§ 9.23) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing, or having reasonable grounds to
know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger, or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach or the
peace, to do the following:
(A) Engage in brawling or fighting;
(B) Disturb an assembly or meeting, not lawful in its character;
(C) Engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct tending
reasonably to arouse alarm, anger, or resentment in others;
5
(D) Willfully and lewdly exposes his or her person or the private parts thereof, or procures another to
so expose himself or herself; and any open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of public
indecency;
(E) Voluntarily enters the water of any lake, river or city public swimming pool within the limit of the
city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; or one enters the water without being garbed in a
bathing suit sufficient to cover his or her person and equal to the standards generally adopted and accepted
by the public;
(F) Races the motor of any motor vehicle;
(G) Causes the spinning or skidding of wheels or tires causing tire squeal or similar noise;
(H) Causes the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting or by any other means or
mechanism including the blowing of any automobile or other vehicle horn;
(I) Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or endanger others;
(J) Drinks or displays any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in or about any premises where the
drinking or display is prohibited by law;
(K) Causes defacement, destruction, or otherwise damage to any premises or any property located
thereon;
(L) Strews, scatters, litters, throws, disposes of, or deposits any refuse, garbage, or rubbish unto any
premises except in receptacles provided for the purpose;
(M) Enters any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or operator; or
(N) Fails or refuses to vacate or leave any premises after being requested or ordered whether orally or
in writing, to do so, by the owner, or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or official;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who is owner or tenant of the premises
involved nor to any law enforcement or other government official who may be present thereon at that time
as part of his or her official duty, nor shall it include the spouse, children, employee, or tenant of the owner
or occupier. (Prior Code,§ 9.27) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.04 ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS, AND SKATEBOARDS.
(A) Scope of application. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health and safety arising
out of the use of roller blades, roller skates, roller skis, and skateboards within the City of Hastings. The
City Council finds there are certain public streets and public property wherein the operation and use of
these devices create a potential danger to either the user of the devices or the general public.
(B) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
6
ROLLER DEVICE. Any of the following devices:
(a) ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES. A wheeled device which is attached to a shoe
or designed to be attached to a shoe and which is designed to transport a rider;
(b) ROLLER SKIS. A pair of skis, platformed with wheels attached and which is intended
to simulate skiing; or
(c) SKATEBOARDS. A wheeled, non-motorized device which is not secured to the rider=s
feet or shoes and which is designed to transport a rider.
(C) Prohibited acts.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel themselves upon roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis, or skateboards in any of the following areas of the City of Hastings:
(a) Any property or parking lot owned by the city, county, state, or federal governments;
(b) Any privately owned parking lot without the written permission of the owner;
(c) Any public tennis court;
(d) Any street where the posted speed limit is in excess of 30 mph, except Pleasant Drive
between West 4th Street and County Road 42 and East 10th Street from Vermillion Street to the East city
limits; or
(e) On any sidewalk adjacent to that part of 2nd Street lying between Eddy Street and Bailly
Street.
(2) No roller device shall be operated on any street within the city while being pushed, pulled or
in any way propelled by the following means: any motorized vehicle, a person on a bicycle, or an animal.
(3) Persons operating roller devices upon public streets shall not ride more than 2 abreast.
(4) All roller devices must be operated as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the street.
(5) No person, while operating a roller device on a public street, shall cause any object to be
pushed, passed, or thrown between 2 or more operators of roller devices.
(6) No person shall operate a roller device in a manner likely to endanger themselves or any other
person or property. (Prior Code,§ 9.34) Penalty, see § 10.99
7
§ 130.05 INTERFERING WITH RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE.
It is unlawful for any person, by threats or violence, intentionally to prevent another person from
performing any lawful act enjoined upon him or her or recommended to him or her by the religion which he
or she professes. (Prior Code,§ 9.52) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.06 FLAGS.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FLAG. Anything which is or purports to be the Stars and Stripes, the United States flag or shield,
the United States coat of arms, the Minnesota State flag, or a copy, picture, or a representation of any of
them.
(B) Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to:
(1) Intentionally and publicly mutilate, defile, or cast contempt upon the flag;
(2) Place on or attach to the flag any work, mark, design or advertisement not properly a part of
the flag or expose to public view the flag so altered;
(3) Manufacture or expose to public view an article of merchandise or a wrapper or receptacle
from merchandise upon which the flag is depicted; or
(4) Use the flag for commercial advertising purposes.
(C) Exception. This section shall not apply to flags depicted on written or printed documents or
periodicals or on stationery, ornaments, pictures, or jewelry, provided there are not unauthorized words or
designs on the flag and provided the flag is not connected with an advertisement. (Prior Code,§ 9.53)
Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.07 VAGRANCY.
It is unlawful for any person to be a vagrant, and for purposes of this section a vagrant shall be anyone
of the following:
(A) A person with ability to work, who is without lawful means of support, does not seek employment,
and is over 18 years of age;
(B) A person found in or loitering near any structure, vehicle, or private grounds who is there without
the consent of the owner and is unable to account for his or her presence;
(C) A prostitute who loiters on street or in a public place or in a place open to the public with intent to
solicit for immoral purposes; or
(D) A person who derives his or her support in whole or in part from begging or is a fortune teller or
8
similar imposter. (Prior Code,§ 9.54) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.08 DISORDERLY HOUSE OR PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT.
It is unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house or place of public resort, whereby the peace,
comfort, or decency of a neighborhood is habitually disturbed; or being the owner or in control of any
premises, intentionally permit them to be so used. (Prior Code,§ 9.87) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.09 DESTRUCTIVE DEVICES.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DESTRUCTIVE DEVICE. Any bomb, time bomb, Molotov cocktail, grenade, mine, rocket or
missile, and any type of weapon which will, or is designed to, or may readily be converted to, expel a
projectile by the action of any explosive, except commercially manufactured firearms.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, own, possess, or have in his or her custody or control
any destructive device which shall include, but is not limited to, any device, apparatus or equipment by
whatever name known, which causes damage by combustion or explosion.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, own, possess, or have in his or her custody or control
any false or hoax device, apparatus, or equipment described in this section, and place the same in any
public building or place.
(D) This section shall not apply to owners, employees, or agents of bona fide business operations
which store, transport, or use explosives in their operation, nor shall it apply to a government official acting
in the discharge of his or her official duties, nor shall it apply to persons who have procured dynamite as set
forth in M.S. ' 299F.19, as it may be amended from time to time, and other emergency regulations issued
by the Governor of the State of Minnesota or the Minnesota Director of Public Safety. (Prior Code,§ 9.90)
Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.10 OPEN PITS, BASEMENTS, AND OTHER EXCAVATIONS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person owning or in control of real estate to have any pit, basement, well,
septic tank, cesspool, or other excavation on the premises open and without protection for the public.
(B) If the excavation is open for 72 hours or less, it shall be protected by use of flares or lights at night
and a railing or other temporary protection during the day.
(C) If it shall be permanently installed, it shall be protected with a chain link fence at least 48 inches
high, night and day. (Prior Code,§ 9.92) Penalty, see§ 10.99
9
§ 130.11 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS BY ALLEYS OR CURBSIDES.
(A) In those areas of the city where alleys are platted and opened for traffic, garbage containers shall
be placed at the rear of the property adjacent to the alley.
(B) Where no alley exists, garbage containers shall be placed at a point adjacent to the residence which
is reasonably accessible to the front of the house. On pick-up day, containers may be placed at the front of
the property line. If containers are placed at the front property line, they shall not be placed before 6:00
p.m. the night before collection day and must be removed by 6:00 p.m. on collection day. (Prior
Code,§ 9.93) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.12 USE OF EXPLOSIVES WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
(A) All explosives shall be handled by a person experienced in the handling of explosives or by
employees under his or her direct supervision who are at least 18 years old.
(B) While explosives are being handled or used, smoking shall not be permitted and no one near the
explosives shall possess matches, open flames or other fire or flame producing devices. No person shall
handle explosives while in the possession of or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics.
(C) Original containers or authorized containers shall be used for taking detonators and other
explosives from storage magazines to the blasting area.
(D) When the blasting is to be done in a congested area or in close proximity to a structure, railway,
highway, or other installation that may be damaged, before blasting the area to be blasted shall be covered
with a mat capable of preventing fragments from being thrown from the blasting site.
(E) Persons authorized to prepare explosive charges or conduct blasting operations shall use every
reasonable safety precaution including, but not limited to, warning signals, flags, barricades or woven wire
mats to insure the safety of the general public and workers in the blasting area.
(F) Immediately upon receiving the necessary permit as required by state law, the applicant shall
notify by certified mail, all residents in the area which will be affected by the blasting. This notice shall
inform those residents of the applicant=s intention to conduct blasting within the area and if known to
inform the residents of the approximate time and date the blasting is to be conducted. This notice must also
contain a provision cautioning residents to remove all objects from the wall and other places where they
could be damaged by blasting, as well as, advising residents to take appropriate action to document the
condition of their structure and its content prior to blasting. No later than 3 days prior to the actual blasting,
the applicant shall notify, in writing, all residents in the affected area of the exact day and time the blasting
is to occur.
(G) All blasting permitted under this section shall be conducted during daylight hours except as may
be specifically authorized by the city.
(H) Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas, electric, water, fire alarm, telephone,
telegraph and steam utilities, the blaster shall notify the police department and appropriate representatives
of the utilities at least 24 hours in advance of blasting, specifying the location and intended time of the
blasting. Verbal notice shall be confirmed with written notice. In an emergency this time limit may be
10
waived by the local authority issuing the original permit.
(I) Due precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental discharge of electric blasting caps from
current induced by radar, radio transmitters, lightening, adjacent power lines, dust storms or other sources
of extraneous electricity. These precautions shall include:
(1) The suspension of all blasting operations and removal of persons from the blasting area
during the approach and progress of an electric storm;
(2) The posting of signs warning against the use of mobile radio transmitters on all roads within
350 feet of the blasting operation; and
(3) Compliance with the latest recommendations of the Institute of Makers of Explosives with
regard to blasting in the vicinity of radio transmitters and power lines.
(J) Prior to issuing any permit required by M.S. Chapter 299F, as it may be amended from time to
time, the applicant shall provide to the Chief of Police a certificate of insurance for the minimum amounts
of $250,000 for bodily injury to a single person, $500,000 for bodily injury to multiple persons and
$500,000 for any property damage. This certificate of insurance shall name the City of Hastings as an
additional insured and further provide that the policy cannot be canceled without giving 10-days= prior
written notice to the city.
(K) The provisions of these regulations shall be in addition to any requirements imposed by state law.
(Prior Code,§ 9.94) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.13 ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.
(A) Except as otherwise provided by statute, only a peace officer and part-time peace officer may:
(1) Ask a person receiving a citation to give a written promise to appear in court; or
(2) Take a person into custody as permitted by M.S.§ 629.34, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(B) The following city employees may issue citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention for
violations of the City Code. Specific areas of jurisdiction for each employee shall be established by
resolution of the City Council, which resolution may be amended from time to time by the City Council:
(1) Peace officers;
(2) Reserve peace officers;
(3) City Forester;
(4) Planning Director and Assistant City Planner;
(5) Department of Building Safety;
(6) Fire Chief and members of the Fire Protection Bureau;
11
(7) Animal Control Officers; and
(8) Public Works Superintendent. (Prior Code,§ 9.95)
§ 130.14 VEHICLE SALES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to sell more than 3 vehicles per any 12-month period from a legal
parcel in a residentially zoned district where there is a principle structure.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to sell vehicles from any residential property where there is not a
principal structure. (Prior Code,§ 9.96) Penalty, see§ 10.99
§ 130.15 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is maintained for 4 primary reasons:
(1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew hours;
(2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours, including
involvement with gangs;
(3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
(4) To help parents control their minor children.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health, safety, or
comfort of the minor or a member of the minor=s household. The term shall include, but shall not be
limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire
department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company
due to a natural or human-made calamity.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master clock used by
the Police Department.
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT, OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs catering to
minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing food,
clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing primary care or custody to
the minor shall not be another minor.
12
PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access
and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, roadways, alleys, vacant lots, parks, playgrounds,
plazas, public recreation, entertainment or civic facilities, places of amusement, entertainment, or
refreshments, public buildings, schools, and the common areas and parking facilities of hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, malls, and shops.
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public or
parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
(C) Hours.
(1) Minors under the age of 12 years. No minor under the age of 12 years shall be present in or
upon any public place within the City between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. the following day, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any Friday
or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official City time.
(2) Minors ages 12 years to 14 years. No minor of the ages of 12 or 14 years shall be present in
or upon any public place within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. the following day, or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on
any Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. the following day official City time.
(3) Minors ages 15 years to 17 years. No minor of the ages of 15 or 17 years shall be present in or
upon any public place within the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. the following day, or between the hours of 12:01 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
on any Saturday or Sunday, official City time.
(D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to give
a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor; nor shall this
section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the adult person having the primary care or
custody of the minor.
(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;
(2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
(3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if in connection with or as
required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor
traveling directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession, or occupation and the minor=s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry written proof of employment and
proof of the hours the employer requires the minor’s presence at work;
(4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which has been
officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in
or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with
13
the permission of the minor’s parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of
the minor;
(5) To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate travel during the hours
of curfew;
(6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the
exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;
(7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the city=s designated law enforcement provider
about the minor=s presence; and
(8) To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise legally emancipated.
(F) Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian, or other adult having the
primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the
minor.
(G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his or her place of business
during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian,
or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless 1 of the exceptions to this
section applies.
(H) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the city=s designated law enforcement provider that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(I) Affirmative defense. A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has an affirmative
defense before making an arrest. Penalty, see§ 10.99 (Ord. 2014-14, 3rd Series, passed 10-6-14)
§ 130.16 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the possession, sale, manufacture,
advertisement, and delivery of drug paraphernalia and thereby deter the use of controlled substances in the
city. This section is not intended to allow what the Minnesota Statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the
Minnesota Statutes expressly allow.
(B) Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this section shall have the following meanings unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota Statutes or this section. It includes, but is not
limited to:
14
(a) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
(b) Kits used, intended for use, or designed of use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
(c) Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
(d) Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances;
(e) Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in a weighing or
measuring controlled substances;
(f) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and
lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
(g) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs
and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
(h) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
(i) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed
for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
(j) Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
(k) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in parenterally injected controlled substances into the human body;
(l) Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
2. Water pipes;
3. Carburetion tubes and devices;
4. Smoking and carburetion masks;
5. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana
cigarette which has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
15
6. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
7. Chamber pipes;
8. Carburetor pipes;
9. Electric pipes;
10. Air-driven pipes;
11. Chillums;
12. Bongs;
13. Ice pipes or chillers.
(C) Evidence. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority
should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
(1) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
(2) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the object under state or federal
law relating to any controlled substance;
(3) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section;
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
(6) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or anyone in control of the object
to deliver it to persons who he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this section; the innocence of an owner or anyone in control of the object as to a
direct violation of this Section should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed
for use as drug paraphernalia;
(7) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
(8) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use;
(10) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
(11) Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related
items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
(12) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the
business enterprise;
(13) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
16
(14) Expert testimony concerning its use.
(D) Offenses.
(1) Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
section.
(2) Manufacture, sale or delivery. It is unlawful for any person to sell, deliver, possess with
intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this section.
(3) Minors. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates division (D)(2) above by selling or
delivering drug paraphernalia and said sale or delivery is to a person who is under 18 years of age and at
least 3 years his or her junior shall also be violating this paragraph as well as division (D)(2).
(4) Advertisement. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or
other publication any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know,
that the propose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or
intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(E) Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor and each day of
violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(F) Civil forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia as defined in this section are subject to forfeiture, subject
to the provisions set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
(G) Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or application of this section
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this
section are severable.
(H) Violation a misdemeanor. Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of
this chapter when they perform an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such
failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 550, 2nd Series, passed 5-1-2006)
§ 130.98 VIOLATIONS.
17
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (Prior Code,§ 9.99) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
Section
150.01 State Building Code adopted
150.02 Special requirements for moving buildings
150.03 Certificate of survey
150.04 Certificate of occupancy
150.05 Wrecking and demolition of buildings
150.06 Licensing contractors
150.07 Electric, telephone, television cable, and other similar utility construction to be
underground
150.08 Commercial building rehabilitation program
150.09 Accessory structures
150.10 Survey inspections
150.11 Irrigation systems
§ 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
(A) Building Code. The 2007 Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S.
§16B.59 through §16B.73, as they may be amended from time to time, 1 copy of which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as the building code for the City of Hastings. The code is
hereby incorporated in this chapter as completely as if set out in full.
(B) Administration required. The following chapters of the 2007 Minnesota State Building Code
are adopted without change by the City of Hastings:
(1) 1300 - Minnesota State Building Code;
(2) 1301 - Building Official Certification;
(3) 1302 - Construction Approvals;
(4) 1303 - Minnesota Provisions of the State Building Code;
(5) 1303 - Window Fall Prevention Provisions;
(6) 1305- Adoption of the 2000 International Building Code;
(7) 1307 – Elevators and Related Devices;
(8) 1309 - Adoption of 2006 International Residential Code;
2
(9) 1311 - Adoption of the Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings;
(10) 1315 - Adoption of the 2008 National Electrical Code;
(11) 1322 - Residential Energy Code;
(12) 1323 - Commercial Energy Code;
(13) 1325 - Solar Energy Systems;
(14) 1335 - Floodproofing Regulations;
(15) 1341 - Minnesota Accessibility Code;
(16) 1346 - Adoption of the 2006 International Mechanical Code;
(17) 1350 - Manufactured Homes;
(18) 1360 - Prefabricated Buildings;
(19) 1361 - Industrialized/Modular Buildings;
(20) 1370 - Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);
(21) 4715 - Minnesota Plumbing Code; and
(22) International Building Code Appendix J (Grading).
(C) Organization and enforcement.
(1) There is hereby established in this jurisdiction a code enforcement agency which shall be
under the administrative and operational control of the Building Official.
(2) The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of
this code. For such purpose, the Building Official shall have powers of law enforcement officers.
(3) The Appointing Authority shall designate the Building Official for the City of Hastings.
(D) Permits, inspections, and fees; surcharge. Permits, inspections, and fees shall be as provided
in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code and as adopted by ordinance. In addition to the
permit fee required by above, the applicant shall pay the required surcharge to be remitted to the
Minnesota Department of Administration as prescribed by M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be amended from
time to time. (Prior Code, § 4.01) (Am. Ord. 2007-04, 3rd Series, passed 8-6-2007; Am. Ord. 2009-
09, 3rd Series, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 2010-16, 3rd Series, passed 07-19-2010)
3
§ 150.01(D)(1) Electrical Inspections.
(A) Authority to inspect. The City of Hastings hereby provides for the inspection of all electrical
installations, pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 326B.36. subd. 6.
(B) Adoption by reference. The Minnesota Electrical Act, as adopted by the Commissioner of
Labor and Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 326B, Sections 326B.31 to 326B.399 is
hereby incorporated into this ordinance as if fully set out herein. The Minnesota State Building Code
incorporates by reference the National Electrical Code pursuant to Minn. R. 1315.0020. All such codes
incorporated herein by reference constitute the electrical code of the City of Hastings.
(C) Compliance. All electrical installations shall comply with the requirements of the electrical
code of the City of Hastings and this ordinance. Each individual, partnership, corporation or other
business association doing electrical work within the City of Hastings shall have on file with the City
a copy of the current license issued by the Commissioner of Administration for the Department of
Labor and Industry or such other evidence of such license as may be provided by the Commissioner.
(D) Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized
in Minnesota Statutes 326B.37. Any inspection or handling fees shall be payable to the City of
Hastings. In addition, a state surcharge fee of $5.00 shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this ordinance in accordance Minn. Stat. § 326B.148.
(E) Notice and appeal. All notices of violations and orders issued under this ordinance shall be
in conformance with Minn. Stat. § 326B.36, subd. 4.
(F) Violations and penalties. A violation of the Minnesota Electrical Act or this ordinance is a
misdemeanor. (M.S. 326B.082, subd. 16).
(2) Purpose. The purpose of this amendment is to establish an electrical inspections program
in the City of Hastings that is administered and enforced by the City.
(3) Ordinance Summary for Publication. The following official summary of Ordinance
150.01 (D)(1)–(4) has been approved by the City Council of the City of Hastings as clearly informing
the public of the intent and effect of the Ordinance:
It is the intent and effect of Ordinance 150.01 (D)(1)-(4) to establish an
electrical inspections program in the City of Hastings that is administered
and enforced by the City, as permitted in Minn. Stat. § 326B.36, subd. 6.
(Ord. 2011-15, Third Series, passed 8-1-11)
§ 150.02 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(A) Conditions and procedures. No building or structure shall be hereafter moved into and/or
within the city limits except under the following conditions.
(1) Any person desiring to move buildings or structures into and/or within the limits of the
4
City shall first apply for a permit with the Planning Director, which permit shall be submitted to the
Board of Design Control.
(2) The building or structure(s) must be so constructed as to be in compliance with all of the
building and operating codes and ordinances of the City of Hastings at the time of the issuance of the
permit, and must be in good repair and condition.
(B) Submittal and review requirements. At the time for the filing of the application for a permit to
move any building and/or structure(s), as herein contemplated, the applicant shall file an affidavit with
the Planning Director. The affidavit, among other things, shall recite the age, type of construction,
height, weight, accurate outside measurements, the number of rooms and descriptions thereof (e.g.,
living room, dining room, kitchen, bedroom, and the like), number of baths, and the like, of the
structure(s) proposed to be moved, and the address of the location where the building or structure(s)
may be personally inspected by the City Building Official or his or her designated representative. The
applicant shall also provide a description of the places from and to which it is proposed to be moved,
and the route to be followed. After the inspection, if in the opinion of the Building Official, the
building or structure(s) does not meet the conditions as outlined above, shall so notify the Planning
Director who shall refuse to issue the permit; provided however, that if the building or structure(s), in
the opinion of the Building Official, can be remodeled, altered, and/or reconditioned so as to comply
with the requirements of the State Building Code, the Building Official, may issue a permit conditioned
on the requirements as set forth by the Building Official’s report. The Planning Director may at his or
her discretion refer the application to the Board of Design Control as authorized under § 30.03.
(C) Penal bond. When a moving permit is issued, it shall be a further requirement that the
applicant shall at the time of the issuance of the conditions and, further, shall post a penal bond in the
sum of $5,000 in favor of the city, guaranteeing compliance with the conditions. All permits shall be
for the duration of 1 year from date of issuance; however, all exterior improvements to structures and
required site landscaping shall be completed within 6 months of the date of issuance. Any moving,
remodeling, alteration, or reconditioning of any building or structure(s) must be completed within the
above referenced time periods; and in the case of a conditional permit, the penal bond shall remain in
full force and effect until all conditions are fully complied with.
(D) Building permit. A building permit, such as is required under § 150.01 for any other
construction in the city, and the payment of fees therefore shall be required in addition to the permit to
move the building and/or structure(s) into or within the limits of city.
(E) City costs. Applicants shall pay in advance and prior to issuance of a permit, all labor and
material costs to the City of Hastings, including but not limited to police, utility changes, and repairs.
(F) Section application. This section applies whether the building or other structure(s) proposed
to be moved started from a point of origin within or without the city and is to a point of destination
within or without the city, or whether the movement is merely through the city with a point of origin
and destination without the city, provided that a public street, or other public property, are used for the
movement. No building may be moved using city streets during the period between April 1 and May
15 of each year.
5
(G) Abandonment of water and sanitary sewer lines. Any city water or sanitary sewer services caused
to be disconnected due to moving of a building shall be properly abandoned. Proper abandonment
shall include capping the corporation stop at the water main and capping sanitary sewer lines. (Prior
Code, § 4.02) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.03 CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY.
In addition to plans and specifications required to ensure compliance with the state building code
and prior to issuance of a building permit, each applicant shall be required to submit a certificate of
survey including at a minimum the following information: property boundaries, existing structures,
proposed structures (including driveways), lot corner elevations, proposed drainage flow (arrows),
proposed garage floor elevation, proposed lowest floor elevation, proposed lowest foundation opening,
proposed top of foundation elevation, street right-of-way (to center line), and existing property
monuments. Field hubs shall be placed on-site by a surveyor to show top of foundation elevation and
setbacks. The Building Official may for accessory structures or minor additions (decks, porches),
waive the certificate of survey submittal requirements in favor of submittal of a plot plan indicating the
location of existing and proposed structures in relation to lot lines. (Prior Code, § 4.03)
§ 150.04 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
In addition to certificate of occupancy requirements referenced in the State Building Code,
certificates of occupancy are also required for Group R, Division 3, occupancies. (Prior Code, § 4.04)
§ 150.05 WRECKING AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
(A) Permit required. That any person who proposes to be involved in the demolition or wrecking
of structures in the City of Hastings shall before undertaking the wrecking or demolition, obtain a
license therefore in accordance herewith. Licensee shall obtain a demolition/wrecking permit for each
job before undertaking a demolition or wrecking and shall pay the cost of the permit. Demolition
permit fees shall be set by ordinance.
(B) Application. Application for a demolition company license shall be made on application
forms provided by the city, addressed to the City Building Official.
(C) Regulations. Licensees shall be required to provide advance notice to all concerned utility
companies and obtain necessary shut-offs or permissions.
(1) No demolition refuse or material shall fall more than 15 feet unless in an enclosed chute.
(2) A licensee shall not install barriers or barricades effecting sidewalks, roadways or private
ways, nor shall sidewalk, roadway, or private way traffic be diverted without prior written approval of
the City Director of Public Works, or the other person as the Hastings City Council may designate.
Any obstruction or diversion of traffic shall be preceded by notice from applicant to the Hastings
Police Department.
6
(3) All demolition work including removal of all debris shall be completed within 30 days of
the date of permit issuance.
(D) Fees. Submitted with the application shall be the annual fee in the amount as established by
ordinance.
(E) License. The licenses shall be good for the calendar year in which the same is issued and shall
expire on the last day of the calendar year of issuance.
(1) It shall be cause for suspension of the license if the licensee does not comply with all state
and city demolition requirements including state statutes, city ordinances, and applicable regulations.
(2) No demolition or wrecking shall be accomplished by other than a licensed person
working under his, her, or its direction.
(F) Bond required. Before issuance of the license, the applicant shall deposit with the Building
Official’s office a liability policy or bond in an amount of at least $10,000 insuring and indemnifying
the city from any and all claims that may be made against it as a result of the applicant’s demolition or
wrecking activity.
(G) Insurance. The applicant, before issuance of the license, shall file with the city a certificate of
insurance covering workers compensation and a public liability insurance policy in the amount of at
least $250,000, insuring the applicant for any damage that may be done during the course of the
wrecking or demolition or matters incident thereto.
(H) Safety. All demolition companies shall meet and maintain all safety requirements of the State
Building Code and comply with provisions thereof. In addition, all foundations of structures which are
demolished shall be removed to at least 24 inches below grade.
(I) Repair. The person accomplishing wrecking or demolition shall after accomplishing same,
repair all common walls, chimneys, doors, stairs, and all other portions of remaining adjacent structures
exposed as a result of the wrecking or demolition. Included in this requirement is the requirement in
the person accomplishing same to repair any adjacent surface and to cover same so that the newly
exposed portion of the remaining adjacent structure has a color or finish uniform with and compatible
with other existing structures of the immediate area.
(J) Abandonment of water and sanitary sewer lines. Any city water or sanitary sewer services
caused to be disconnected due to demolition of a building shall be properly abandoned. Proper
abandonment shall include capping the corporation stop at the water main and capping sanitary sewer
lines. (Prior Code, § 4.06) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.06 LICENSING CONTRACTORS.
(A) License. That it is deemed in the interest of the public and the residents of the City of
Hastings that any person, firm, or corporation who engages in the business of building, construction, or
related work, within the City of Hastings shall first secure a city contractors license therefore as
7
provided herein unless the party provides evidence that it is licensed by the State of Minnesota to
conduct the activity within Minnesota.
(1) Licenses shall be obtained by every person engaged in the following businesses or work
in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the City of Hastings:
(a) General contractors including those involved in erection, alteration, or repair of
structures;
(b) Masonry, cement work, cement block work, block laying, or brick work;
(c) Heating, air conditioning, and ventilation;
(d) Roofing;
(e) Plastering, stucco work, and sheet rock taping;
(f) Excavation, including excavation for footings, basements, and grading of lots and
excavation of streets and other public properties;
(g) Lawn sprinkler installers;
(h) Residential and commercial fire alarm installation, maintenance, and repair;
(i) Gas fitters;
(j) Plumbers;
(k) Electricians; and
(l) Fire suppression system installation and repair.
(2) Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing any such qualified licensee from allowing
an employee from performing work under his or her supervision and control, nor a property owner
from performing his or her own work providing all provisions of the State Building Code are met.
(3) A license granted to a general contractor shall include the right to perform all of the work
included in his or her general contract. The license shall include any or all persons performing the
work, provided that each person performing the work is in the regular employ of the general contractor
and qualified as required under state law and the provisions of this chapter to perform the work. The
general contractor shall be responsible for the quality and completeness of all of the work so
performed.
8
(B) Application and insurance requirements. Application for the license shall be made to the City
Building Official and the license shall be granted upon filing with the City Building Official of
certificates evidencing the holding of public liability insurance in the limits of $100,000 per person,
$300,000 per accident for bodily injury and $50,000 for property damages and certificates of worker’s
compensation insurance as required by law. The insurance policies shall contain provisions that same
may not be canceled without 10-days’ prior written notice thereof being mailed to the City of Hastings.
(C) Liability. This chapter shall not be construed to effect the responsibility of liability for any
party owning, operating or installing the above described work for damages to persons or property
caused by any neglect therein nor shall the City of Hastings be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of the licensing of persons, firms, or corporations engaged in the work.
(D) License fee. The license fee shall be paid annually at an amount established by resolution of
the City Council. Each license shall expire on the first day of January after the same is issued and shall
not be prorated.
(E) Waiver of license. The City Council may issue a variance hereto, waiving the requirements of
this chapter or any portions in the event of a declared emergency and for the period of time as deemed
by the Council to be necessary.
(F) Revocation. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked for just cause after a public
hearing with 4-days’ prior written notice to the licensee. (Prior Code, § 4.07)
§ 150.07 ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE, TELEVISION CABLE, AND OTHER SIMILAR UTILITY
CONSTRUCTION TO BE UNDERGROUND.
(A) Underground construction required. All utility lines hereafter installed, constructed, or
otherwise placed within the city for electric, telephone, TV Cable, or other similar services to serve
residential, commercial, and industrial customers in newly platted areas, and which utilize metallic
conductors to carry electric current, whether owned, installed, or constructed by the supplier,
consumer, or any person shall be installed and placed underground in an approved, safe manner,
subject only to the exceptions hereinafter stated.
(B) Utility companies. All companies installing and operating lines such as those described herein
shall be referred to as utility companies for the purpose of this section.
(C) Exceptions to application. The following exceptions to the strict applicability of this section
shall be allowed upon the conditions stated.
(1) Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement of meters, gauges,
transformers, street lighting, and service connection pedestals shall be allowed.
(2) Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement of these lines
commonly referred to as high voltage transmission lines upon which the conductor’s normal operating
voltage equals or exceeds 23,000 volts-phase-to-phase shall be allowed, provided, however, that 60
days prior to commencement of construction of such a project, the Director of Public Works shall be
9
furnished notice of the proposed construction and, upon request, the utility company shall furnish any
relevant information regarding the project to the Director of Public Works.
(3) Aboveground placement, construction, modification, or replacement of lines shall be
allowed in residential, commercial, and industrial areas where the Council, following consideration and
recommendation by the Planning Commission finds that:
(a) Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to
topographical, subsoil, or other existing conditions which adversely affect underground utility
placement; and
(b) Aboveground placement of temporary service line shall only be allowed:
1. During the new construction of any project for a period not to exceed 24 months;
2. During an emergency to safeguard lives or property within the city; and
3. For a period of not more than 7 months when soil conditions make excavation
impractical.
(D) Repair and maintenance of existing installation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent repair, maintenance, replacement, or modification of existing overhead utility lines.
(E) Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are responsible for complying
with the requirements of this section, and prior to the final approval of any plat or development plan,
shall submit to the Planning Commission written instruments from the appropriate utility companies
showing that all necessary arrangements with the companies for installation of the utilities have been
made.
(F) Placement.
(1) All utility lines shall be placed within appropriate easements or dedicated public ways so
as to cause minimum conflict with other underground services. Whenever feasible, all utilities shall be
placed within the same trench.
(2) All utility companies shall submit annually to the Director of Public Works current maps
revealing locations of underground installation, whether the installations were installed prior to the
adoption of this section or hereafter. (Prior Code, § 4.13) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.08 COMMERCIAL BUILDING REHABILITATION PROGRAM.
(A) General provisions.
(1) Authority. Pursuant to M.S. § 469.184, as it may be amended from time to time, the City
of Hastings has been authorized to establish a program to provide rehabilitation loans to owners of
10
small and medium sized commercial buildings. In establishing a commercial building rehabilitation
program, the City Council is acting in all respects for the benefit of the citizens of the City of Hastings
to serve a public purpose in improving and otherwise promoting their health, welfare, and prosperity.
(2) Findings. The City Council of the City of Hastings finds that many commercial buildings
in the city are physically deteriorating, underused, economically inefficient, or functionally obsolete
and in need of rehabilitation to meet applicable building codes; that there is a need for a comprehensive
program for the rehabilitation of the commercial buildings to prevent economic and physical blight and
deterioration, to increase the tax base of the city, and to assist in the implementation of the
comprehensive plan for the city; that some owners of small and medium sized commercial buildings
are unable to afford rehabilitation loans on terms available in the private mortgage market or to obtain
rehabilitation loans on any terms because the private mortgage market is severely restricted; and that
the health, safety, and general welfare and the preservation of the quality of life of the residents of the
City of Hastings is dependent upon the preservation and rehabilitation of the commercial buildings.
(3) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT. M.S. § 469.184, as now in effect and as it may be amended from time to time.
AGENCY. The Housing and Redevelopment Authority in and for the City of Hastings.
PROGRAM. The commercial rehabilitation loan program authorized by the act and set
forth in division (B) below.
REGULATIONS. Regulations drafted or approved by the agency for the program.
SMALL OR MEDIUM SIZED COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A structure having a total
floor area not exceeding 40,000 square feet, the primary ground floor function of which is commercial
in nature, i.e., retail service, or office. Noncommercial usage on other floors of such a structure shall
not affect the structure qualifying as a small or medium sized commercial building.
(4) Administration. The agency is hereby authorized to administer the program in
accordance with the act and the regulations and resolutions adopted by the city for the issuance of
bonds, loans, or other obligations for the program.
(B) Program requirements.
(1) Regulations and forms. The agency shall adopt regulations setting forth uniform
procedures by which applications for loans shall be submitted and processed, and for determining
eligibility of borrowers, and other procedures necessary or desirable in carrying out the program. The
agency may, in the agency’s discretion and from time to time, prescribe and amend forms to be used by
an applicant in applying for financing under the program.
(2) Authorization of loans. Under the program, no loan shall be made or purchased until the
agency or its designee has reviewed the application relating to the loan and has approved the loan. In
approving applications for loans under the program, the agency or its designee, in addition to other
11
requirements and regulations, shall consider the following factors:
(a) The availability and affordability of private mortgage credit;
(b) The availability and affordability of other government programs;
(c) Whether the building is required, pursuant to any court order, statute, or ordinance, to
be repaired, improved, or rehabilitated; and
(d) Whether the proposed improvements will result in conformance with the building
and zoning codes and any design guidelines approved by the agency for commercial areas.
(3) General limitations. The following limitations shall apply to all loans under the program.
(a) No loan shall be made for a period exceeding 20 years.
(b) No loan shall exceed 80% of the estimated market value of the property to be
rehabilitated upon completion of the rehabilitation, less the principal balance of any prior mortgage or
contract for deed existing on the property at the time the loan is made, or $200,000, whichever is less.
(c) All monies loaned under this program shall be used only on property located within a
redevelopment area designated by the City Council.
(4) Interest Reduction Program. The agency may develop and administer an interest
reduction program, pursuant to M.S. § 469.012, Subdivision 7-9, as now in effect and as it may be
amended from time to time, to assist in the rehabilitation or preservation of small or medium sized
commercial buildings.
(5) Expiration date. The agency’s ability to authorize payment of interest reduction
assistance pursuant to this chapter shall expire on 12-31-2011. Interest reduction assistance payments
authorized prior to 12-31-2011 may be paid after 12-31-2011. (Prior Code, § 4.14)
§ 150.09 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
(A) Deleted in its entirety per Ord. 2011-5, 3rd Series 4-18-11
(B) Swimming pools.
(1) Definition. For the purpose of this division (B), the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SWIMMING POOL. Any enclosure above or below grade having a water depth greater
than 18 inches, and having a water surface area in excess of 100 square feet, which shall be used or
designed for swimming or wading purposes by anyone.
12
(2) Building permit required.
(a) A building permit shall be obtained prior to excavation, erection, or any phase of
pool construction.
(b) The application for permit shall include:
1. Type and size of pool; and
2. Site plan shall provide: Location of pool, location of house, garage, fencing, and
other improvements on the lot. Also the location of filter unit, pump, and wiring indicating the type of
the units; location of back-flush and drainage outlet; elevations and final treatments or finishes around
the pool. Also the location of overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, trees or other
features or heating unit shall be specified.
(3) Enclosure fence. All pools to be constructed or already constructed shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or wall of not less than 4 feet, nor more than 6 feet in height. The fence shall be
of a type not readily climbed by children. A dwelling house or accessory building may constitute part
of the enclosure. An above ground pool with a side wall height of 4 feet or greater does not require a
fence. All gates or openings shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device for security. Pool
gates shall have locking devices for off-season or non use.
(4) Life-saving and emergency equipment.
(a) One ring buoy not more than 15 inches in diameter with a 3/16-inch rope attached;
the rope shall be equal to the greater dimension of the pool.
(b) One life pole, or shepherd’s crook type pole, at least 10 feet long with blunt ends.
(5) Above-ground pools. Shall be protected in such a way that access or entry to the pool can
be secured when not in use.
(6) City water supply. There will be no cross-connections of the city water supply with any
other source of water supply for the pool. The line from the city water supply to the pool shall be
protected against backflow of polluted water by means of either an aid gap, vacuum breaker, or other
adequate device to prevent back siphonage.
(7) Outdoor pool enclosures. Outdoor pool enclosures, permanent or inflated shall not
exceed 18 vertical feet above the pool deck and shall conform to the Uniform Fire Code.
(8) Setback requirements. Pools or their outer most appurtenances shall not be located within
10 feet of any side or rear lot line nor within 6 feet of any principal structure or frost footing. Pools
shall not be located within any front yard.
(9) Lighting, ventilation, and electrical. When underwater lighting is used, the lights will be
spaced to provide illumination so that all portions of the pool and pool bottom may be readily seen
13
without glare. All electrical wiring shall conform to the National Electrical Code of the National Fire
Protection Association and shall be approved by the State Electrical Inspector, with particular reference
to Article 680-20 (National Electrical Codes).
(10) Overhead wiring clearance. Any overhead wiring shall not be installed above the
swimming pool or surrounding area extending 10 feet horizontally from the pool edge, or diving
structure, observation stands, towers, or platforms.
(11) Pool filters. Every pool shall be equipped with a recirculating system capable of filtering
the entire contents of the pool in 12 hours or less.
(a) Filters shall be capable of maintaining the clarity of the water through an 8-foot
depth.
(b) Filter capacity shall be such that it need not be cleaned more frequently than once
every 4 days under proper conditions of water and operation.
(c) All filters shall be equipped with at least 1 pressure vacuum or compound gauge
which shall be positioned in such a way as to determine the differential across the filter and the need
for cleaning.
(d) All pressure filter systems shall be equipped with an air release at the high point in
the system.
(e) Operating instructions shall be posted on every filter system. All valves shall be
properly designated indicating their purpose.
(f) When dissimilar metals are used in the construction of the filter, which set up
galvanic currents, then suitable provision shall be made to resist electrolytic corrosion.
(g) Filters shall be so designed and installed that they can be readily disassembled and
the filter elements removed.
(12) Disinfection and conditioning. Suitable methods shall be available to maintain a pH of
the pool water between 7.2 and 8.2 and to maintain an alkalinity of not less than 50 ppm. The devices
used to apply chlorine or its equivalent as a disinfectant shall be of the capacity as to maintain in all
areas of the swimming pool at all times at least 0.5 ppm. of free available residual chlorine or a level of
another approved disinfectant which shall be of at least a proven equivalent disinfecting strength as 0.5
ppm. of free available residual chlorine.
(13) Modifications.
(a) The City Council may make modifications in individual cases, upon showing of good
cause, with respect to height, nature, or location of the fence or wall, gates, latches, or the necessity
therefore, provided the degree protection is not reduced thereby.
14
(b) Upon the application of a property owner, the Council may grant extension of time
for compliance in individual cases, upon the showing of good cause; the extensions of time shall not
exceed 30 days at a time.
(14) Revocation of a permit. The Building Official may revoke any permit for failure to
comply with the regulations of this chapter. Before a permit is revoked, the pool owner shall have
notice in writing listing the failure or failures to comply with this chapter. The permit shall be reissued
upon proper application and upon proof that the deficiencies causing revocation have been corrected.
(15) Public pools. All pools used for any purpose other than private dwellings shall first have
plans and specifications approved by the Minnesota Health Department, and subsequently by the
Building Official.
(C) Deleted in its entirety per Ord. 2011-18, 3rd Series, 8-15-11
(D) Deleted in its entirety per Ord. 2011-5, 3rd Series, 4-18-11
§ 150.10 SURVEY INSPECTIONS.
The city shall require a top of block inspection and a final grade and site inspection. The top of
block survey inspection shall be paid for as a part of the building permit fee. The final grade and site
inspection costs shall be an additional fee to be collected with building permit charges. The amount of
the final grade and site inspection fee shall be set by the City Council by ordinance. (Prior Code,
§ 4.17) (Am. Ord. 480, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 150.11 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
(A) Permit required. An irrigation permit issued by the Building Department is required prior to
the installation of all turf and landscaping irrigation systems. The Building Department will conduct an
inspection to review the proper installation of a backflow prevention device in accordance with
Minnesota Health Department standards, and the installation of a rain sensor device in accordance with
M.S. § 103G.298, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Permit fee. The irrigation permit fee shall be as set by resolution adopted by the City Council.
(C) Installation standards. All new and existing outdoor meter installations are required to be
sheltered by a protective box that meets the standards established by the Public Works Department and
adopted by the City Council. All irrigation system installations within the public right-of-way shall be
installed as outlined in the Public Works Department irrigation installation guidelines. All property
owners are solely responsible for repairing, replacing, or relocating irrigation system installations as
needed within the public right-of-way. (Ord. 545, passed 3-6-2006) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
151.01 Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose
151.02 General provisions
151.03 Establishment of zoning districts
151.04 Floodway District (FW)
151.05 Flood Fringe District (FF)
151.06 General Flood Plain District (GF)
151.07 Wetland areas
151.08 Subdivisions
151.09 Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges
151.10 Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and placement of
recreational vehicles
151.11 Administration
151.12 Nonconforming uses
151.13 Amendments
151.98 Violations
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
(A) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the
City of Hastings, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
(B) Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the City of Hastings, Minnesota, are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) Methods used to analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards
established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
2
(3) National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This Ordinance is adopted
to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 - 78, as amended, so as to maintain
the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(C) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in
§151.01(B)(1) by provisions contained herein. (Prior Code, § 13.01) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd
Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14,
3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010)
§ 151.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Lands to which ordinance applies. This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within
the jurisdiction of the City of Hastings, Minnesota shown on the Official Zoning Map
and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway,
Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain Districts.
(B) Establishment of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map together with
all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this Ordinance. The attached material shall include:
(1) Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Minnesota and Incorporated
Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels therein numbered 27163C0438E and
27163C045IE, all dated February 3, 2010
(2) Flood Insurance Study for Dakota County, Minnesota and Incorporated
Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels therein numbered 27037C0144E,
27037C0163E, 27037C0164E, 27037C0257E, 27037C0259E, 27037C0276E,
27037C0277E, and 27037C0278E, all dated December 2, 2011. (Ord. 2011-23, 3rd Series,
Passed 10-03-11)
(C) Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional
flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain
that result from designation of a floodway.
(D) Interpretation.
(1) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City
of Hastings and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
state statutes.
3
(2) The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for
example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the
Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall make the necessary interpretation. All
decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground
elevations that existed on the site at the time the Community adopted its initial flood
plain ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map
showing the area within the 100-year flood plain if earlier, and other available technical
data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals and to
submit technical evidence.
(E) Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this Ordinance to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(F) Warning and disclaimer of liability. This Ordinance does not imply that areas
outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of
the City of Hastings or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(G) Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
(H) Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in
common usage and so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
BASEMENT. Means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of
excavation below ground level.
CONDITIONAL USE. Means a specific type of structure or land use listed in
the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and
4
with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or
building codes and upon a finding that:
(a) Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist.
(b) The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the
location of floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
Flood fringe is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the Flood
Insurance Study for Washington County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas and the
Flood Insurance Study for Dakota County and Incorporated Areas. (Ord. 2011-23, 3rd
Series, Passed 10-03-11)
FLOOD PLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse
and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry or
store the regional flood discharge.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a
building’s lowest floor.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
5
OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel,
watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard, or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. Means all uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.
REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the
segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most
typically constitute a reach.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not
for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term recreational
vehicle shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence
interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term “base flood” used in a flood
insurance study.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the
flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the
exemption criteria specified in §151.09(C)(1) of this Ordinance and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period,
any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after
damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial
6
damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
(b) Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic structure.” For the
purpose of this Ordinance, “historic structure” shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 59.1.
VARIANCES. Means a modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this Ordinance to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied
to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or
unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a City’s respective planning and
zoning enabling legislation.
WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For
purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following three attributes:
(a) Have a predominance of hydric soils;
(b) Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
(c) Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
(I) Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into
§151.02(B) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate
boundaries of the City of Hastings at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. If any of
these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Hastings after the date of
adoption of this Ordinance, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the
provisions of this Ordinance immediately upon the date of annexation into the City of
Hastings. (Prior Code, § 13.02) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord.
2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010)
Penalty, see § 10.99
7
§ 151.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
(A) Districts.
(1) Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps. (Ord. 2011-23, 3rd Series,
Passed 10-03-11)
(2) Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as floodway fringe. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas shown
on the:
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Washington County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas, as adopted in §151.02(B), as being within Zone AE but being located
outside of the floodway; and
(b) Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Dakota County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas, as adopted in §151.02(B), as being within Zone AE but being located
outside of the floodway. (Ord. 2011-23, 3rd Series, Passed 10-03-11)
(3) General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District shall
include those areas designated as Zone A or Zone AE without a floodway on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps adopted in §151.02(B).
(B) Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure
shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations which apply
to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and
General Flood Plain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in
§151.04, §151.05, and §151.06 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In addition,
a caution is provided here that:
(1) New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel
trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this Ordinance and
specifically §151.09.
(2) Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and
repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming
uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this Ordinance and
specifically §151.11.
(3) As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be certified
8
by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this
Ordinance and specifically as stated in §151.10 of this Ordinance.
(4) Floodplain modifications must equal a no net loss of floodplain storage.
(Prior Code, § 13.03) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02,
3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.04 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
(A) Permitted uses.
(1) General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing
strips.
(3) Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
(4) Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
(B) Standards for floodway permitted uses.
(1) The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
(2) The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
(3) The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall
not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment.
(C) Conditional uses.
(1) Structures accessory to the uses listed in §151.04(A) above and the uses
listed in §151.04(C) below.
(2) Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
(3) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
(4) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
9
(5) Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
(6) Placement of fill or construction of fences.
(7) Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or
new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the
exemptions and provisions of §151.09(C) of this Ordinance.
(8) Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures and levees or
dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to
or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
(9) Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
(10) Kennels and stables.
(D) Standards for floodway conditional uses.
(1) All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for
roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses
may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-
year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches
affected.
(2) All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in §151.10(D) of this Ordinance.
(3) The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
(4) Fill.
(a) Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in
the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or
other acceptable method.
(b) Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed
in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which includes an
erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
(c) As an alternative, and consistent with Subsection (b) immediately
above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-site
storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the
100-year or regional flood but only after the City has received an appropriate plan which
assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning
10
time available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the
Office of the County Recorder.
(5) Accessory Structures.
(a) Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
(b) Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
1. Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
2. So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on
the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
(c) Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classifications in the State
Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-
3 or FP-4 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory
structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at its
largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for
parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory structures must meet
the following additional standards:
1. The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
2. Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly flood proofed;
and
3. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be
a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the structure having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade
to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will
not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
(6) Storage of materials and equipment.
(a) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
11
(b) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the City.
(7) Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or
cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of
Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide structural works for flood control
intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the
floodway.
(8) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal
conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(9) Garbage and solid waste disposal.
(a) No conditional use permits for garbage and waste disposal sites shall be
issued for floodway areas.
(b) Provided further, there shall be no further encroachment upon the
floodway at existing sites. (Prior Code, § 13.04) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-
2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed
07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.05 FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
(A) Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as
permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing, underlying
zoning use districts exist, then any residential or non residential structure or use of a
structure or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use
does not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the standards
for Flood Fringe District “Permitted Uses” listed in §151.05(B) and the “Standards for all
Flood Fringe Uses” listed in §151.05(E).
(B) Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.
(1) All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so
that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than one
(1) foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such
elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected
thereon.
(2) As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a
minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest projection may
12
be internally flood proofed in accordance with §151.04(D)(5)(c).
(3) The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of onethousand
(1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a
conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in
accordance with §151.05(B)(1) of this ordinance. Placement of temporary fill for
emergency flood protection purposes may be approved by the Planning Director.
(4) The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
(5) The provisions of §151.05(E) of this Ordinance shall apply.
(6) Flood control works shall be subject to the provision of division (B) above
and the following provisions.
(a) The minimum height and design of any dikes, levees, flood walls, or
similar structural works shall be based upon the flood profile of the regional flood
confined between the structures subject to the following:
1. For urban areas, the minimum height and design of structural
works shall be at least three (3) feet above the elevation of the regional flood as confined
by structures, or at the elevation of the standards project flood, whichever is greater; and
2. Modifications and additions to existing structural works shall
assure that the work will provide a means of decreasing the flood damage potential in the
area. Any existing structural work which potentially threatens public health or safety
shall be modified or reconstructed in order to meet the standards contained herein within
a period of 5 years of the effective date of this chapter.
(b) Flood protection elevations and floodway limits which reflect proposed
measures for flood control shall not be effective until the measures are constructed and
operative unless the proposed measures will increase flood heights, in which event, the
regulatory flood protection elevations and flood plain limits shall reflect the anticipated
increases.
(C) Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in
accordance with §151.05(B)(1) - §151.05(B)(2) and or any use of land that does not
comply with the standards in Section §151.05(B)(3) - §151.05(B)(4) shall only be
allowable as a conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the
standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in §151.05(D) -§151.05(E) and
§151.10(D) of this Ordinance.
13
(D) Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.
(1) Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to
elevate a structure’s lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or abovegrade,
enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an
enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest
floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is
designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 3) it is
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted
alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards:
(a) Design and certification. The structure’s design and as-built condition
must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in compliance
with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be
designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these components
during times of flooding.
(b) Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed areas. Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to
internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
1. A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding
is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on
at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one-foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would
suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters without any form of human intervention; and
2. That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials
in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall
be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage.
(2) Basements, as defined by §151.02(H) of this Ordinance, shall be subject to
14
the following:
(a) Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
(b) Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection
elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with
§151.05(D)(3) of this Ordinance.
(3) All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be placed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood proofed in accordance with
the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally
dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having
the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be
permitted.
(4) When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and
gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control
works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted. The plan must clearly
specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of
the 100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City. The
plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the flood
plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
(5) Storage of materials and equipment.
(a) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited.
(b) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in
accordance with a plan approved by the City.
(6) The provisions of §151.05(E) of this Ordinance shall also apply.
(E) Standards for all flood fringe uses.
(1) All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
15
elevation not more than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. If a
variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals
must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of
flooding and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood
emergency response procedures exist.
(2) Commercial uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public
shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time
for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when
multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number
exceeds four (4) upon occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) Manufacturing and industrial uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having protracted
flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at
lower elevations subject to requirements set out in §151.05(E)(2) above. In considering
permit applications, due consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose
business requires that it be located in flood plain areas.
(4) Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected
by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above
the 100-year flood elevation - FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction
and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(5) Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity
of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system
where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the Official
Zoning Map.
(6) Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in §151.09(C).
(7) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. (Prior Code, § 13.05) (Ord. 2009-12,
3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord.
2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
16
§ 151.06 GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.
(A) Permissible uses.
(1) The uses listed in §151.04(A) of this Ordinance shall be permitted uses.
(2) All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria pursuant to §151.06(B) below. §151.04 shall apply if the proposed use is in the
Floodway District and §151.05 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe
District.
(B) Procedures for floodway and flood fringe determinations within the general
flood plain district.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the
General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the
following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the
determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use
is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
(a) A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be
occupied by the proposed development, and high water information.
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground,
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and spatial arrangement
of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and the location and elevations of
streets.
(c) Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and
downstream, and soil types.
(d) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of
the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation. Procedures consistent
with Minnesota Regulations 1983, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer
or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation
methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist
prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or expert shall:
17
(a) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
(b) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a
hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
(c) Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood
without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage increase than .5’ shall
be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages would
result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach
shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City. The City must formally accept
the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District
boundary or deny the permit application. The City, prior to official action, may submit
the application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission
for review and comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District Boundaries have
been determined, the City shall refer the matter back to the Zoning Administrator who
shall process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of §151.04
and §151.05 of this Ordinance. (Prior Code, § 13.06) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed
12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series,
passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§151.06.5 WETLAND AREAS.
(A) Review criteria. Proposals to disturb wetland areas will be reviewed with the
following criteria:
(1) Achieve no net loss of wetlands in the Vermillion River Watershed.
(2) Replace lost wetlands in the same subwatershed whenever possible.
(3) Provide equal or greater functions and values for lost wetlands at the
replacement ratios dictated by the Wetland Conservation Act.
(4) Avoid direct or indirect wetland disturbance in accordance with State and
Federal requirements and approved local wetland management plans.
(5) Limit the use of high quality wetlands for stormwater management where
other alternatives exist.
(6) Avoid fragmentation of natural areas and corridors when feasible and
mitigate when unavoidable.
18
(B) Regulation. No person or political subdivision shall drain, fill, excavate, or
otherwise alter a wetland or public waters wetland without first submitting a Wetland
application and obtaining approval from the Local Governmental Unit (LGU) with
jurisdiction over the activity. (Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14,
3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.07 SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason
of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots
within the flood plain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the
Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions
shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building
sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all
subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall
be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(B) Floodway/flood fringe determinations in the general flood plain district. In the
General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the information required in
§151.06(B) of the Ordinance to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway
and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
subdivision site.
(C) Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood
hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year
flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special
flood hazard area designation will be requested. (Prior Code, § 13.08) (Ord. 2009-12,
3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord.
2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.08 PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.
(A) Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer,
and water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
19
(B) Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located
within the flood plain shall comply with §151.04 and §151.05 of this Ordinance.
Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or
interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or
safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor
or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
(C) On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public utilities are
not provided:
(1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
(2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the State’s current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment
systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section. (Prior Code, § 13.07)
(Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-
2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.09 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND
PLACEMENT OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
(A) New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by §151.07 of this
Ordinance.
(B) The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood plain
districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in
compliance with §151.05 of this Ordinance. If vehicular road access for pre-existing
manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with §151.05(E)(1), then
replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s)
develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the City.
(1) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
20
(C) Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in
§151.09(C)(1) below shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and as
specifically spelled out in §151.09(C)(3) - §151.09(C)(4) below.
(1) Exemption. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance if they are placed in any of the areas listed in §151.09(C)(2) below and further
they meet the following criteria:
(a) Have current licenses required for highway use.
(b) Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system,
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in
campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational vehicle has no
permanent structural type additions attached to it.
(c) The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any
pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
(2) Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles.
(a) Individual lots or parcels of record.
(b) Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
(c) Existing condominium type associations.
(3) Recreational vehicles exempted in §151.09(C)(1) lose this exemption when
development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the
recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory structure such as a garage or
storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will
then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing
requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §151.04 and §151.05 of this
Ordinance. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to
the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood free
location should flooding occur.
(4) New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any
existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the
following:
21
(a) Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle and its contents are
placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road
access to the site exists in accordance with §151.05(E)(1) of this Ordinance. No fill
placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this Section shall increase flood
stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
(b) All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of
(a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the
following provisions and the provisions of §151.10(b) of the Ordinance. The applicant
must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during
the 100-year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified
individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of §151.09(C)(1)(a) and (b) of this
Ordinance will be met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or
contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with §151.08(C) of this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 13.09) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02,
3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 151.10 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Zoning administrator. A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by
the City shall administer and enforce this Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator finds a
violation of the provisions of this Ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
person responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in §151.12
of this Ordinance.
(B) Permit requirements.
(1) Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be secured prior to the erection,
addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or
alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use
of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic
system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a
structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to
the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment
within the flood plain.
22
(2) Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate
to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall
include the following where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures,
fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream
channel.
(3) State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
(4) Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming use.
It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been
issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms
to the requirements of this Ordinance.
(5) Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans, permits,
variances and certificates of zoning compliance. Permits, conditional use permits, or
certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans
and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement,
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance, and punishable as provided by §151.12 of this Ordinance.
(6) Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the
finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance. Flood proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or registered architect.
(7) Record of first floor elevation. The Building Official shall maintain a
record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and
alterations or additions to existing structures in the flood plain. The Zoning Administrator
shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and
additions to structures are flood proofed.
23
(8) Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning Administrator shall
notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds
of public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as
adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification
shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
(9) Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease the 100-
year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the
date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said
technical or scientific data.
(C) Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
(1) Rules. The Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall operate in
accordance with City Code Chapter 30.02 and may exercise all of the powers conferred
on such Boards by State law.
(2) Administrative review. The Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or
administration of this Ordinance.
(3) Variances. The Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals may authorize
upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under
consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and
zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such variance, the Board of
Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions
that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this Ordinance, any other zoning
regulations in the Community, and in the respective enabling legislation that justified the
granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses
prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory
flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those
required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
24
(a) Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(b) Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause,
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(c) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(4) Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals
of an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing and give due notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of
Adjustment shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
(5) Decisions. The Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall arrive at a
decision on such appeal or variance within 60 days. In passing upon an appeal, the Board
of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other public
official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the
reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance the Board of Zoning Adjustment and
Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those specified in
§151.10(D)(6), which are in conformity with the purposes of this Ordinance. Violations
of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance punishable under
§151.12. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
(6) Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustment
and Appeals may be made, and as specified in this community’s official controls and also
by Minnesota Statutes.
(7) Flood insurance notice and record keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
25
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as
$25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases
risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial
report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.
(D) Conditional uses. The Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall hear and
decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this Ordinance. Applications
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward the application to
Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals for consideration.
(1) Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals,
an application for a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by
mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten
days notice of the hearing.
(2) Decisions. The City shall arrive at a decision on a conditional use within 60
days. In granting a conditional use permit the City shall prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards, in addition to those specified in §151.10(D)(6), which are in conformity
with the purposes of this Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance punishable under § 151.12. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
(3) Procedures to be followed by the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals
in passing on conditional use permit applications within all flood plain districts.
(a) Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information and
additional information as deemed necessary by the Board of Zoning Adjustment and
Appeals for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:
1. Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, flood proofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of
the stream channel; and
2. A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be
occupied by the proposed development, and high water information;
26
3. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of all
proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water
supply; sanitary facilities; photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation
upstream and downstream; and soil types;
4. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line
of the stream; and
5. Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water
supply and sanitary facilities.
(b) Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection (a) to a
designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where
necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities,
the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and
other technical matters.
(c) Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall determine the specific flood
hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood
hazard.
(4) Factors upon which the decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustment and
Appeals shall be based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the Board of
Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this Ordinance, and:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or other hydraulic
structures.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
27
(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
(j) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(l) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this Ordinance.
(5) Time for acting on application. The City shall act on an application in the
manner described above within 60 days from receiving the application, except that where
additional information is required pursuant to §151.10(D)(3) of this Ordinance. The
Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals shall render a written decision within 60 days
from the receipt of such additional information.
(6) Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon consideration of the
factors listed above and the purpose of this Ordinance, the Board of Zoning Adjustment
and Appeals shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
(b) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
(c) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(d) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory
storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
(e) Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code
and this Ordinance. The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing measures are
consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for
the particular area. (Prior Code, § 13.10) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009;
Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-
2011) Penalty, see § 10.99
28
§ 151.11 NONCONFORMING USES.
(A) A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before June 6,
1977 but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance may be
continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in
§151.02(H) of this Ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of §151.11(A)(1) -
§151.11(A)(5) of this Ordinance.
(1) No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that
increases its nonconformity.
(2) Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that
structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation in
accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru
FP-4 flood proofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as
further restricted in §151.11(A)(3) and §151.11(A)(6) below.
(3) The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming
structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market value of
the structure unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied. The cost of all structural
alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a
reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the
structure must meet the standards of §151.04 or §151.05 of this Ordinance for new
structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe
District, respectively.
(4) If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this Ordinance. The Assessor shall
notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses that have
been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
(5) If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined
in §151.02(H) of this Ordinance, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this Ordinance. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or
new structures in §151.04, §151.05 or §151.06 will apply depending upon whether the
use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain District,
respectively.
29
(6) If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §151.02(H) of this
Ordinance, from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the
existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to
the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition
and the existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements of §151.04 or
§151.05 of this Ordinance for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. (Prior Code, § 13.11) (Ord. 2009-
12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord.
2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.12 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
(A) Violations of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of
its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as defined by law.
(B) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Hastings from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions may
include but are not limited to:
(1) In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator
and Local Government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it
including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits,
orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for
denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The Community must act in
good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct Ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(2) When an Ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately
investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the
official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to
the appropriate Department of Natural Resources’ and Federal Emergency Management
Agency Regional Office along with the Community’s plan of action to correct the
violation to the degree possible.
30
(3) The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this Ordinance and all other official controls and the nature and extent of
the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction
or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or development
immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the Community. If the
construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may
either:
(a) Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made
within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the
official controls.
(b) Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30-days.
(Ord. 2011-23, 3rd Series, passed 10-03-11)
(4) If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall
constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance and shall be prosecuted accordingly.
The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period
notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the
violation of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010)
§ 151.13 AMENDMENTS.
The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from
flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has
been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
All amendments to this Ordinance, including amendments to the Official Zoning
Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources
prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive
prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be
given 10-days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this Ordinance
and said notice shall include a draft of the Ordinance amendment or technical study under
consideration. (Prior Code, § 13.12) (Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am.
Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-2010; Ord. 2010-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-06-2010)
31
§ 151.98 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails
to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (Prior Code, § 10.99) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Prior Code, § 13.99)
(Ord. 2009-12, 3rd Series, passed 12-7-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-02, 3rd Series, passed 3-1-
2010) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2011-23, 3rd Series, Passed 10-03-11)
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 152: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
152.01 Statutory authorization
152.02 Findings
152.03 Purpose
152.04 Definitions
152.05 Scope and effect
152.06 Storm water management plan approval procedures
152.07 Plan review procedure
152.08 Approval standards
152.09 Illicit Discharges and Connections
152.10 Other controls
152.98 Violations
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.351, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS.
The City of Hastings hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands,
woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion, and areas containing restrictive soils
adversely affects the public health, safety, and general welfare by impacting water quality and
contributing to other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of
environmental resources, and hindering the ability of the City of Hastings to provide adequate water,
sewage, flood control, and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures
may be required for the protection of persons and property in the areas and in areas which may be
affected by unplanned land usage. (Prior Code, § 15.02) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
2
§ 152.03 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve, and enhance the natural resources within the
City of Hastings and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or
incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an
adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally
sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land disturbing and
development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed
review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for the areas,
thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development and protection of water quality
and natural areas. (Prior Code, § 15.03) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 152.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context dearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or subdivision
approval.
BANKFULL CHANNEL WIDTH. The channel width of a stream, creek, or river at bankfull
stage.
BANKFULL STAGE. The water level in a stream channel, creek, or river where the flow just
begins to leave the main channel and enter the active floodplain.
CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant
pollution.
DEAD STORAGE. The volume of space located below the overflow point of a basin, pond or
landlocked basin.
DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure, including wetlands, for
the temporary storage of runoff which has a storm water outlet and may have a permanent pool of
water.
DUAL PURPOSE POND. A detention facility without a permanent pool that functions as both a
storm water ponding basin and as a sedimentation basin. Sediment removal is accomplished through
the use of filter media surrounding a slotted outlet pipe, with an overflow outlet set at an elevation that
provides for minimum required run off volume and sediment storage.
FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is
synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of
Hastings.
3
FLOOD PLAIN. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake, or watercourse, which
have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood (The critical 100-year storm).
FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of the watercourse and those portions
of the adjoining flood plains which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood
discharge.
HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing
season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil, or on a substrate
that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, and the construction of any structure.
MS4 – Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) (Ord. 2011-20, 3rd Series Passed 9-6-11)
MEANDER. A sinuous bend of a river, stream, or creek.
MEANDER BELT. The area between lines drawn tangential to the extreme limits of fully
developed meanders.
MINIMUM IMPACT ALIGNMENT. Is the alignment for a proposed road, street, utility, path or
access that creates the smallest area of impact to a buffer, waterway, or floodplain. For activities that
cross a buffer, waterway, or floodplain the minimum impact alignment is one that crosses
perpendicular, or near perpendicular, to the longitudinal orientation of the buffer, waterway, or
floodplain as reasonable to serve to intended purpose of the improvement.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER (OHW) LEVEL. The boundary of water basins, watercourses,
public waters, and public waters wetlands and:
(1) The ordinary high water level is an elevation delineating the highest water level that has
been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly the
point where the natural vegetation changes from predominately aquatic to predominately terrestrial;
(2) For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of
the channel; and,
(3) For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the
normal summer pool.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, association, or governmental
entity.
PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subdivision 15, as
amended.
4
REDEVELOPMENT. The rebuilding, repair, or alteration of a structure, land surface, road or
street, or facility that creates less than 1 acre of new impervious surface, and disturbs, replaces, or alters
more than 1 acre of existing impervious surface. Note: for the purposes of these Rules, if an activity
creates more than 1 acre of new or additional impervious surface, the activity is considered new
development and exceptions in these Rules for redevelopment do not apply to the increased (new)
impervious surface exceeding 1 acre.
REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average
frequency in the magnitude of the critical 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is
synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD in the Flood Insurance Study.
RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or man made structure that provides for the
storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
SEDIMENT. Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground,
including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, mobile or manufactured homes, and
other similar items.
WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is
usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water no deeper than 6 feet. For
purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following 3 attributes:
(1) Have a predominance of hydric soils;
(2) Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and
(3) Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of the vegetation. (Prior Code, §
15,04) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
5
§ 152.05 SCOPE AND EFFECT.
(A) Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a permit to
allow land disturbing activities must submit a storm water management plan to the Public Works
Department. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities
shall be issued until approval of the storm water management plan or a waiver of the approval
requirements has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The
provisions of §152.09 apply to all land, public or private, located within the City of Hastings.
(B) Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
(1) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the City
Council on or before the effective date of this chapter;
(2) Any land disturbing activity for which plans have been approved by the watershed
management organization within 6 months prior to the effective date of this chapter;
(3) A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this
chapter;
(4) Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles
gardening, tree planting, deck construction, and other types of construction disturbing 1/3 acre or less;
or
(5) Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
(C) Waiver. The City Council may waive any requirement of this chapter upon making a finding
that compliance with the requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of the
requirement will not adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in §152.06. The City
Council may require as a condition of the waiver, the dedication or construction, or agreement to
dedicate or construct as may be necessary to adequately meet the standards and requirements. (Prior
Code, § 15.05) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 152.06 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
(A) Application.
(1) A written application for storm water management plan approval, along with the
proposed storm water management plan, shall be filed with the Public Works Department and shall
include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use
is permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence
showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this chapter. Prior to applying
for approval of a storm water management plan, an applicant may have the storm water management
plans reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city.
6
(2) One electronic pdf drawings and other required information shall be submitted to the
Public Works Department and shall be accompanied by all required fees for processing and approval as
set forth in §152.07(E), and a bond when required by § 152.07(D) in the amount to be calculated in
accordance with that section. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project
and suitable for the review to be performed. The drawing scale may range from a maximum of 1 inch
equals 20 feet to a minimum of 1 inch equals 100 feet. Electronic copies of the drawings shall also be
submitted in a pdf format or other electronic format as specified by the Public Works Department.
(B) Storm water management plan. At a minimum, the storm water management plan shall
contain the following information:
(1) Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately
adjacent areas, including:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, the project name, the section, township and
range, north direction arrow, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets;
(b) Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property and giving the information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads,
utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks;
(c) Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land
but in no case having a contour interval greater than 2 feet;
(d) A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters, and wetlands located on and
immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be
found in the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body
or wetland by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, the Dakota County Soil and Water Conservation District, Vermillion River Watershed Joint
Powers Organization, and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers;
(e) Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems and natural
drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what
rate storm water is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or
wetland, and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects;
(f) A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to
be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps
to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable including special rotations locating where
erosion soils exist on the site;
(g) Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal; and
(h) One hundred-year flood plain, flood fringes and floodways.
(2) Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
7
(a) Locations dimensions including total acreage of all proposed land disturbing
activities and any phasing and phasing time frame of those activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion control measures and storm
water BMP’s necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter;
(d) Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land disturbing activity
including the installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements
of this chapter (in general the erosion control measure shall be installed prior to any grading activity);
and
(e) Provisions for maintenance of the construction site erosion control measures during
construction.
(f) Contractor is responsible for submitting to the City an erosion control inspection form
after every half inch or greater rain event and at a minimum of one time per week. A rain gage must
be present on site.
(g) Erosion control and erosion control inspection priority must be given to areas
susceptible to erosion due to site topography, soil characteristics, quality of receiving water, state of
construction, and weather conditions.
(3) Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the
existing site map showing the site changes including:
(a) Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided above or as
required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features;
(b) A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances
and the location, type, size, and description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to
the site as part of the development;
(c) A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and at what rate
storm water will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will
be allowed to collect;
(d) The proposed size, alignment, and intended use of any structures to be erected on the
site;
(e) A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced,
including a description of the surfacing material to be used; and
8
(f) Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the
applicant and/or the city is necessary for the review of the project. (Prior Code, § 15.06) (Ord. 2010-
11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010) (Ord. 2015-06, 3rd Series, passed 4-06-15_
§ 152.07 PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.
(A) Process. Applicant prepared storm water management plans meeting the requirements of
§152.06 shall be submitted to the Public Works Department for review in accordance with the
standards of §152.08. City Council action on the storm management plan must be accomplished within
120 days following the date the application for approval is filed with the Public Works Department.
(B) Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire 1
year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan.
However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Public
Works Department for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the
requested extension, the Public Works Department may grant an extension of not greater than 1 single
year. Receipt of any request for extension shall be acknowledged by the Public Works Department
within 15 days. The Public Works Department shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of
receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.
(C) Conditions. A storm water management plan may be approved subject to compliance with
conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements contained in this chapter are met.
The conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed
development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other
facilities, require placement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work
over time, require alteration of the site design to insure buffering, and require the conveyance to the
City of Hastings or other public entity of certain lands or interests herein.
(D) Performance bond. Prior to approval of any storm water management plan, the applicant shall
submit an agreement to construct the required physical improvements, to dedicate property or
easements, or to comply with the conditions as may have been agreed to. The agreement shall be
accompanied by a performance bond to cover the amount of the established cost of complying with the
agreement. The agreement and performance bond shall guarantee completion and compliance with
conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended in accordance with division (B) above.
The performance bond amount shall be determined by the Director of Public Works, and shall be set at
125% of the estimated cost of the required improvement. The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of
any agreement and performance bond shall be determined by the Hastings City Council or any official
of the City of Hastings as may be designated by resolution of the City Council.
(E) Fees. All applications for storm water management plan approval shall be accompanied by a
processing and approval fee as required by ordinance. (Prior Code, § 15.07) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series,
passed 6-21-2010)
9
§ 152.08 APPROVAL STANDARDS.
(A) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation
basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other
appropriate controls as appropriate. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or
flooding of the site or receiving channels or a wetland.
(B) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials (including garbage,
debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed
of off-site and not allowed to be carried off by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system.
(C) Tracking. Each site shall have graveled roads, access drives, and parking areas of sufficient
width and a length providing a minimum of 50 feet of maintained graveled surface both from the edge
of the public or private roadway to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private
roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday. Failure to keep the public or private roadway clean may
result in the city ordering construction halted until the time as the roadways are properly clean.
(D) Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction until
control measures are in place with a straw bale, silt fence, or equivalent barrier meeting accepted
design criteria, standards and specifications included in the City’s Builders Handbook and Public
Works Design Manual or otherwise approved by the City.
(E) Site erosion control.
(1) Construction Erosion Control
(a) Erosion and sediment control measures shall be consistent with Best Management
Practices (BMPs), included in the City’s Builders Handbook and Public Works
Design Manual or otherwise approved by the City, and shall be sufficient to retain
sediment on site. The City may at its discretion use turbidity measurements as an
indicator of potential non-compliance with erosion and sediment control measures
taken. Turbidity measurements will be in accordance with VRWJPO Standards.
(b) All temporary erosion and sediment controls shall be installed on all down gradient
perimeters before commencing the land disturbing activity, and left in place and
maintained as needed until removal is approved by the City after the site had been
stabilized. All permanent erosion control measures shall be installed and operational
per the design and as approved by the City.
(c) For projects disturbing more than 1 acre:
(1) Erosion and sediment controls, and final stabilization of the site, shall meet the
most current requirements of the General Permit Authorization to Discharge
Storm Water Associated With Construction Activity Under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program
Permit (NPDES General Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollutant
10
Control Agency;
(2) All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed and constructed to
withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 10-year frequency storm without
erosion.
(3) If the activity is taking place on a site where soils are currently disturbed (e.g., a
tilled agricultural site that is being developed), areas that will not be graded as
part of the development and areas that will not be stabilized according to the
timeframes specified in the NPDES General Construction permit Part IV, B.S.,
shall be seeded with a temporary or permanent cover before commencing the
proposed land disturbing activity.
(d) All activities on the site shall be phased and/or conducted in a logical sequence to
minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
(e) All disturbed ground left inactive e for 14 or more days shall be stabilized by seeding
and mulching, sodding, coverings, or other equivalent control measure. Straw, hay,
or other vegetative mulch shall be disc anchored. Geotextile or other approved
covering shall be anchored in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
(f) Contractor is responsible for submitting to the City an erosion control inspection
form after every half inch or greater rain event and at a minimum of one time per
week. A rain gage must be present on site.
(g) Erosion control and erosion control inspection priority must be given to areas
susceptible to erosion due to site topography, soil characteristics, quality of receiving
water, state of construction, and weather conditions.
(F) Storm water management criteria for new development or re-development projects with
land disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre. (Ord. 2011-20 3rd Series, Passed on 9-
6-11). Green infrastructure techniques and practices (ie. infiltration, filtration,
evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry, green roofs) are to
be given highest priority to meet the water quality treatment requirements.
Infiltration/filtration options are the preferred approach to satisfying the water quality
treatment requirements of the NPDES General Construction Permit. Rate and volume
calculations are to utilize NOAA Atlas 14 precipitation frequency estimates.
(1) Conditions
(a) Post Construction Water Quality.
(1) Post construction storm water runoff quality measures shall meet the standard
for the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water Associated With
Construction Activity Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System/State Disposal System Permit Program Permit (NPDES General
Construction Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
11
(2) Storm water discharges of Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and Total Phosphorus
(TP) shall have no net increase from pre-project conditions for new development
and a net reduction from pre-project conditions for re-development.
(3 ) Circumstances where the TSS and TP requirements cannot be reasonably
achieved on site shall be addressed through mitigation.
(a) Mitigation projects shall be selected in the following order of preference:
(1) Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives
runoff from the original construction activity.
(2) Locations within the same Department of Natural Resource (DNR)
catchment area as the original construction activity.
(3) Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area up-stream.
(4) Locations anywhere within the City of Hastings.
(b) Mitigation projects must involve the creation of new structural stormwater
BMPs, retrofit of existing structural stormwater BMPs, or the use of a
propertly designed regional structural stormwater BMP.
(c) Routine maintenance of structural BMPs cannot be used to meet mitigation.
(d) Mitigation projects shall be completed within 24 months after the start of the
original construction activity.
(e) The long term maintenance for stormwater BMPs shall be determined prior
to construction activity.
(f) If monetary payment is received to satisfy mitigation processes then
payment shall be applied to a public stormwater project and comply with
City Ordinance 152.08(F)(1)(a)(3)(1)(a-d)
(b) Peak Runoff Rate.
(1) Hydrologic models and design methodologies used for the determination of
runoff and analysis of storm water management infrastructure shall be signed by
a registered professional engineer and approved by the Engineering Department.
(2) Runoff rates for proposed land disturbing activities greater than or equal to one
acre shall:
(a) Utilize an existing condition in the runoff calculation as defined as the land
cover condition existing in the year 2005.
12
(b) Not exceed existing runoff rates for the 1-year 24 hour, 10-year 24 hour,
100-year 24 hour, and 100 year 4 day storm events.
(c) Volume Runoff Criteria.
(1) Hydrologic models and design methodologies used for the determination of
runoff and analysis of storm water management infrastructure shall be signed by
a registered professional engineer and approved by the Engineering Department.
(2) Runoff volume for proposed land disturbing activities greater than or equal to
one acre shall:
(a) Utilize an existing condition in the runoff calculation as defined as the land
cover condition existing in a pre-project condition.
(b) Not exceed the existing pre-project runoff rates for the 2-year 24 hour storm
event.
(3) Exceptions where a lessor volume control will be acceptable.
(a) Infiltration, as listed in 152.08(F)(2)(a), prohibit volume control.
(b) Non-infiltration green technologies are implemented to the maximum extent
possible.
(c) Outlets from landlocked basins with a tributary drainage area of greater than
or equal to 100 acres, provided:
(1) Outlets are consistent with other portions of the City Ordinances
(2) Outlets have been analyzed for any detrimental downstream impacts,
riparian impacts, and habitat impacts. The analysis shall include:
(a) Use a hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory to
analyze runoff for the design or analysis of flows and water levels;
(b) Ensure a hydrologic analysis is consistent with the Stormwater
Runoff Control Criteria of the City Ordinances.
(c ) Ensure the outlet does not create adverse downstream flooding or
water quality conditions, or materially affect stability of
downstream major waterways;
(d) Maintain dead storage within the basin to the maximum extent
possible while preventing damage to property adjacent to the basin;
13
(e) Ensure that the low floors of new structures adjacent to the basin
are set consistent with the Floodplain Alterations Rule; and
(f) Ensure that proposed development tributary to the land-locked
basin has incorporated runoff volume control practices to the extent
practical.
(d) Artificial drainage, flow obstruction, and diversions involving waterways,
public waters, and wetlands with drainage areas of 640 acres or more,
provided:
(1) Alterations and diversions are consistent with other portions of the City
Ordinances
(2) Alterations and diversions have been analyzed for any detrimental
downstream impacts, riparian impacts, and habitat impacts. The analysis
shall include:
(a) Provide reasonable necessity for such drainage alteration or
diversion to improve or protect human health and safety, or to
improve or protect aquatic resources;
(b) Ensure reasonable care has been taken to avoid unnecessary injury
to upstream and downstream land;
(c ) Ensure the utility or benefit accruing to the land on which the
drainage will be altered reasonably outweighs the gravity of the
harm resulting to the land receiving the burden; and
(d ) Ensure the drainage alteration or diversion is being accomplished
by reasonably improving and aiding the normal and natural system
of drainage according to its reasonable carrying capacity, or in the
absence of a practicable natural drain, a reasonable and feasible
artificial drainage system is being adopted.
(e) Drainage alterations, diversions, and landlocked basin outlets shall
be provided with stable channels and outfall.
(d ) Design Criteria
(1) Minimize connected impervious surfaces.
(2) Vegetation used in conjunction with infiltration systems must be tolerant of
urban pollutants and the range of soil moisture conditions anticipated.
(3) Infiltration and filtration areas must be fenced or otherwise protected from
disturbance before the land disturbing project begins.
14
(2) Limitations of using infiltration techniques to achieve storm water management.
Filtration and other green technologies should be considered instead.
(a) Conditions
(1) Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.
(2) Where industrial areas with exposed materials are capable of leeching into the
soil
(3) Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial stormwater
under an NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater Permit issued by the Agency.
(4) Where high level of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be mobilized.
(5) Where less than three (3) feet separates the bottom of the infiltration system to
the elevation of the top of bedrock or seasonally saturated soils (ie. water table).
(6) Type D Soils (clay)
(7) Where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour.
(8) Within an emergency response area, as defined by the Drinking Water Surface
Management Area (DWSMA).
(9) Within the one year travel zone of a municipal or other community supply well
as defined in the Hastings Well Head Protection Plan (WHPP). The following
design requirements need be adhered to if infiltration for volume control is to be
considered as an option:
(a) Pretreatment of stormwater runoff is designed to protect infiltration system
from clogging with sediment and to protect groundwater quality.
(b) Hydrological soil group classification and saturated infiltration rate shall
comply with the current VRWJPO rules.
(c) Site specific infiltration or hydraulic conductivity measurements shall be
performed by a licensed soil scientist or engineer.
(d) Infiltration rates shall reflect the least permeable horizon within the first five
feet below the bottom of the infiltration system.
(e) Infiltration system shall be capable of infiltrating the required volume within
72 hours.
(10)Within 100 feet of a private well unless specifically allowed by an approved
15
WHPP.
(11)Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet down gradient of active karst features.
(12)Within linear projects where the lack of available or obtainable right-of-way
prevents the installation of volume control practices.
(3) Long term maintenance of structural stormwater BMPs
(a) A legal document shall be executed that determines the party responsible for long
term maintenance of the stormwater BMP. Should the BMP be on private property, the
agreement shall allow the City to enter the property to inspect, notify owner of
maintenance duties, and if necessary conduct necessary maintenance to maintain normal
functionality of the BMP. Costs to perform maintenance shall be assessed to the
property owner.
(G) Wetlands
(1) General Provisions
(a) Any drainage, filling, excavation, or other alteration of a public waters wetland or
wetland shall be conducted in compliance with Minnesota Statues, §103G.245, Wetland Conservation
Act (WCA), Minnesota Rules 8420, and regulations adopted hereunder.
(b) In order to preserve WCA exemption or no loss determination, projects involving
excavation in Types 1, 2, 6, and 7 wetlands must demonstrate a beneficial purpose, such as habitat or
water quality improvements, and minimize loss of wetland function as determined by the City.
(c) A high quality (or equivalent value) public waters wetland or wetland (as determined
by methods acceptable to the VRWJPO for vegetative diversity) may not be used for stormwater
management and treatment unless the use will not adversely affect the function and public value of the
wetland and other alternatives do not exist. Runoff shall not be discharged directly into a high quality
public water wetlands or wetland (as determined by methods acceptable to the VRWJPO for vegetative
diversity) without pretreatment of the runoff.
(2) No Net Loss and Wetland Alteration
(a) No permits will be granted until the WCA replacement plan is approved or
exemption certificate is obtained. Wetland replacement/mitigation citing must follow the priority order:
(1) Mitigation on-site
(2) Mitigation within the same minor subwatershed as established by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources for the “1979 Watershed Mapping Project” pursuant to Minnesota
Laws 1977, chapter. 455, section33, subdivision 7, paragraph (a).
(3) Mitigation within the JPO boundary
16
(4) Mitigation within Dakota County
(b) Transportation projects shall pursue wetland mitigation projects to the extent
practical using the criteria above. However, this does not preclude the use of the BWSR Replacement
Program.
(3) Wetland Buffer Areas
(a) Application. Buffer areas abutting all rivers, streams, and wetlands as identified in
Figure 4 of the City’s Water Management Plan.
(b) Classification. A wetlands functional assessment for vegetative diversity will be
completed with each wetland and public waters wetland, delineated for a project and buffers
established according to the management classification in the following table. Figure 4 and 8 in the
Water Management Plan, as adopted in 2009, delineates three different quality standards for wetlands.
All wetlands shown on Figure 8 not shown on Figure 4 are considered Low Quality. Buffers on
wetlands begin at the delineated edge of the wetland; (the line where hydrology, vegetation, and soils
indicates a change between upland and wetland).
(1) Exceptional Quality Wetland:
(a) Average Buffer Width: 50ft
(b) Minimum Buffer Width: 30ft
(2) High Quality Wetland:
(a) Average Buffer Width: 40ft
(b) Minimum Buffer Width: 30ft
(3) Medium Quality Wetland:
(a) Average Buffer Width: 30ft
(b) Minimum Buffer Width: 25ft
(4) Low Quality Wetland:
(a) Average Buffer Width: 25ft
(b) Minimum Buffer Width: 16.5ft
(c) Buffer area requirements. Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in buffer areas,
the retention of such vegetation in an undisturbed state is required unless approval to replace such
vegetation is received. A buffer has acceptable vegetation if it:
17
(1) Has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses that has been uncultivated or
unbroken for at least 5 consecutive years; or,
(2) Has an overstory of trees and/or shrubs that has been uncultivated or unbroken
for at least 5 consecutive years; or,
(3) Contains a mixture of the plant communities in Criteria (c)(1) and (c)(2) above
that has been uncultivated or unbroken for at least 5 years.
(d) Maintenance of Buffer Areas. Buffers shall be staked and protected in the field prior
to construction unless the vegetation and the condition of the buffer are considered inadequate. Existing
conditions vegetation will be considered unacceptable if:
(1) Topography or sparse vegetation tends to channelize the flow of surface water
(2) Some other reason the vegetation is unlikely to retain nutrients and sediment
(e) Requirements for Replanting. Where buffer vegetation and conditions are
unacceptable, or where approval has been obtained to replant, buffers shall be replanted and maintained
according to the following criteria:
(1) Buffers shall be planted with a native seed mix approved by MnDOT, BWSR,
NRCS or the Dakota County SWCD, with the exception of a one-time planting with an annual nurse or
cover crop. Plantings of native forbs and grasses may be substituted for seeding. All substitutions must
be approved by the City. Groupings/clusters of native trees and shrubs, of species and at densities
appropriate to site conditions, shall also be planted throughout the buffer area.
(2) The seed mix and planting shall be broadcast/installed according to MnDOT,
BWSR, NRCS or Dakota County SWCD specifications. The selected seed mixes and plantings for
permanent cover shall be appropriate for the soil site conditions and free of invasive species.
(3) Buffer vegetation (both natural and created) shall be protected by erosion and
sediment control measures during construction.
(4) During the first five full growing seasons, except where the City has determined
vegetation establishment is acceptable, the owner or applicant must replant buffer vegetation where the
vegetative cover is less than 90%. The owner or applicant must assure reseeding/or replanting if the
buffer changes at any time through human intervention or activities.
(f) Conservation Easement. Where a buffer is required, the City shall require the
protection of the buffer under a conservation easement, or include the buffer in a dedicated outlet as
part of platting and subdivision approval, except where the buffer is located in a public transportation
right-of-way. Buffer shall also have monumentation to clearly designate the boundaries of all new
buffers within new residential subdivisions. A monument shall consist of a post and a buffer strip sign
approved by the City.
18
(g) Usage:
(1) Alterations, including building, storage, paving, routine mowing, burning,
plowing, introduction of noxious vegetation, cutting, dredging, filing, mining, dumping, grazing
livestock, agricultural production, yard waste disposal, or fertilizer application are prohibited within
any buffer. Periodic mowing or burning, or the use of fertilizers and pesticides for the purpose of
managing and maintaining native vegetation, may be allowed with approval of the City. Noxious
weeds may be removed and mechanical or spot herbicide treatments may be used to control noxious
weeds, but aerial or broadcast spraying is not acceptable. Prohibited alterations would not include
plantings that enhance the natural vegetation or selective clearing or pruning of trees or vegetation that
are dead, diseased or pose similar hazards, or as otherwise clarified in Criteria 3d.
(2) The following activities shall be permitted within any buffer, and shall not
constitute prohibited alterations:
(a) The following activities are allowed within both the minimum and average
buffer width areas:
(1) Use and maintenance of an unimproved access strip through the buffer,
not more than 10 feet in width, for recreational access to the major waterway or wetland and the
exercise of riparian rights;
(2) Structures that exist when the buffer is created;
(3) Placement, maintenance, repair, or replacement of public roads and
utility and drainage systems that exist on creation of the buffer or are required to comply with any
subdivision approval or building permit obtained from the City, so long as any adverse impacts of
public road, utility, or drainage systems on the function of the buffer have been avoided or minimized
to the extent practical;
(4) Clearing, grading, and seeding is allowed if part of an approved
Wetland Replacement Plan, or approved Stream Restoration Plan.
(5) Construction of a multipurpose trail, including boardwalks and
pedestrian bridges, provided it is constructed to minimize erosion and new impervious surface, and has
an undisturbed area of vegetative buffer at least ten (10) feet in width between the trail and the wetland
or public waters wetland edge, or the bank of the major waterway; or where needed to cross the major
waterway, the minimum impact alignment is used.
(6) The construction of underground utilities such as water, stormwater,
and sanitary sewers and. pipelines provided the minimum impact alignment is used, the area is
stabilized in accordance with Criteria 3d above, and setbacks established in the Floodplain Alterations
Rule, are met.
(b) The following activities are allowed within those portions of the average
buffer width that exceed the minimum buffer width:
19
(1) Stormwater management facilities, provided the land areas are
stabilized in accordance with Criteria (e)(1-4) above, and alterations prohibited in Criteria (g)(1) above
are upheld.
(2) The area of shallow vegetated infiltration and biofiltration facilities, and
water quality ponds not to exceed 50 percent of the pond area, adjacent to wetlands and major
waterways may be included in buffer averaging provided the facilities do not encroach into the
minimum buffer width, and the land areas are stabilized in accordance with Criteria 3d above, and
alterations prohibited in Criteria fl above are upheld. (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
(Ord. 2015-06, 3rd Series, passed on 4-6-15)
§ 152.09 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
(A) Prohibition of Illicit Discharges
(1) No person shall directly or indirectly discharge, or cause others under its control to
discharge into the MS4 or surface water any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than storm water. Exempt discharges include:
(a) individual residential car washing, swimming pool discharges dechlorinated to less
than 0.1ppm, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, foundation drains, footing
drains, water from crawl space pumps, discharges from potable water sources, water line
flushing, fire fighting activities, uncontaminated ground water infiltration,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, rising ground waters, springs, diverted stream
flows, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dye testing provided approval granted
by enforcement authority prior to time of test, non-storm water authorized by an
NPDES point source permit obtained by the MPCA, any use of fertilizers, herbicides,
and pesticides for agriculture or landscaping purposes when applied for their intended
purpose in accordance with label directions and with all applicable local, state and
federal ordinances, laws, and regulations, and any other waste discharge not containing
pollutants.
(B) Prohibition of Illicit Connections
(1) No person shall use any illicit connections to intentionally convey non storm water into
storm sewer system.
(C) Discharge Prevention
(1) No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic
waste in an area where discharge to a street, storm sewer system, or surface water body may
occur.
(2) Recreational vehicle sewage shall be disposed of at a proper sanitary waste facility. Waste
must not be discharged in an area where drainage to streets or storm sewer system may occur.
(3) Water in swimming pools must sit seven (7) days without the addition of chlorine (to allow
for the evaporation of chlorine) before discharge.
(4) Mobile washing companies, such as carpet cleaning and mobile vehicle washing services,
shall dispose of any wastewater to the sanitary sewer system. Wastewater shall not be
discharged to the streets or storm sewer system.
(5) Objects such as motor vehicle parts that contain grease, oil or other hazardous substances
and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials shall not be stored in areas susceptible
20
to runoff. Any machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible
to runoff shall be placed in a confined area to contain any leaks, spills, or discharges.
(6) Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful material, such as animal
waste, garbage or batteries shall be removed as soon as possible and disposed of properly.
Household hazardous waste must be disposed of through the county collection program or at
any other authorized disposal site. Household hazardous waste shall not be placed in a trash
container.
(D) Industrial Activity Discharges
(1) Any person subject to an industrial activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. All facilities that have an illicit discharge may be
required to implement, at owner’s expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to
prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system.
(E) Notification of Spills
(1) Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility
or operation has information of any known release of materials that are resulting in illicit
discharges or pollutants entering the storm sewer system or waters of the state, said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
Hazardous emergency discharges shall require immediate notification to emergency dispatch
services. Authorized enforcement agency shall be notified by no later than the next business
day for non-hazardous, non-emergency related discharges.
(F) Access to Facilities
(1) The authorized enforcement authority shall be permitted to enter and inspect all buildings
under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a
building has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before
entry into the premises, the owner shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the
authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, dye testing, examination and copying of
records that relate to the discharge of storm water.
(3) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up at any building such
devices as necessary to conduct monitoring, sampling or dye testing of the facilities stormwater
discharge.
(4) The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the illicit discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facilities sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the request of the authorized
enforcement agency. The costs of clearing such access shall be paid by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a facility are
a violation of this chapter.
(7) If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which storm water is discharged, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
21
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of jurisdiction.
(G) Enforcement
(1) Notice of Violation
(a) Whenever a City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require:
(1) Monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit discharges and connections;
(3) Abatement of pollution and hazards
(4) Restoration of affected property
(5) Remediation of violation
(6) Implementation of source control or treatment BMPs
(2) Failure to Satisfy Notice of Violation
(a) If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the Notice of
Violation within the appropriate time specified, the City, after reasonable notification,
may correct a violation and may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of the
repair work. Penalties and the cost of the work may be charged a special assessment
against the property.
(3) Appeal of Notice of Violation
(a) Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
authorized enforcement agency by filing an appeal with the authorized enforcement
agency within seven (7) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. A
hearing on the appeal will be before the City Council within thirty (30) days of the
receipt of the appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 15.09) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010) (Ord. 2011-20, 3rd Series, passed 9-
6-11)
152.10 OTHER CONTROLS.
§ 152.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (Prior Code, § 15.99) (Ord. 2010-11, 3rd
Series, passed 6-21-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 153: SHORELAND MANAGEMENT
Section
153.01 Statutory authorization and policy
153.02 General provisions and definitions
153.03 Administration
153.04 Shoreland classification system
153.05 Zoning and water supply/sanitary provisions
153.06 Nonconformities
153.07 Subdivision/platting provisions
153.08 Planned residential developments
153.98 Violations
§ 153.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND POLICY.
(A) Statutory authorization. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization
and policies contained in M.S. Chapter 103F, Minn. Rules, parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900,
and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 462, as they may be
amended from time to time.
(B) Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the City of Hastings, Minnesota,
affects the public health, safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution
of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best
interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use,
and development of shorelands of public waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has
delegated responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use,
and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the
quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of
shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This
responsibility is hereby recognized by the City of Hastings. (Prior Code, § 16.01) (Am.
Ord. 531, passed 4-4-2005)
2
§ 153.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
(A) Jurisdiction and boundaries.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the shorelands of the public
water bodies as classified in § 153.04.
(2) The shoreland within the City of Hastings is hereby established as the
Shoreland Overlay District with its attendant regulations. The boundaries of the
Shoreland District are established within 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of
a lake, pond, or flowage that is greater than 10 acres in size and 300 feet from a river or
stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain designated by ordinance on a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The Shoreland Overlay Districts are specifically delineated
on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Hastings, and is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be part of this chapter.
(3) The Shoreland Overlay District shall overlay the zoning districts established
by Chapter 155. The regulations and requirements imposed by this chapter shall be in
addition to those established for the underlying zoning districts and the conditions and
regulations of any other applicable ordinance and regulation of the city. In the event of a
conflict between ordinance requirements, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
(B) Compliance. The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of
lots; the use, size, type, and location of structures on lots; the installation and
maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling of any
shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(C) Enforcement. The City of Hastings is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special uses) shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. For each day, the violation
continues a separate offense shall be declared. In the event of a violation or threatened
violation of the chapter, the city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violations or threatened violations and it is the duty
of the City Attorney to institute the action.
(D) Interpretation. The boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay District shall be
determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is
needed to the boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay Districts as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, the rules established in Chapter 155 shall be followed.
3
(E) Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
(F) Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. For the purpose of
this chapter, the words “must” and “shall” are mandatory and not permissive. All
distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
BLUFF. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the
following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance
for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff):
(a) Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
(b) The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of
the waterbody;
(c) The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or
more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and
(d) The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top
of a bluff.
BOATHOUSE. A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or
boating equipment.
BUFFER. An area of natural, minimally maintained, vegetated ground cover
abutting or surrounding a major waterway, public waters wetland, or wetland.
BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level
at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease,
rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.
COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources.
4
DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings,
seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site
and at any point extending more than 3 feet above ground.
DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, and QUAD. A dwelling structure on a single lot, having
2, 3, and 4 units, respectively, being attached by common walls and each unit equipped
with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation facilities.
DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by 1 or more
persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle
sites.
EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of
sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated
under M.S. §§ 93.44 through 93.51, as they may be amended from time to time.
FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare
for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
HARDSHIP. The same as that term is defined in M.S. Chapter 462, as it may
be amended from time to time.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining
ground level at the building or 10 feet above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower,
and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a pitched or
hipped roof.
INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other
wholesale items.
INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING. The complete removal of trees or
shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
LOT WIDTH. The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint
of the building line.
NONCONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure, or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments
thereto that would not have been permitted to become established under the terms of the
official controls as now written, if the official controls had been in effect prior to the date
it was established, recorded, or authorized.
5
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and
wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape,
commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation
of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high
water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. Chapter 103G, as it may be
amended from time to time.
RIPARIAN. Land or uses located adjacent to the bank of a river or lake.
SEMIPUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to
provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular
constituency of the organization.
SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and
management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints
such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils,
steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special
protection.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment
system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A septic tank and soil absorption system
or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in
§ 153.05.
SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main,
and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting
sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the structure setback.
SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public
waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and
300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by
ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be
reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend
landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.
6
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure,
or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic
Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an
unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended
from time to time. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either
register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the
Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All
unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
SPECIAL USE. A land use or development as defined by ordinance that would
not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions as provided
by official controls upon a finding that certain conditions as detailed in the zoning
ordinance exist, the use or development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan of
the community, and the use is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not
recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s soil
characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other
technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming
practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where specific
information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12%, as
measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, and
fences.
SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for
commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral
part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with
transient docking facilities are examples of the use.
TOE OF THE BLUFF. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually
observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above. If
no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of bluff shall be determined to be the lower end
of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.
TOP OF THE BLUFF. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually
observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If
no break in the slope is apparent, the top of bluff shall be determined to be the upper end
of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.
7
WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A small,
above ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and
retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature,
reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback.
Examples of the structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish
houses, pump houses, and detached decks. (Prior Code, § 16.02) (Am. Ord. 531, passed
4-4-2005; Am. Ord. 2010-12, 3rd Series, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 153.03 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Permits required.
(1) A shoreland permit is required for the construction of buildings or building
additions (and including the related activities as construction of decks and signs), the
installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling
activities not exempted by § 153.05. Application for a shoreland permit shall be made to
the Planning Department on the forms provided. The application shall include the
necessary information so that the Planning Department can determine the site’s suitability
for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.
(2) A shoreland permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall
stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined by
§ 153.05, shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized by permit
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided in
§ 153.09.
(B) Variances.
(1) Applications for variances from this chapter shall be administered in
accordance with the procedures in Chapter 155 and reviewed in accordance with M.S.
§ 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time, in addition to the following.
(a) All variance requests shall be accompanied by a land use application.
(b) Variance applications shall be submitted to the Department of Natural
Resources in accordance with division (C) below.
(c) Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure
compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest.
8
(d) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances
in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a
variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally
recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance
required in division (C) below shall also include the Board of Adjustment’s summary of
the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the
issuance of the variance.
(2) For existing developments, the application for variance must clearly
demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended
use of the property. The variance, if issued, must require reconstruction of a
nonconforming sewage treatment system.
(C) Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
(1) Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,
amendments, or special use permits from the requirements of this chapter must be sent to
the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked at
least 10 days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed
subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
(2) A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions
granting variances or special use permits from the requirements of this chapter must be
sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative and
postmarked within 10 days of final action.
(D) Special use permits.
(1) All uses that require a special use permit by the underlying zoning district
or any other ordinance shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 155 in addition to
the following.
(a) All special use permit applications shall be accompanied by a land use
application.
(b) Special use permit applications shall be submitted to the Department of
Natural Resources in accordance with division (C) above.
(c) Applications for special use permits shall be administered in
accordance with the procedures in Chapter 155 and reviewed in accordance with M.S.
§ 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time.
9
(2) A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic, vegetation,
and soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:
(a) The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public
waters, both during and after construction;
(b) The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public
waters is limited;
(c) The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment; and
(d) The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will
generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely
accommodate these watercraft.
(3) Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a special use permit to ensure
compliance, protect adjacent properties and the public interest, and to fulfill the purposes
of this chapter. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
(b) Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement
that additional vegetation be planted; and
(c) Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures,
sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking
areas. (Prior Code, § 16.03) (Am. Ord. 531, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 153.04 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.
(A) Shoreland Classification System. The public waters of Hastings have been
classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Rules, part 6120.3300, as it
may be amended from time to time, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Dakota
and Washington County, Minnesota. Pursuant to Minn. Rules, chapters 6120.2500 -
6120.3900, no lake, pond, or flowage less than 10 acres in size need be regulated by this
chapter but shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 152. The shoreland
classification in the City of Hastings are as follows:
(1) Lakes:
(a) Natural Environment Lake - Lake Rebecca; and
(b) Recreational Development Lake - Lake Isabel.
10
(2) Rivers and streams:
(a) Transition Rivers - Mississippi and Vermillion Rivers; and
(b) Tributary Streams - Sand Coulee Flowage (All protected watercourses
in the City of Hastings not given a classification in division (A)(2)(a) above shall be
considered “Tributary.”)
(B) Land use district descriptions. The land uses allowable for the Shoreland
District shall follow the permitted, accessory, and special use designations of the
underlying zoning district of the property contained in Chapter 155, Chapter 151, and the
Mississippi River Corridor Area Ordinance, except that agricultural feedlots shall not be
permitted in any district. In the event there is a conflict between the regulations of these
ordinances, the most restrictive ordinance shall apply. (Prior Code, § 16.04) (Am. Ord.
531, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 153.05 ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS.
(A) Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet) and lot width
standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex, and quad residential lots created after 6-16-
1994 for the lake and river/stream classifications are the following.
(1) Unsewered lakes.
(a) Natural environment (Lake Rebecca).
Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
Area Width Area Width
Single 80,000 200 80,000 200
Duplex 20,000 300 160,000 400
Triplex 60,000 400 240,000 600
Quad 200,000 500 320,000 800
(b) Recreational development (Lake Isabel).
Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
Area Width Area Width
Single 40,000 150 40,000 150
Duplex 80,000 225 80,000 265
Triplex 120,000 300 120,000 375
Quad 160,000 375 160,000 490
11
(2) Sewered lakes.
(a) Natural environment (Lake Rebecca).
Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
Area Width Area Width
Single 40,000 125 20,000 125
Duplex 70,000 225 35,000 220
Triplex 100,000 325 52,000 315
Quad 130,000 425 65,000 410
(b) Recreational development (Lake Isabel).
Riparian Lots Non-Riparian Lots
Area Width Area Width
Single 20,000 75 15,000 75
Duplex 35,000 135 26,000 135
Triplex 50,000 195 38,000 190
Quad 65,000 255 49,000 245
(3) River/stream lot width standards. The lot width standards for single,
duplex, triplex, and quad residential developments for the 2 river/stream classifications
are:
Transition Tributary Without
Sewer
Tributary With Sewer
Single 150 100 75
Duplex 375 150 115
Triplex 500 200 150
Quad 625 250 190
(4) Additional special provisions.
(a) Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be
used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards must be met at both the ordinary
high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot area dimensions in of this section
can only be used if publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property.
(b) Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads on natural environment
lakes must also meet the following standards:
1. Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the ordinary
high water level;
12
2. Each building must have common sewage treatment and water
systems in 1 location and serve all dwelling units in the building;
3. Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in 1
location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
4. No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline can be in duplex, triplex,
or quad developments.
(c) Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation
areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within subdivisions are permissible and must
meet or exceed the following standards.
1. They must meet the width and size requirements for residential
lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots.
2. If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than 6
watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot (keeping the
same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of the requirements for riparian
residential lots for each watercraft beyond 6, consistent with the following table:
Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements
Ratio of lake size to shore length (acres/mile) Required increase in frontage (percent)
Less than 100 25
100-200 20
201-300 15
Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements
Ratio of lake size to shore length (acres/mile) Required increase in frontage (percent)
301-400 10
Greater than 400 5
3. They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the
subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the subdivision who are provided
riparian access rights on the access lot; and
4. Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be
developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what
activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching, loading, storage,
beaching, mooring, or docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational
activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or
the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the
non-significant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The
covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total
number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or stored over water,
and must require centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable
13
locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also
require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by
vegetation or topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions.
(d) Multiple-family residential developments that contain 5 or more
dwelling units per building or lot shall be allowed per special use permit.
(5) Substandard lots of record. Any lot of record filed in the office of the
County Recorder on or before 6-16-1994 that does not meet the lot area and/or lot width
standards of this chapter may be allowed as a building site, provided that:
(a) The lot meets all the standards of the underlying zoning district;
(b) The lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times
since it became substandard; and
(c) All setback, impervious surface, and dimensional requirements of this
section are complied with.
(B) Placement, design, and height of structures.
(1) Placement of structures on lots. When more than 1 setback applies to a site,
structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on
the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be
altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high
water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or
in a bluff impact zone. Structures shall be located as follows:
(a) Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks (in feet) from ordinary
high water level*.
Setbacks*
Classes of Public
Waters
Structures Sewage Treatment
System
Unsewered Sewered
Lakes
Natural Environment 150 150 150
Recreational
Development
100 75 75
Transition 150 150 100
Tributary 100 50 75
NOTES TO TABLE:
* One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with § 153.02 may be set back a
minimum distance of 10 feet from the ordinary high water level.
14
(b) Additional structure setbacks. The following additional structure
setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the water body:
Setback From Setback (in feet)
Top of bluff 30
Unplatted cemetery 50
(c) Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except
stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.
(d) Uses without water-oriented needs. Uses without water-oriented needs
must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or
parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary
high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by
vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
(2) Design criteria for structures.
(a) High water elevations. Structures shall be placed in accordance with
Chapter 151 when flood plain regulations are applicable to the site. Where no flood plain
delineation exists, the lowest floor must be located at least 3 feet above the highest
known water level or 3 feet above the ordinary high water level; whichever is greater.
(b) Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have 1 wateroriented
accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback of this chapter if
this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:
1. The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet.
Detached decks must not exceed 8 feet above grade at any point;
2. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water level must be at least 10 feet;
3. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as
viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased
setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
4. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be
enclosed or used as a storage area;
5. The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human
habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities; and
15
6. As an alternative for general development and recreational
development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft
storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment,
may occupy an area up to 400 square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is
20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
(c) Stairways, lifts, and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred
alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and
steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design
requirements:
1. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, and public
open-space recreational properties;
2. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed
32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial
properties, and public open-space recreational properties;
3. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
4. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the
ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and
built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
5. Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
6. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that
the dimensional and performance standards of divisions (B)(2)(c)1 through (B)(2)(c)2
above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minn. Rules, Chapter 1340, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(d) Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed on a significant
historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information
about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository.
(e) Steep slopes. The City of Hastings shall evaluate possible soil erosion
impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for
construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other
improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached
to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of
structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters,
assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
16
(3) Height of structures. All buildings and structures shall comply with the
height standards of the underlying zoning district or 35 feet, whichever is more
restrictive, except as follows: buildings in the DC - Downtown Core Zoning District may
be allowed a maximum building height of 47 feet or 756.5 feet above sea level;
whichever is greater, provided the following.
(a) The building contains no more than 4 stories.
(b) The building is setback a minimum of 150 feet from the ordinary high
water level.
(c) The building has been designed to be compatible with the historic
character of the DC District.
(C) Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography will be
regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife
habitat.
(1) Vegetation alterations.
(a) Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and
sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by
division (G) below are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
(b) Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest
management uses as regulated in divisions (F)(3) and (F)(4) below, is allowed subject to
the following standards.
1. Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact
zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land
conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a special use if an erosion
control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the soil and water
conservation district in which the property is located.
2. In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is allowed to
provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the
placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas,
beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities, provided that:
a. The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially
reduced;
17
b. Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved;
and
c. The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
(2) Topographic alterations/grading and filling.
(a) Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of
structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction
permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling
permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this section must be incorporated
into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and
driveways.
(b) Public roads and parking areas are regulated by division (D) below.
(c) Notwithstanding divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b) above, a grading and
filling permit will be required for:
1. The movement of more than 10 cubic yards of material on steep
slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
2. The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
(d) The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to during
the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, special use permits,
variances, and subdivision approvals:
1. Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland must be
evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following
functional qualities of the wetland. (This evaluation must also include a determination of
whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by
other local, state, or federal agencies such as the Vermillion River Watershed
Management Organization, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the
United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant shall submit any necessary
applications as required by other agencies.):
a. Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
b. Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
c. Fish and wildlife habitat;
d. Recreational use;
18
e. Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
f. Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic
significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.
2. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
3. Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as
soon as possible;
4. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they
reach any surface water feature must be used;
5. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service;
6. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope;
7. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be
reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must not create
finished slopes of 30% or greater;
8. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact
zones;
9. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner;
10. Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are
accessory to permitted or special uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby
properties; and
11. Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of
the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not
exceed 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within 10
feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high
water level does not exceed 3 feet.
(e) Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public
water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by local
shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the
Commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters.
19
(D) Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas.
(1) Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from
view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that
all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion
to public waters consistent with the Hastings Watershed Management Plan and the
Vermillion River Watershed Management Organization, as my be amended from time to
time, or other applicable technical materials.
(2) Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and must
not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible
placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these
areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
(3) Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and accessrelated
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative
screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are met. For private facilities, the
grading and filling provisions of division (C)(2) above must be met.
(E) Storm water management. The following general and specific standards shall
apply in addition to any other applicable city codes.
(1) General standards.
(a) When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated
soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain storm water runoff before
discharge to public waters.
(b) Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce
and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as
possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.
(c) When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle storm water runoff using
natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions,
settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference
must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than
buried pipes and human-made materials and facilities.
(d) All development shall be consistent with the City of Hastings
Watershed Management Plan, Chapter 152 of this code, and the requirements of the
Vermillion River Watershed Management Organization.
20
(2) Specific standards.
(a) Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25% of the lot
area, except as follows. Impervious surface coverage may be permitted to exceed 25%
on property that was platted before 6-16-1994 or property zoned DC - Downtown Core
upon approval of a special use permit by the City of Hastings that demonstrates
compliance with the following:
1. All applicable provisions of Chapter 152;
2. All structures and treatments shall be installed for the treatment of
storm water runoff in accordance with the City of Hastings Watershed Management Plan;
3. Improvements that will result in an increased rate of runoff directly
entering a public water shall have all structures and practices in compliance with Chapter
152 in place for the collection and treatment of storm water runoff or will be constructed
in conjunction with a special use permit application;
4. The lot shall be served by municipal sewer and water; and
5. Storm water is collected and treated in compliance with Chapter
152 and best management practices. The treatment may be comprised of either on-site
control, access to the city’s storm water control system, or a combination of both, to be
approved by the Public Works Director.
(b) When constructed facilities are used for storm water management,
documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and
installed consistent with the City of Hastings Watershed Management Plan, Chapter 152
of this code, and the requirements of the Vermillion River Watershed Management
Organization.
(c) New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters must provide for
filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
(d) An existing site which is being altered, remodeled, or expanded without
expanding the existing impervious surface may be allowed, provided that, where
appropriate and where necessary, structures and practices for the treatment of storm water
runoff are in compliance with Chapter 152.
(F) Special provisions for commercial, industrial, public/semipublic, agricultural,
forestry, and extractive uses and mining of metallic minerals and peat.
21
(1) Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semipublic uses.
(a) Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or
semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be
located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented
needs must meet the following standards:
1. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and
other zoning standards in this chapter and Chapter 155, the uses must be designed to
incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;
2. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be
the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
3. Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs
and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general
standards:
a. No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be
placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be
placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the County
Sheriff;
b. Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact
zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed
information. They must only convey the location and name of the establishment and the
general types of goods or services available. The signs must not contain other detailed
information such as product brands and prices, must not be located higher than 10 feet
above the ground, and must not exceed 32 square feet in size or consistent with those
provisions contained in Chapter 155, whichever are more restrictive. If illuminated by
artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across
public waters; and
c. Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact
zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and
is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters.
This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
(b) Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels
without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters
frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or
be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
22
(2) Agriculture use standards. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or
operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems)
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation
districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified
individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land
uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.
(3) Forest management standards. The harvesting of timber and associated
reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Non-
Point Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in
Forest Management Best Management Practices in Minnesota.
(4) Extractive use standards.
(a) Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site
development and restoration plan must be developed, approved, and followed over the
course of operation of the site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant
discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations in addition to any requirements contained in Chapter 155. It must also
identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts,
particularly erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after
extractive activities end.
(b) Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery must be
located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of
public waters and from bluffs.
(G) Water supply and sewage treatment.
(1) Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes
must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health
and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(2) Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be
provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment in compliance with Chapter 150,
as follows.
(a) Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where available.
(b) All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s standards for individual sewage treatment systems
contained in the document titled, “Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards,
Chapter 7080,” a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this chapter.
23
(c) On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the ordinary
high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in division (B)(1).
(d) All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be
evaluated in accordance with the criteria below. If the determination of a site’s suitability
cannot be made with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and percolation tests from
on-site field investigations:
1. Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or
bedrock;
2. Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;
3. Slope; and
4. The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock
outcrops.
(e) Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with division (G)(2) above.
(H) Buffers.
(1) Purpose. It is the policy, objective, or action to:
(a) Require buffers, acting as filter strips around every wetland based on its
management classification.
(b) Avoid fragmentation of natural areas and corridors when feasible and
mitigate when unavoidable.
(c) To protect shoreland areas from chemical, physical, biological, or
hydrological changes so as to prevent significant adverse impacts.
24
(2) Areas of Affect. For any lot created after March 22, 2007, a buffer shall be
maintained around the perimeter of identified waterways. The buffer provisions shall not
apply to any lot of record created prior to March 22, 2007 until such lot is subdivided,
and as long as the lots created are eligible for Green Acres or Agricultural Preserve.
Buffer strips shall apply whether or not the major waterway, wetland, or public waters
wetland is on the same lot as a proposed development. Buffer regulations apply to
waterways identified in the figure below:
25
(3) Buffer Widths.
Stream Classification Buffer Width in Feet
Conservation Corridor - Lower Reach 150
Aquatic Corridor - Principal Connector 100
Aquatic Corridor - Tributary Connector 50
Water Quality Corridor 30
(4) Provisions.
(a) Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in buffer areas, the retention
of such vegetation in an undisturbed state is required unless approval to replace such
vegetation is received. A buffer has acceptable vegetation if it:
1. Has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses that has been
uncultivated or unbroken for at least five consecutive years; or,
2. Has an overstory of trees and/or shrubs that has been uncultivated
or unbroken for at least 5 consecutive years; or,
3. Contains a mixture of the plant communities in 1 or 2 above that
has been uncultivated or unbroken for at least 5 years.
(b) Buffers shall be staked and protected in the field prior to construction
unless the vegetation and the condition of the buffer are considered inadequate. Existing
conditions vegetation will be considered unacceptable if:
1. Topography or sparse vegetation tends to channelize the flow of
surface water. or
2. Some other reason the vegetation is unlikely to retain nutrients and
sediment.
(c) Where buffer vegetation and conditions are unacceptable, or where
approval has been obtained to replant, buffers shall be replanted and maintained
according to the following criteria:
1. Buffers shall be planted with native seed mix approved by the City,
with the exception of a one-time planting with an annual nurse or cover crop. Plantings of
native forbs and grasses may be substituted for seeding. All substitutions must be
approved by the City. Grouping\clusters of native trees and shrubs of species and at
densities appropriate to site conditions, shall also be planted throughout the buffer area.
26
2. The seed mix and plantings shall be installed according to City
specifications. The selected seed mixes and plantings for permanent cover shall be
appropriate for the soil site conditions and free of invasive species.
3. Buffer vegetation (both natural and created) shall be protected by
erosion and sediment control measures during construction.
4. During the first 5 full growing seasons, except where the City has
determined vegetation establishment is acceptable, the owner or applicant must replant
buffer vegetation where the vegetative cover is less than 90 percent. The owner or
applicant must assure reseeding or replanting if the buffer changes at any time through
human intervention or activities.
(d) Where a buffer is required, the City shall require the protection of the
buffer under a conservations easement, or include the buffer in a dedicated outlot as part
of platting and subdivision approval, except where the buffer is located in a public
transportation right-of-way. The buffer shall also be monumented to clearly designate the
boundaries of all new buffers within the new residential subdivision. A monument shall
consist of a post and a buffer strip sign approved by the City.
(e) Alterations, including building, storage, paving, routine mowing,
burning, plowing, introduction of noxious vegetation, cutting, dredging, filling, mining,
dumping, grazing livestock, agricultural production, yard waste disposal, or fertilizer
applications are prohibited within any buffer. Periodic moving or burning, or the use of
fertilizers and pesticides for the purpose of managing and maintaining native vegetation
is allowed with the approval of the City. Noxious weeds may be removed and mechanical
or spot herbicide treatments may be used to control noxious weeds, but aerial or
broadcast spraying is not acceptable. Prohibited alterations would not include plantings
that enhance the natural vegetation or selective clearing or pruning of trees or vegetation
that are dead, diseased or pose similar hazards, or as otherwise clarified in Paragraph (f).
(f) The following activities shall be permitted within any buffer, and shall
not constitute prohibited alterations:
1. Use and maintenance of an unimproved access strip through the
buffer not more than 10 feet in width, for recreational access to the waterway and the
exercise of riparian rights;
2. Structures that exist when the buffer is created.
3. Placement, maintenance, repair, or replacement of public roads and
utility and drainage systems that exist on creation of the buffer are required to comply
with any subdivision approval or building permit obtained from the City so long as any
adverse impacts of public road, utility, or drainage systems on the function of the buffer
have been avoided or minimized to the extent practical;
27
4. Clearing, grading and seeding is allowed if part of an approved
Wetland Replacement Plan, or approved Stream Restoration Plan.
5. Construction of a multi-purpose trail, including boardwalks and
pedestrian bridge, provided it is constructed to minimize erosion and new impervious
surface, and has an undisturbed area of vegetative buffer at least ten feet in width
between the trail and the wetland or public waters wetland edge, or the bank of the major
waterway; or where needed to cross the major waterway, the minimum impact alignment
is used.
6. The construction of underground utilities such as water,
stormwater, and sanitary sewers and pipelines provided the minimum impact alignment is
used, the area is stabilized in accordance with Paragraph (b) above, and setbacks
established in the Floodplain Alterations Rule Criteria are met.
7. Stormwater management facilities provide the land areas are
stabilized in accordance with Paragraph (b) above, and alterations prohibited in
Paragraph (e) above are upheld.
8. The area of shallow vegetated infiltration and biofiltration
facilities, and water quality ponds not to exceed 50 percent of the pond area, adjacent to
wetlands and major waterways may be included in buffer averaging provided the
facilities do not encroach into the minimum buffer width, and the land areas are stabilized
in accordance with Paragraph (b) above, and alterations prohibited in Paragraph (e) above
are upheld.
(5) Exceptions.
(a) Buffers do not apply to lots of record created prior to March 22, 2007
that are less than one acre in size.
(b) Buffers do not apply to existing outlots that receive preliminary plat
approval prior to March 22, 2005.
(c) Where a stream meandering project has been completed, the buffer
width shall be established by the City and shall be no less than the minimum.
(6) Permit requirements. The following exhibits shall accompany the permit
application.
(a) Construction plans and specifications showing the delineated wetland
edge, buffer strip location(s), the location of buffer monuments and the location of any
temporary fencing required.
(b) A narrative description of each buffer strip identifying its current
condition.
28
(c) A legal description and drawing of each buffer strip, signed forms for
conservation easement; or record of an administrative land split, preliminary plat or final
plat demonstrating that the buffer area is contained in a dedicated Outlot.
(d) A landscaping and vegetation management plan according to Paragraph
(4)(c) above, including a compliance monitoring and certification plan and a cost
estimate, for buffer strips with unacceptable vegetation as defined by Paragraph (4)(b)
above or where grading in a buffer strip is proposed. (Prior Code, § 16.05) (Am. Ord.
531, passed 4-4-2005; Am. Ord. 534, passed 5-16-2005; Am. Ord. 2010-12, 3rd Series,
passed 6-21-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.06 NONCONFORMITIES.
(A) Generally. All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this chapter
may continue, but they will be managed according to applicable state statutes and
Chapter 155 for the subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage,
discontinuance of use, and intensification of use; except that the following standards will
also apply in shoreland areas.
(B) Construction on nonconforming lots of record.
(1) Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on the date of enactment
of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of § 153.05(A) may be
allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements provided the use is
permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting
lands at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official
controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this
chapter are met.
(2) A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any use,
sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In evaluating the
variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply
capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities
cannot be provided.
(3) If, in a group of 2 or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any
individual lot does not meet the requirements of § 153.05(A) the lot must not be
considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot
must be combined with the 1 or more contiguous lots so they equal 1 or more parcels of
land, each meeting the requirements of § 153.05(A) as much as possible.
29
(C) Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures.
(1) All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing
nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other requirements of
§ 153.05(B). Any deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance
pursuant to § 153.03.
(2) Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not
meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following
criteria and standards are met:
(a) The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established;
(b) A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water
level setback of the structure;
(c) The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not
exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or
does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and
(d) The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or
screened.
(D) Nonconforming sewage treatment systems.
(1) A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of § 153.05(G)(2)
must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required
for any improvement on, or use of, the property. For the purposes of this provision, a
sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is
the sewage treatment system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
(2) The City of Hastings will require upgrading or replacement of any
nonconforming system identified within a reasonable period of time which will not
exceed 2 years. Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland
management standards adopted under M.S. Chapters 103A through 103G, as it may be
amended from time to time, in effect at the time of installation may be considered as
conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools,
leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil
treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency’s Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be
considered nonconforming. (Prior Code, § 16.06) (Am. Ord. 531, passed 4-4-2005)
Penalty, see § 10.99
30
§ 153.07 SUBDIVISION/PLATTING PROVISIONS.
(A) Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision pursuant to Chapter 154
shall be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration.
Suitability analysis by the city shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of
wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe
erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment
capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation,
important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other
feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future
residents of the proposed subdivision or of the city.
(B) Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all official
controls of this community including, but not limited to, Chapter 155. A subdivision will
not be approved where a later variance from 1 or more standards in official controls
would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by
publicly owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless
domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with
§ 153.05(G)(2) can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size
and dimensional requirements of § 153.05(B), including at least a minimum contiguous
lawn area, which is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of 2 standard
soil treatment systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be
approved.
(C) Information requirements. Sufficient information must be submitted by the
applicant for the city to make a determination of land suitability. In addition to the
requirement contained in Chapter 154, the information shall include at least the
following:
(1) Topographic contours at 10-foot intervals or less from United States
Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site characteristics;
(2) The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.02, Subdivision 1, as it
may be amended from time to time, to be shown on plats, obtained from United States
Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;
(3) Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on-site
sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing sources or from
field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods;
(4) Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of
anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions,
including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed
methods for controlling storm water runoff and erosion, both during and after
construction activities;
31
(5) Location of 100-year flood plain areas and floodway districts from existing
adopted maps or data; and
(6) A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the toe and the
top of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and
the lake or stream.
(D) Dedications. When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision
approval, the approval must provide easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for
management of storm water and significant wetlands.
(E) Platting. All subdivisions that create 5 or more lots or parcels that are 2½ acres
or less in size shall be processed as a plat in accordance with M.S. Chapter 505, as it may
be amended from time to time. All subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 154. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall
be issued for lots created after these official controls were enacted unless the lot was
approved as part of a formal subdivision.
(F) Controlled access or recreational lots. Lots intended as controlled accesses to
public waters or for recreational use areas for use by non-riparian lots within a
subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria in § 153.05(A)(4)(c). (Prior Code,
§ 16.07) (Am. Ord. 531, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.08 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
(A) Applicability. New projects built on undeveloped land, redevelopment of
previously built sites, and conversion of the use of existing buildings and lands that
contain multiple-family units, multi-use structures, mixed residential and commercial
uses, cluster developments, and other similar projects may be developed as a planned
residential development (PRD) in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 155, as
follows.
(1) Properties zoned DC - Downtown Core are subject to the PRD provisions of
Chapter 155, and are exempt from the provisions of this section.
(2) All other properties are subject to the provisions in divisions (A)(1) above
and (D) below.
(3) Only areas served by municipal water and sanitary sewer service may be
developed as a PRD.
(B) Density. The density of development for each project shall not exceed the
density established for the property within the 2020 Comprehensive Plan, as amended
from time to time.
32
(C) Special use permit and site plan review. All projects that are developed as a
PRD shall require both special use permit and site plan approval in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 155. Notice of the application shall be sent to the Department of
Natural Resources in accordance with § 153.03.
(D) Density calculation. Density increases for all proposed shoreland PRDs (with
the exception of properties zoned DC) shall be evaluated using the following procedures
and standards.
(1) Shoreland tier calculations. The project parcel must be divided into tiers by
locating 1 or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high
water level (OHWL) at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
Shoreland Tier Dimensions Sewered (in feet)
Recreational Development Lake - Lake Isabel 267
Natural Environment Lake - Lake Rebecca 320
All River Classes 300
(2) Net area calculation. The net area within each tier is next calculated by
subtracting all wetlands, bluffs, and land below the ordinary high water level of public
waters.
(3) Base density calculation. The net area within each tier is divided by the
residential lot area standards for lakes or rivers as established in § 153.05(B) to determine
a base density.
(4) Bonus density calculation.
(a) Properties are eligible for a bonus density based as follows:
Shoreland Tiers (landward from the OHWL) Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier
(as a percent)
First 50
Second 100
Third - Fifth 200
(b) The density for the development shall not exceed the density
established for the property within the 2020 Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time
to time.
(E) Open space.
(1) All PRDs must contain open space that comprises at least 50% of the total
project area that shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent
means.
33
(2) Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by road
surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented structures or facilities, shall
not be included in the computation of minimum open space.
(3) Open space may include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for
development in their natural state, and areas containing significant historic sites or
unplatted cemeteries.
(4) Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of
the dwelling units or sites, or the public.
(5) The Shore Impact Zone, based on the normal structure setback, must be
included as open space. At least 50% of the Shore Impact Zone area of expansions to
existing developments; or at least 70% of the Shore Impact Zone area of new
developments must be preserved in their natural or existing state.
(F) Design criteria.
(1) Clustering. Dwelling units or site must be clustered into 1 or more groups
and located on suitable areas of the development.
(2) Building setbacks. Each building must be setback a minimum of 225 feet
from the ordinary high water level of rivers and 300 feet from the ordinary high water
mark of lakes. All other setbacks established in § 153.05 shall not be eligible for
deviation under the terms of the PRD.
(3) Building setbacks for increased densities. Maximum density increases shall
only be allowed if structure setbacks from the OHWL are increased in accordance with
this section or the impact on the water body is reduced an equivalent amount through
vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the city and the
setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback established in § 153.05.
(4) Shore recreation facilities. Shore recreation facilities including but not
limited to swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps
must be centralized and located in suitable areas. Evaluation of suitability shall include
consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to ground water and
bedrock, or other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous
beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft shall not exceed 1 for each allowable
dwelling unit or site within the first Shoreland Tier, as determined by § 153.04(A).
Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment
may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers.
34
(5) Visibility. Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation,
topography, increased setbacks, and/or color (assuming summer leaf-on conditions).
Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved if existing or may be required to
be provided.
(G) Administration and management.
(1) Generally. Before final approval of a PRD, adequate provision shall be
developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the
continued existence and functioning of the PRD.
(2) Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent
means shall be provided to ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open space.
(3) Development organization and functioning. All PRDs shall establish an
owners association and covenants or suitable organization acceptable to the city to ensure
the maintenance of all property and facilities held in common ownership for the
development. (Ord. 531, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails
to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (Prior Code, § 16.99) (Am. Ord. 531, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see
§ 10.99)
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
154.01 Purpose and scope
154.02 Definitions
154.03 Plat presentation procedures
154.04 Plat presentation requirements
154.05 Design standards
154.06 Required improvements
154.07 Public land dedication
154.08 Administration and enforcement
154.09 Conveyance by metes and bounds
154.10 Minor subdivision; waiver of platting requirements
154.11 Fees
154.98 Violations
§ 154.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
(A) Purpose. The provisions of this chapter are adopted to regulate the subdividing
of land within the city so that new additions will be integrated with the Comprehensive
Plan of the city and will contribute to an attractive, stable, and wholesome community
environment.
(B) Scope. The regulations governing plats and the subdivision or development of
land shall apply within the corporate limits of the city. (Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLEY. A public right-of-way less than 24 feet in width which normally affords a
secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
ARTERIAL STREET. A street which serves intra-community travel and augments
high density arterial systems. The design character provides for access control with
emphasis on traffic mobility with a projected average daily traffic (ADT) range of greater
than 5,000 trips.
2
BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or
by streets and the entire boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of
the above with a river or lake.
BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and
property line.
COLLECTOR STREET. A through street connecting neighborhood and minor
collector streets to the arterial network. Also serves as an access for business and
residential development. Minimum Right-of-Way width on minor collector streets is 80
feet for all new segments. Some existing streets may have less Right-of-Way while
exhibiting all other criteria of a Collector and shall be considered as such. The design
character allows for a moderate access control and is for low to moderate operating
speeds with a projected average daily traffic (ADT) range of 2,000 to 15,000.
(Ord. #2011-17, 3rd Series, Adopted 8-15-11)
MINOR COLLECTOR STREET. A through street which services as a feeder
facility from neighborhood and local streets to the collector street network. Minimum
Right-of-Way on minor collector streets is 66 feet for all new segments. Some existing
streets may have less Right-of-Way while exhibiting all other criteria of a Minor
Collector and shall be considered as such. The design character requires little access
control, and is for low operating speeds with a projected average daily traffic (ADT)
range of 1,000 to 2,000. (Ord. #2011-17, 3rd Series, Adopted 8-15-11)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A policy document which serves as a guide for the
future physical development of the city and entitled “Comprehensive Plan, Hastings,
Minnesota.”
CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having but 1 end open to traffic and the other end
being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn around.
EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land and for the
purpose of constructing and maintaining drives, utilities, including, but not limited to,
wetlands, ponding areas, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines,
storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines.
FINAL PLAT. A formal layout of a proposed subdivision encompassing all
requirements imposed by the City Council and prepared by a qualified person.
HALF STREET. A street having only 1/2 of its intended roadway width developed
to accommodate traffic.
LOCAL STREET. A street designed to provide access to abutting property and
collector streets.
LOT. A piece, parcel, or plot of land intended for building development or as a unit
for transfer of ownership.
3
OUTLOT. A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended
as open space or other use, for which no development is intended and for which no
building permit shall be issued.
OWNER. The record owner, whether 1 or more persons, or entities of legal or
equitable title to the property, but excluding those having the interest merely as security
for the performance of an obligation or those having a lien upon the property by
provision or operation of law.
PERCENTAGE OF GRADE ON STREET CENTER LINE. The distance
vertically from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal
distance.
PLAT. A map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is
presented to the Council for approval.
PRELIMINARY PLAT. A formal layout of the proposed subdivision prepared by a
registered qualified person.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving the
physical and economic integrity of any given area.
QUALIFIED PERSON. A person recognized by Dakota County as having the
required training and experience to prepare plats.
SUBDIVISION and RESUBDIVISION. A division of a parcel of land into 2 or
more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or,
if a new street is involved, and division of a parcel of land; provided that:
(1) A division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of 5 acres or
more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision;
(2) The parcel is co-extensive with a separate parcel of record at the effective
date of this chapter;
(3) An agreement to convey such a parcel has been entered into prior to the
time and the instrument showing the agreement to convey is recorded in the office of the
Dakota County Register of Deeds within 1 year thereafter;
(4) The parcel is co-extensive with a lot unit or units described with reference
to a plat or auditor’s subdivision duly filed and of record in the office of the Dakota
County Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of this chapter; and
(5) A minor subdivision (waiver of platting requirements) or boundary lot line
4
adjustment approved pursuant to § 154.10 shall not be deemed a subdivision. (Prior
Code, § 11.02)
§ 154.03 PLAT PRESENTATION PROCEDURES.
(A) Generally. The following procedures shall be followed in the administration of
this chapter and no real property within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be subdivided
and offered for sale or a plat recorded until a pre-application meeting has been held and a
preliminary plat and a final plat of the proposed subdivision have been reviewed by the
Planning Commission and its technical assistants and until the final plat has been
approved by the Council as set forth in the procedures provided herein and filed with the
Register of Deeds for the county in which the land is located. Plans for cluster or planned
developments including housing, commercial, industrial, and other uses or for any
combination of uses designed for sale or rental purposes shall be presented in the same
manner as other plats for the review of the Planning Commission and the approval of the
Council.
(B) Pre-application meeting and sketch plan. Prior to the submission of any plat for
consideration to the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall meet with City Planning
Department staff to introduce himself or herself as a potential subdivider and learn what
shall be expected of her or him or her in the capacity and to determine the relationship of
the proposed subdivision with the Comprehensive Plan for the affected area. The
subdivider shall present a sketch plan pursuant to the requirements of § 154.04(B) to the
City Planning Department staff prior to filing a preliminary plat.
(C) Preliminary plat approval.
(1) The subdivider shall engage a qualified person to prepare a preliminary plat
of the area to be subdivided as required by § 154.04(C).
(2) The subdivider shall submit the following:
(a) Ten full size copies of the preliminary plat; and
(b) One reduced size 11 inches by 17 inches copy of the preliminary plat to
the City Planning Department at least 21 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting
at which plat is to be considered. The required filing fee as established by City Council
resolution shall be paid at the time of submitting the preliminary plat.
(3) The subdivider shall submit to the City Planning Department a list of
property owners located within 350 feet of the subject property obtained from and
certified by an abstract company or as prepared by Dakota County.
(4) City Planning Department staff shall submit 1 copy of the preliminary plat
to the Public Works Department no later than 3 days after its receipt.
5
(5) The submitted preliminary plat shall be reviewed by a representative of the
Public Works Department with respect to street and utility layout, storm water control,
grading, and erosion control. The subdivider shall establish an escrow account with the
city to pay for preliminary plat review. The escrow amount shall be set by the City
Council by resolution. Any escrowed funds remaining after the preliminary plat review
has been completed shall be returned to the subdivider after Council approval of the
preliminary plat or cancellation of the project. If the initial escrowed amount is
insufficient to complete review of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall provide
additional funds to be escrowed for review costs. The Public Works Department shall
transmit a report of its review together with any supporting material to the Planning
Commission prior to the meeting at which the plat is considered.
(6) The Planning Commission may require qualified technical services such as
land planning and legal to review the preliminary plat and advise on its suitability
regarding general planning; conformity with plans of other private and public
organizations and agencies; adequacy of proposed water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage and flood control, and other features. The subdivider shall be required to pay
the cost of the services.
(7) The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat, considering the
reports of the Public Works Department and other technicians, if applicable, and shall
submit a recommendation to the City Council within 60 days of submittal to the City
Planning Department. Prior to the approval of a plat by the Planning Commission and
referral to the Council, a public hearing shall be held thereon after notice of the time and
place thereof has been published once in the official newspaper at least 10 days before
the day of the hearing. If disapproval of the plat is recommended by the Planning
Commission, the Commission shall set forth the grounds for the refusal in its proceedings
and shall transmit them to the Council.
(8) The preliminary plat must be acted on by the Council within 120 days after
submittal to the City Planning Department. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall provide the city a digital copy of the preliminary plat drawings in a city
approved electronic format.
(9) All final plats shall be submitted for approval within 1 year of preliminary
plat approval, unless specifically noted otherwise in the preliminary plat resolution. Any
preliminary plat not finalized in accordance with this provision must be resubmitted for
recertification by the Planning Commission and Council. (Am. Ord. 472, passed 4-15-
2002)
(D) Final plat approval.
(1) The subdivider shall engage a qualified person to prepare a final plat
6
pursuant to the requirements of § 154.04(D) which may constitute only that portion of the
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time.
(2) The subdivider shall submit 10 full size copies and one 11 inches by 17
inches size copy of the final plat to the City Planning Department at least 21 days before
the Planning Commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered. A final plat of
all or a portion of the preliminary plat shall be submitted within 1 year of preliminary plat
approval; otherwise, the approval shall become null and void. The required filing fee as
established by City Council resolution shall be paid at this time.
(3) The City Planning Department shall transmit 1 copy of the final plat to the
Planning Commission and 1 copy to the Public Works Department no later than 3 days
after its receipt.
(4) The Public Works Department shall review the final plat and transmit a
report to the Planning Commission prior to the meeting at which the plat is to be
considered.
(5) The Planning Commission shall study the final plat, considering the reports
of the Public Works Department and other City Departments and/or employees, and then
transmit its recommendation to the Council within 30 days of submittal to the City
Planning Department.
(6) The Council shall act upon the final plat within 60 days of submittal to the
City Planning Department, whereupon the City Planning Department shall notify the
subdivider of the Council’s action. The Council may approve, reject, refer back to the
Planning Commission, or require modification in the proposed final plat.
(7) The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the City Planning
Department, and shall record the final plat with the Dakota County Recorder within 1
year of final plat approval; otherwise the approval shall be considered null and void.
(Am. Ord. 544, passed 1-3-2006)
(8) At the time of filing the plat with the city, a cash payment or certified check
shall be furnished the City Clerk for the total amount due for interceptor sewer charges,
public land dedication fees and any other charges or fees as provided by the City Code.
(9) The subdivider shall furnish a duplicate hardshell copy, one paper print, and
a digital copy in a city approved electronic format of the final plat as recorded to the City
Planning Department at the same time the original is submitted for recording.
(10) The final plat must meet all state and county platting requirements.
(11) The final plat must show the size of each lot on the plat, in square footage.
This may be exhibited either in schedule form or by having the square footage indicated
on the drawing of each lot.
7
(Prior Code, § 11.03)
§ 154.04 PLAT PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Generally. Information required to be shown in the sketch plan, preliminary and
final plats shall be as follows.
(B) Sketch plan data. Sketch plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) Plat boundary;
(2) North arrow and graphic scale;
(3) Street layout on and adjacent to plat;
(4) Designation of existing and proposed land use and zoning;
(5) Significant topographical features;
(6) General lot locations and layout; and
(7) Concept plan showing divisions (B)(1) through (B)(6) above for adjacent
lands owned or controlled by the subdivider.
(C) Required preliminary plat submittal data.
(1) Existing identification and description.
(a) Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be
similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat recorded in Dakota County;
(b) Title opinion indicating ownership of property as prepared by a
certified title company;
(c) Location by section, town, range, or by other legal description;
(d) Names and addresses of the owner(s), lien holders, subdivider,
surveyor and designer of the plan; and
(e) Graphic scale (no smaller than 1 inch equals 100 feet and no larger than
1 inch equals 20 feet), north-point, and date of preparation.
(2) Existing conditions. Existing conditions in tract and surrounding area to a
distance of 300 feet for undeveloped areas and to the nearest street right-of-way (ROW)
or 200 feet for developed areas including, but not limited to, the following:
8
(a) Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated;
(b) Size of area to be platted;
(c) Name, location, and size of public and private streets, sidewalks,
railroad right-of-way and drainage and utility easements and any other easements and
their purpose;
(d) Boundary lines and ownership of adjoining land;
(e) Utilities including, but not limited to, location, size and water mains,
storm and sanitary sewers (including rim and invert elevations), fire hydrants, gas lines,
electric and telephone poles, street lights, curbs, gutter, culverts, catch basins, manholes
and other facilities;
(f) Permanent buildings and structures;
(g) Topography, showing lakes, water courses, wetlands, and contours at
vertical intervals of no more than 2 feet. All elevation data shall be mean sea level, 1929
USGS or established city datum;
(h) Other information, such as soil tests or borings and a historic high
water elevation, if requested by the Public Works Department, Planning Department or
the Council to aid in its review;
(i) Public improvements of record; and
(j) Zoning.
(3) Proposed subdivision design features.
(a) Layout and width of proposed streets and utility easements showing
street names, lot dimensions, parks and other public areas. The street layout shall include
all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider;
(b) Proposed use of all parcels. If a proposed preliminary plat will, upon
approval, require a comprehensive plan amendment and/or rezoning, the developer shall
submit to the City Planning Department, at the time of submitting the preliminary plat, a
petition for the comprehensive plan amendment and/or rezoning;
(c) Grading plan with the following items:
1. Plan showing finish grades and surface drainage of all parcels
including overall final contours at 2-foot intervals;
2. Building pad elevations; the building pad elevation shall be the
9
garage floor elevation;
3. Lowest opening elevations;
4. Proposed lot corner elevations;
5. Building pad foundation style such as walkout, look out, and the
like;
6. All drainage swales and critical drainage areas shall be clearly
identified with grade and spot elevations;
7. Preliminary street grades and drainage plan with elevations; and
8. Existing benchmarks used for surveying grading plan.
(d) Other right-of-way or easement locations, width, and purpose;
(e) Lot layout including size of each lot in square feet, lot lines, lot
numbers and block numbers;
(f) Size and location of public lands;
(g) Zoning and minimum required building setback lines;
(h) Preliminary plan of sanitary and storm water sewers with rim and invert
elevations, grades and sizes indicated for approval by the Public Works Department.
Preliminary plan of water main, valving and hydrants with sizes indicated for approval by
the Public Works Department. Sanitary sewer and water service lines stubbed out to the
individual lots shall also be shown;
(i) Erosion and sedimentation control plans which specify the control
measures to be used before, during, and after construction until the soil and slope are
stabilized by permanent cover. Erosion control plans shall be designated per city
approved standards;
(j) Tree plans which specify the proposed location and species of trees for
the subdivision. Trees plan shall be designated per city approved standards;
(k) Landscape plans for cul-de-sac islands, eyebrow islands, and berms;
(l) Key map at small scale showing location of the preliminary plat and
other property for at least 600 feet in every direction; and
(m) A declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions or the
equivalent document shall be submitted for review and approval by the city to ensure
10
maintenance of any common elements including open space, common drives, and
common utilities. The declaration shall include, but is not limited to, the following.
1. A statement requiring the deeds, leases, or documents of
conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses, or apartments be
subject to the terms of the declaration.
2. A provision for the formation of a property owners association or
corporation and that all owners must be members of the association or corporation which
may maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which may assess
individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common costs. The
association or corporation must remain in effect and may not be terminated or disbanded.
3. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for each owner
and any successive buyer.
4. Any open space restrictions must be permanent and may not be
changed or modified without city approval.
5. The association is responsible for liability insurance, local taxes,
and the maintenance of the open space facilities deeded to it.
6. Property owners are responsible for their pro rata share of the cost
of the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association which meet
the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes.
7. The association may adjust the assessment to meet changing needs.
(Am. Ord. 525, passed 1-3-2005)
(4) Additional city code requirements for subdivisions.
(a) Compliance with Chapter 155;
(b) Compliance with Chapter 151;
(c) Compliance with Chapter 152;
(d) Compliance with Chapter 153;
(e) Compliance with the Critical Areas Ordinance; and
(f) Compliance with the Natural Resources Management Ordinance.
(D) Final plat data.
(1) Existing identification and description data and proposed subdivision design
11
features as required for the preliminary plat;
(2) Boundaries of the property; lines of all proposed streets, walkways and
alleys, with their width, and any other areas intended for public use;
(3) Lines of adjoining streets and alleys, with their width and names;
(4) All lot lines, building lines and easements, with figures showing their
dimensions;
(5) An identification system for all lots and blocks;
(6) Data required under regulation by the Dakota County Surveyor, i.e.,
accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles and curvatures used to
describe boundaries, streets, easements, and other features;
(7) Certification by a qualified person to the effect that the plat represents a
survey made by him or her and that monuments and markers thereon exist as located and
that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct;
(8) Notarized certification by owner, and by all mortgage holders of record, of
the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas;
(9) Certification showing that all taxes currently due on the property to be
subdivided have been paid in full;
(10) Form for approval by the Planning Commission:
Planning Commission of Hastings, Minnesota
This __________ day of __________, 20__
Signed ____________________
Chairperson
Signed ____________________
Secretary
12
(11) Form for approval by the Council:
City Council of Hastings, Minnesota
This __________ day of ____________, 20__
Signed ____________________
Mayor
Signed ____________________
City Clerk
(Prior Code, § 11.04) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
(A) Generally. Design standards shall assure that the layout of the subdivision
harmonizes with existing plans affecting the development and its surroundings and shall
be in conformity with the city’s development objectives for the entire area. preliminary
plat designs shall be in accordance with the latest Public Works Design Manual,
approved by the Council, and on file at the city. No plat shall be approved for any
subdivision which covers an area subject to periodic flooding or which is otherwise
poorly drained unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements at developer’s sole
expense which will, in the opinion of the Public Works Department, make the area
completely safe for occupancy, and provide adequate street and lot drainage and which
satisfy all flood plain requirements.
(B) Circulation.
(1) General street design.
(a) The design of all streets shall be considered in their relation to the
following: existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to
topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water and to the proposed uses of the area to
be served.
(b) Where new streets extend existing adjoining streets, their projections
shall be at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required
width.
(c) Where adjoining areas are not subdivided the arrangement of streets in
new subdivisions shall make provisions for the proper projection of streets. When a new
subdivision adjoins un-subdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, then the new
13
streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the un-subdivided land.
(2) Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall not be permitted unless there are specific
engineering reasons to require them based on existing property condition, topography, or
natural features. Maximum length of permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be 500 feet
measured along the center line from the intersection or origin to end of right-of-way.
Each cul-de-sac shall be designed according to city standards. Cul-de-sacs shall be
required to have a landscaped island according to city specifications.
(3) Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
(4) Street intersections. Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right
angles and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees. It must be
evidenced that safe and efficient traffic flow is encouraged. No intersection shall contain
more than 4 corners.
(5) Street names. Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing and
named streets shall bear the name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the
proposed street duplicate existing street names, including phonetical similarities. Where
a plat extends beyond existing streets, continuity of present street naming scheme shall be
maintained. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works Director
and the Fire Marshal.
(6) Private streets. Public improvements shall not be approved for any private
street. Private drives and utilities shall be constructed according to approved city
standards and shall be privately maintained.
(7) Local service drives. Where a proposed plat is adjacent to a major
thoroughfare, the Council may require the developer to provide local service drives along
the right-of-way of the facilities or they may require that lots should back on
thoroughfares, in which case, vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots and
thoroughfares shall be prohibited.
(8) Access to arterial and collector roadways. Where a proposed plat is
adjacent to an arterial or collector roadways as designated by the Hastings
Comprehensive Plan, spacing between access points to the thoroughfares of less than 660
feet for collectors and 1,320 feet for arterials shall be avoided except where impractical
or impossible due to existing property divisions or topography.
(9) Arterial and collector road driveways. Driveway access to arterial streets is
strongly discouraged. Residential driveway access to collector streets should be avoided.
If residential driveway access to arterial or collector streets is approved due to specific
engineering reasons, topography or natural features, a 35-foot setback from the property
line shall be required, and the driveways must be constructed with a turnaround.
14
(10) Alleys. Alleys may be permitted as part of planned residential
developments (PRD).
(11) Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street arrangements shall be
such as to cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land
and providing convenient access to it.
(12) Pedestrian system. A pedestrian walkway shall be provided between lots
where required by the City Council to allow for pedestrian accessibility to streets or
public service areas. These pedestrian ways shall be graded to allow construction of
concrete sidewalks or bituminous paths thereon and to meet established grades.
(C) Easements.
(1) Utilities. Easements at least 10 feet wide along front and side-corner lot
lines as well as centered on rear and side lot lines shall be provided for drainage and
utilities where necessary. Easements for water main, storm or sanitary sewers shall be at
least 20 feet wide. They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block.
Temporary construction easements may be required where installation depths are greater
than 10 feet. Drainage and utilities easements shall be kept free of any vegetation which
would interfere with the free movement of utilities service vehicles and/or water flow.
Vegetation and fences placed in utility easements by the property owner are done so at
the property owner’s risk. Fences and vegetation may be removed at the owner’s
expense by the city to work within the easement.
(2) Trail easements. Trail easements shall be recorded with plats and will be
sized and located according to the city’s sidewalk and trails plan.
(3) Water courses. When a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage
ways, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right
of way conforming substantially with the lines of the water courses, and with the further
width or construction as may be determined to be necessary by the Public Works
Department. No fences, structures, or vegetation shall be allowed that would block the
water course.
(D) Blocks.
(1) Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet and shall not be less than
400 feet.
(2) Pedestrian ways. In blocks longer than 600 feet, a pedestrian crossway
easement or right of way with a minimum width of 20 feet may be required near the
center of the block. The use of additional access ways to schools, parks, and other
destinations may be required.
15
(E) Lots.
(1) Layout. Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines. Lots with frontage on 2 parallel local streets
shall be prohibited.
(2) Size and dimension. Minimum lot area and lateral dimensions shall be as
set forth in Chapter 155.
(3) Corner lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least 10% wider than the
minimum lot width required.
(4) Natural features. When subdividing land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features which if preserved will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed
development and which may alter normal lot platting.
(5) Lots along thoroughfares. There shall be no direct vehicular access from
residential lots to an arterial street, and residential lots shall be separated from arterial
streets and railroad rights-of-way by a 25-foot buffer strip, which may be in the form of
added depth or width of lots backing on or siding on the thoroughfares or railroad rightof-
way.
(6) Lot remnants. Lot remnants which are below the minimum lot size must be
added to adjacent or surrounding lots rather than be allowed to remain as an unusable
outlot or parcel unless the owner can show plans for the future use of the remnant. (Prior
Code, § 11.05) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) Generally. The subdivider shall be required to provide the following
improvements unless the city elects to provide any of the required improvements as
specified under the provisions of division (I) below.
(B) Monuments. Steel monuments shall be placed at all block corners, lot corners,
angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shown on the final
plat. The installation shall be the subdivider’s expense and responsibility. All U.S., state,
county, or other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent
to the property shall be preserved in precise position. All monuments displaced,
damaged, or removed during grading operations shall be replaced by the developer. The
monuments shall be installed after the final grading has been completed. The subdivider
shall provide required certification of installation to the county. A copy of this
certification shall also be sent to the city.
16
(C) Streets.
(1) Grading. Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way in
accordance with street grades submitted to and approved by the Public Works
Department. All street grading and gravel base construction will be in accordance with
specifications on file in the Public Works Department. Grading will be complete prior to
installation of applicable underground utilities, either private or public in nature. Gravel
base construction shall be undertaken after completion of the installation of underground
utilities.
(2) Surfacing. Following Public Works Department approval of street grading
and after utility installation, streets shall be surfaced and provided with concrete curbs
and gutters in accordance with the latest recommended plans and specifications prepared
by the Public Works Department, approved by the Council, and on file at the city.
(3) Boulevard sod. The developer shall install a 3-foot strip of sod directly
behind the curb as part of the street construction process. This boulevard sod strip shall
be planted prior to the development being approved for building permits. If weather or
sod supply does not allow the sod to be installed before building permits are requested,
then the developer shall provide the city a letter of credit for the sod installation and shall
install the sod as soon as feasible.
(D) Utilities.
(1) Sanitary sewer. Sanitary sewer facilities adequate to serve the subdivision
shall be installed in accordance with the latest plans and specifications of the Public
Works Department and shall meet the requirements of the master plan for sanitary sewer
extensions of the city. Minimum size sanitary sewer in any street shall be 8 inches
diameter. The developer must pay the total cost of sanitary sewer through 10 inches
diameter size if this greater size is required by the Public Works Department. Larger than
10 inches diameter size pipe, when required shall be funded through the use of city
SAC/Interceptor Sewer funds. The oversizing cost for developer constructed public
sanitary sewer mains shall be determined by the Public Works Director and paid to the
developer upon construction and acceptance of the sewer mains.
(2) Water supply. Water distribution facilities adequate to serve the subdivision
including pipe, fittings, hydrants, valves, and the like shall be installed. All water mains
shall be installed in accordance with the requirements with the latest plans and
specifications of the Public Works Department and shall meet the requirements of the
master plan for water main extensions of the city. Minimum size water main in any street
shall be 6 inches diameter. The developer must pay the total cost of water main through
8 inches diameter size. Larger than 8 inches diameter size pipe, when required shall be
funded through the use of city WAC funds. The oversizing cost for developer
constructed public water mains shall be determined by the Public Works Department and
17
paid to the developer upon construction and acceptance of the water mains.
(E) Drainage facilities. Storm sewer, ponding basins, and or other surface drainage
facilities shall be installed as determined to be necessary by the Public Works
Department for the proper drainage of surface waters. No storm drainage shall be carried
over the street surface for a distance greater than 500 feet.
(F) Tree plantings.
(1) Tree requirements. A street/boulevard tree shall be required for every 50
linear feet of street frontage in a subdivision. One front yard tree shall also be required
for every lot in the subdivision. The subdivider shall submit a tree plan indicating the
location and species of trees. Only those varieties of trees approved by the City Forester
will be used. The minimum size shall measure 1 and 1/2 inches in diameter at ground
line. No trees shall be planted within 30 feet of the intersection of curb lines on corner
lots.
(2) Time of tree planting. The front yard tree and boulevard trees as identified
on the approved tree plan shall be planted prior to a residence receiving a certificate of
occupancy. If it is not practical to plant trees because of inclement weather, the builder
or owner shall provide a cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in the amount of 125% of
the estimated cost of the tree(s) and installation.
(3) Front yard trees. The front yard trees shall be planted on private property 5
to 15 feet inside the property line and not in the utility and drainage easement, side strip
or boulevard. No trees shall be planted within 30 feet of the intersection of curb lines on
corner lots.
(G) Sidewalks and driveways.
(1) Grading of boulevards in all new developments shall be accomplished so as
to accommodate construction of sidewalks thereon regardless of whether the boulevard is
part of the Sidewalk Plan on file at City Hall. Any sidewalk located in the plat shall be
dedicated to the public. Any sidewalks constructed in any subdivision shall be in
accordance with specifications established by the Public Works Department. Sidewalks
shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width, and located 1 foot off the property line in the street
right-of-way.
(2) Each and every driveway shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications established by the Public Works Director. If a sidewalk is to be
constructed, the concrete driveway shall extend through to the property line side of the
walk. The remainder of the driveway shall be concrete or asphalt from the end of the
concrete apron to the garage. In cases where driveways are constructed after curbing and
sidewalks are in place, the sidewalk shall be reconstructed in accordance with driveway
specifications for the width of the driveway.
18
(3) (a) Parking areas shall be designed to provide an adequate means of access to
a public alley or street. The driveway access shall not exceed 30 feet in width for residential
uses and 32 feet in width for commercial, office, or industrial uses at the property line and
driveways shall be so located as to cause the least interference with traffic movement. All
driveway widths shall be measured from the property line, not the roadway. Driveways
must be located at least 3 feet from the extension of the side lot line from the property line
to the curb to accommodate the driveway apron. Driveways abutting a public street must
have a minimum 3-foot landscaped separation between any adjacent driveway.
(b) Driveway widths up to 50 feet will be permitted only by special permission
of the Planning and Public Works Directors. All off-street parking spaces shall access off
driveways and not directly off a public street unless otherwise approved by the Planning
and Public Works Directors.
(Ord. #2011-17, 3rd Series, Adopted 8-15-11)
(4) All single-family homes, duplexes, 4-plexes, townhomes, and townhouse
quadriminiums developed as part of plats approved after 1-1-1994 shall be required to
have mail delivery serviced by city approved boxes clustered together. Individual mail
boxes will be permitted only upon receiving handicap exemption status from the Hastings
area office of the United States Postal Service, with appeal rights to the St. Paul district
office of the United States Postal Service. Mailbox unit foundations shall be constructed
with the development’s street improvements, and in accordance with the latest
recommended plans and specifications prepared by the Public Works Department and on
file at City Hall. The location and number of mailbox units will be determined by the
Public Works Director in consultation with the U.S. Post Office.
(Ord. #2011-17, 3rd Series, Adopted 8-15-11)
(H) Specification; inspections.
(1) Generally. Unless otherwise stated, all of the required improvements shall
conform to engineering standards and specifications as required by the city. The
improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by, and shall be made in
sequence as determined by the Public Works Department. Plans and specifications for
the required improvements shall be submitted to the Public Works Department in a type
and format specified by the Public Works Department for review and approval. The
developer contracting these improvements will be required to post a cash escrow with the
City of Hastings in the amount of 125% of the estimated cost of the review of the plans.
The estimated cost of the plan review shall be determined by the Public Works Director.
The city will pay all plan review costs incurred from these escrowed funds, and furnish
the Developer with copies of all invoices received. The city will also charge 10% of the
consultant fees to cover city overhead and administrative costs connected to the
consultant inspection services. Excess funds will be returned to the developer upon
completion of the improvement project. If the funds deposited with the city are
insufficient to cover the review costs, the developer will be required to deposit additional
19
funds with the city to cover the estimated overage.
(2) Grading inspection. All development site grading 1 acre in size or larger
shall be inspected by a city-designated grading inspector, who will review and inspect
maintenance of erosion control measures and compliance with city standards, and the
approved grading plan and specifications. The developer contracting these grading
improvements will be required to post a cash escrow with the City of Hastings in the
amount of 125% of the estimated cost of the inspection services prior to receiving
approval to commence grading. The estimated cost of inspection services shall be
determined by the Public Works Director. The city will pay all grading inspection costs
incurred from these escrowed funds, and furnish the developer with copies of all invoices
received. The city will also charge 10% of the consultant fees to cover city overhead and
administrative costs connected to the consultant inspection services. Excess funds will be
returned to the developer upon completion of the grading project. If the funds deposited
with the city are insufficient to cover the inspection costs, the developer will be required
to deposit additional funds with the city to cover the estimated overage. The Building
Code grading permit fee and the construction permit erosion control inspection fee will
be waived for those grading projects that require a grading inspection cash escrow.
(3) As-built grading plan. Upon completion of site grading, the developer shall
submit to the Public Works Department for review, an as-built grading plan in a type and
format specified by the Public Works Department showing the newly graded elevations at
all lot corners, critical elevations in drainage-ways, 1 foot contours at ponding and
sedimentation basins, and at ponding level control points for ponding basin emergency
overflow swales.
(4) Inspection of public improvements. Construction of all subdivision street
and utility improvements and other required subdivision improvements shall be inspected
by a city designated inspector for compliance with city standards, and the approved
improvement plans and specifications. The developer contracting these improvements
will be required to post a cash escrow with the City of Hastings in the amount of 125% of
the estimated cost of the inspection services prior to receiving approval to commence
construction. The estimated cost of inspection services shall be determined by the Public
Works Director. The city will pay all improvement inspection costs incurred from these
escrowed funds, and furnish the Developer with copies of all invoices received. The city
will also charge 10% of the consultant fees to cover city overhead and administrative
costs connected to the inspection services. Excess funds will be returned to the
Developer upon completion and acceptance of the improvement project. If the funds
deposited with the city are insufficient to cover the inspection costs, the Developer will
be required to deposit additional funds with the city to cover the estimated overage.
(5) As-built improvement plan. Upon completion of the required public
improvements, the city inspector shall prepare a record as-built drawing of the
constructed improvements.
20
(I) Required surety.
(1) Developer financed and constructed improvements. Prior to installation of
improvements required under this section that are to be furnished and installed by the
developer, the developer shall provide the city a letter of credit, cash escrow, or other
approved form of surety, in the amount of 125% of the estimated cost of furnishing and
installing the required improvements. This surety shall be used to cover failure of the
developer to construct the improvement in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and city standards, or failure to complete the improvements as approved.
(2) City financed and constructed improvements. To request the city to design
and construct improvements required under this section, the developer must submit a
petition for all improvements required as part of the development in accordance with
state law. The petition must be submitted prior to October 15 of the year preceding the
construction of improvements. Upon acceptance of the petition by the City Council and
prior to commencement of city work on the improvement design, the developer must post
a letter of credit, cash escrow, or other approved form of surety with the City of Hastings
in the amount of 125% of the estimated cost of engineering services to prepare a
feasibility study and plans and specifications for the improvement project. This surety
shall be used to cover city costs incurred for the feasibility study and design of
improvements should the Council decide not to order the improvement, or the developer
fail to complete the platting and grading of the proposed development by August 1 of the
year in which the City Council ordered the improvements constructed.
(3) Maintenance bond. Prior to accepting or approving the completed
developer financed and constructed grading and/or street and utility improvements, the
developer must submit a maintenance bond from his or her contractor in the amount of
20% of the improvement costs, covering a period of 1 year after city acceptance of the
improvements.
(4) Privately constructed improvements. In the event the subdivider elects to
pay 100% of all costs incurred by installation of the improvements required under this
section, outside of the normal assessment procedure, he or she may do so providing he or
she complies with the following requirements:
(a) All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Public Works Department;
(b) The subdivider must retain a registered civil engineer to design the
improvements; and
(c) Complete the required improvements within a 2-year period.
21
(J) Requirements for a building permit.
(1) No building permit shall be granted on the platted property until the time as
certified copy of the recorded plat has been filed with the city and production of proof
that all conditions of plat approval have been met. In a case where the City of Hastings is
a party to the platting, a copy of the plat, certified by the City Clerk as true and correct,
shall satisfy the requirements of this section.
(2) No building permit shall be granted on the platted property until the time
that the subdivider provides the city with a certified survey indicating that the entire site
as shown on the preliminary and final plats has been graded pursuant to the approved
elevations shown on the preliminary and final plats.
(3) No building permit shall be granted on platted property until the bituminous
base course has been constructed, sod behind the curb and gutter installed, and sanitary
sewer, water main and storm sewer improvements tested and accepted. (Prior Code,
§ 11.06) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 154.07 PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION.
(A) All persons requesting the platting, replatting, or other subdivision of land
(excluding simple lot line adjustments which do not create additional lots) shall dedicate
a portion of the area to be subdivided for parks, playgrounds, public open space, or storm
water holding areas or ponds in accordance herewith. The city may at its discretion
choose to require payment of cash in lieu of land in accordance herewith.
(1) General requirements. In all subdivisions, a portion of the area to be
subdivided shall be dedicated for public recreation and open space purposes, the
dedication being in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, storm water holding
areas or ponds, or other public ways or easements. No area may be dedicated for public
use until it has been approved by the City Council as being suitable and needed to
preserve and enhance the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.
The dedicated lands shall be reserved for public use as parks, playgrounds, public open
space, trails or any combination thereof. It shall be deemed to be in the public interest to
require park dedication from a particular subdivision when the City Council after review
and recommendation by the Natural Resources and Recreation Commission and the
Planning Commission, determines that 1 or more of the following criteria have been met.
(a) All or part of the land proposed to be subdivided or developed has been
previously designated as open space, park land or a trailway in the Comprehensive Plan.
22
(b) A need for additional parks or recreational facilities will be generated
by the development of the proposed facilities.
(c) The land proposed to be subdivided or developed adjoins existing park
or school open space property and the City Council further finds that for the safety and
convenience of the public using the parks or the school children attending the school, a
walkway or corridor or open space is a public necessity; or that parking lot surface runoff
from the land to be subdivided would create or add to water drainage or erosion problems
within the adjoining open space area.
(d) All or part of property located in an industrial or commercial district
proposed to be subdivided is adjacent to a residentially zoned district, and that an open
space area is or will be in the near future necessary to protect the adjacent residents from
safety or health hazards which are reasonably foreseeable from any of the permitted or
conditional uses which exist or could be developed on the land to be subdivided.
(e) The land proposed to be subdivided contains or borders upon existing,
unique topographical features, including but not limited to ponds, lakes, streams,
wetlands, timber stands, hills or bluffs which should be preserved or reserved for all the
public in order to prevent safety hazards and to provide unique recreational aesthetic
enjoyment for residents.
(2) Standards for accepting dedication of land for public park purpose.
(a) Land proposed to be dedicated for public purposes shall meet the
general requirements as set forth under division (A)(1) above.
(b) Prior to dedication for public purpose, the subdivider shall deliver to
the city an abstract of title or registered property abstract for the dedication. The
conveyance documents shall be in the form acceptable to the city.
(c) The required dedication and/or payment of fees-in-lieu of land
dedication shall be made at the time of final plat approval. The Council may upon the
request of the property owner, at the city’s discretion when cash is provided in lieu of
land, postpone to a subsequent date (not later than commencement of construction) the
time of payment. Any delayed payment in accordance herewith shall bear interest at 8%
per annum from the date of plat approval to date of payment.
(d) The removal of trees, topsoil, storage of construction equipment,
burying of construction debris, or stockpiling of surplus soil is strictly forbidden without
the written approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(e) Grading and utility plans, which may affect or impact the proposed
park dedication, shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation
prior to dedication, or prior to initiation of construction which will affect the park lands.
23
(f) To be eligible for park dedication credit, land to be dedicated must be
located outside of drainage ways, flood fringe areas, floodway areas, or ponding areas
after the subdivision is developed. Grades exceeding 12% or grades which are unsuitable
for parks development may be considered for partial dedication. A credit of up to 30% of
the required dedication at the discretion of the City Council may be allowed for on-site
storm sewer, ponding and storm water holding and ponding areas, wetlands or other
surface water resources provided that the improvements benefit identifiable park and
recreation resources. When lands to be dedicated to be used for these purposes have been
determined to have a park function, credit will be given at a rate of 50% of the pond and
adjoining land area below the ordinary high water level; a minimum of 70% of land
above the high water level shall be dedicated before pond credit is granted.
(g) Land to be dedicated must be determined suitable for public recreation
and open space use and must be situated so as to best serve the present and future needs
of the neighborhood and community for recreation and park purposes. Areas to be
dedicated for public park, trail or ponding shall be brought to a suitable condition by the
subdivider prior to acceptance by the city. All dead trees, trash, junk, unwanted
structures or similar undesirable elements shall be removed by the owner at his or her
expense. Further, the city may at its discretion require the subdivider to rough grade the
land to be dedicated if deemed necessary for use for park purposes.
(B) The amount of land to be dedicated in accordance herewith shall be as follows.
(1) Residential development. The amount of land that all new residential
subdivisions shall dedicate for public parks, playgrounds, public open space, or storm
water holding areas or ponds, as required by this chapter, shall be a percentage of the
gross land area being platted based upon the proposed density per gross acre as shown
below:
Proposed Density (units)
Per Gross Acre of Plat
Percentage of Gross Area of
Plat to be Dedicated
0.0-1.9 9%
2.0-3.5 11%
3.6-5.9 13%
6.0-10 15%
10+ Add 0.6% per unit over 10
(2) Commercial/industrial development. The amount of land to be dedicated in
accordance herewith shall be 10% of the gross land area to be platted. (Am. Ord. 500,
passed 8-4-2003)
(C) The Planning Director shall transmit a copy of all preliminary plats involving
24
land to be dedicated for the purpose hereof, to the Natural Resources and Recreation
Commission, who shall report back to the Planning Director within 30 days after receipt
thereof, with recommendation with reference to the proposed dedication.
(D) The city may at its discretion require the developer to make a cash payment to
the city in lieu of land to meet public land dedication requirements. The cash amounts
shall be determined as follows.
(1) Residential development.
(a) Two thousand and two hundred dollars per unit for all single-family
detached units;
(b) One thousand and six hundred and fifty dollars per unit for all twin
homes and 2-unit buildings; and
(c) One thousand and one hundred dollars per unit for all buildings
containing 3 or more units
(2) Commercial/industrial development.
(a) One thousand and two hundred dollars per gross acre of industrial
development; and
(b) One thousand and five hundred dollars per gross acre of commercial
development.
(3) Payment. Any cash so obtained shall be used by the city only for the
acquisition of land or equipment for parks, playgrounds, public open space, trails or debt
retirement in connection with land previously acquired for the purposes. The City
Council may, upon request of a subdivider, delay time of payment of cash in lieu of land
beyond the time of final plat approval by the city no later than commencement of
construction of public improvements. Any delayed payment in accordance herewith shall
bear interest at 8% per annum from the date of plat approval to the date of payment.
(Am. Ord. 500, passed 8-4-2003; Am. Ord. 517, passed 6-21-2004)
(E) Where the developer provides internal to the development, open space, park,
recreational or like facilities, which are to be privately owned and maintained by the
developer or residents of the developed area, a credit not to exceed 50% of land required
(or cash in lieu of) may be provided upon the following conditions: That the land is not
occupied by non-recreational buildings or structures and is available for the use of all
residents in the proposed subdivision. That required open space and setbacks shall not be
included in the computation of the private open space, park, and the like. That the use of
the private open space shall be restricted to park, recreational and like uses in a manner
satisfactory to the city, which may include recorded restrictions or covenants to run with
the land, the same not to be defeated, eliminated or reduced without consent of the city.
25
That the proposed park area internal to the development is of size, shape and location,
topography and usability for park and recreational purposes or contains unique natural
features, the preservation of which is determined to be in the best interest of the city by
the City Council. The proposed private open space, park, and the like, reduces the
demand for public recreational facilities to serve the development. Determinations in
accordance with this division (E) shall be by the city.
(F) Where a proposed park, playground, or recreational area has been indicated in
the master plan or park plan of the city, and is located in whole or in part within the
proposed subdivision, the proposed public site shall be designated as such and shall be
dedicated to the appropriate governmental entity. If the developer chooses not to
dedicate an area in excess of the land required under the section hereof for the proposed
public site, the Council shall not be required to act or approve or disapprove the plat of
the subdivision or development of same for a period of 90 days after the subdivider meets
all of the provisions of this chapter to permit the Council to consider the proposed plat
and take the necessary steps to acquire, through purchase or condemnation, all or part of
the public site proposed under the master plan of the city. This chapter shall apply to all
plats which receive final plat approval after 7-1-1991. (Prior Code, § 11.07) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 154.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Responsible official. It shall be the duty of the Council to see that the provisions
of this chapter are properly enforced.
(B) Building permit.
(1) No building permit shall be issued by any city official for the construction
of any buildings, structures, or improvement of any land henceforth subdivided until all
requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.
(2) Building permits shall be withheld for structures on tracts which have been
subdivided and conveyed by methods prohibited by this chapter and the city may refuse
to take over tracts as street or roads or to improve, repair, or maintain any such tracts.
(C) Variances. The Council, by a 2/3 vote of the entire Council, shall have the
power to vary from the requirements of this chapter when supporting evidence indicates
that:
(1) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographic
conditions of the land involved, a practical difficulty to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be
carried out;
(2) The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is based are unique to
26
the tract of land for which the variance is sought and one not applicable, generally, to
other property with the same zoning classification;
(3) The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to
increase the value or income potential of the parcel of land;
(4) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other land or improvements in the vicinity in which the tract of land is
located; and/or
(5) The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
property, or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets, or increase the
danger of fire, or endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property
values within the vicinity; (Prior Code, § 11.08)
(6) The variance is in harmony with the purposes and intent of ordinance;
(7) The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
(8) The proposal puts the property to use in a reasonable manner; and
(9) There are practical difficulties in complying with the official control.
“Practical difficulties,” as used in connection with the granting of a variance means that:
(a) The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by an official control;
(b) The practical difficulty is caused by the provisions of this chapter and
has not been created by any persons presently or formerly having an interest in the parcel
of land;
1. A practical difficulty is not present if the proposal could be
reasonably accomplished under the current Ordinance
requirements,
(c) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality.
(d) Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
(e) Practical difficulties include inadequate access to direct sunlight for
solar energy systems.
(10) The Council may impose conditions in the granting of a variance provided
the conditions must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the
impact created by the variance. (Ord. No. 2011-14, 3rd Series, passed 07-05-11)
§ 154.09 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
27
No transfer of ownership of land may occur in which the land is described:
(A) By metes and bounds;
(B) By reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after 4-21-1961; or
(C) To an unapproved plat made after the effective date of this chapter. However,
transfers of ownership of land may occur as allowed by M.S. § 462.358, Subdivision 4b,
(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) now in effect and as they may be amended from time to
time, or was an approved minor subdivision (waiver of platting requirements) or
boundary lot line adjustment approved pursuant to § 154.10. (Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 154.10 MINOR SUBDIVISION; WAIVER OF PLATTING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Generally.
(1) A minor subdivision may be initiated by the property owner(s) or
authorized agent by filing an application with the Planning Department along with the
fee(s) established by resolution of the City Council.
(2) A minor subdivision is limited to 1 division of a parcel of land per 12-
month period which results in no more than 3 lots, provided no new road is required and
all lots created meet the requirements of Chapter 155. It does not include any
boundary/lot line adjustment approved pursuant to division (E) below.
(3) The minor subdivision or boundary/lot line adjustment shall not necessitate
any additional public investment in new roads nor utilities to serve the lots.
(4) A minor subdivision is generally not intended for outlots nor
commercial/industrial lands.
(B) Application.
(1) Unless specifically exempted by division (B)(2) below, an application for a
minor subdivision/waiver of platting requirements shall include 20 copies of a certificate
of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor showing at a minimum the following
information:
(a) Map specifications. Date; northpoint; legend; standard engineer’s scale
no less than 1 inch equaling 100 feet, unless otherwise approved by staff;
(b) Boundaries. The original lot lines; the proposed new lot lines; legal
description of the existing and proposed property;
28
(c) Easements. Existing and proposed easements and their dimensions;
(d) Existing improvements. Names and locations of streets, drainage lines,
sewer and water lines, other utilities, and structures within the proposed minor
subdivision area;
(e) Proposed improvements. Location of proposed sewer and water lines,
utilities, common facilities, driveways and structures;
(f) Setbacks. Setback distance between existing/proposed structures and
all lot lines;
(g) Lot areas. Existing and proposed lot(s) areas shown in square feet for
each lot less than 1 acre;
(h) Supplementary information. An affidavit by the applicant containing
the exact names and addresses of all persons or entities having any type of ownership
interest in the property;
(i) Other features. Topography and other features as may be required by
the City Engineer; and
(j) Site information. Any other information specific to the particular site
and required for the complete evaluation of the application. The information shall be
supplied at the expense of the applicant.
(2) For property zoned commercial within the Downtown Overlay District, the
city may waive any of the requirements of this division (B) including a certificate of
survey. Generally, the city may waive a certificate of survey if the lot split results in
equal halves, thirds or quarters of the parent platted parcel. The applicant for a minor
subdivision within the Downtown Overlay District shall, at a minimum, submit a legal
description for all existing and proposed lots/parcels.
(C) Review process.
(1) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application.
Notice of the time and place of this public hearing shall be published once in the official
newspaper and mailed to all property owners within 350 feet of the subject property.
Both notices shall be given at least 10 days before the date of the hearing. The Planning
Commission shall recommend to the City Council either approval, with or without
conditions, or denial of the proposed minor subdivision within 60 days of when the
completed application was accepted by the Planning Director. If the Planning
Commission recommends that the minor subdivision be denied, the Planning
Commission shall set forth the reasons for its recommendation and forward them to the
applicant and the City Council.
29
(2) The City Council may approve the request with or without conditions, deny
it, refer it back to the Planning Commission for additional input or study or require
modification of the proposed minor subdivision. The City Council shall approve or deny
the minor subdivision request within 120 days after the completed application has been
accepted by the Planning Director.
(3) Where public agencies other than the city have some form of jurisdiction
over an area included in or directly affected by a proposed minor subdivision, approval of
that minor subdivision may be conditioned on satisfaction of the requirements of the
outside agency. The agencies shall include but not be limited to Dakota County and
Minnesota Department of Transportation, and the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
(D) Filing.
(1) If the application is approved and the city deems it appropriate, a
Declaration of Minor Subdivision shall be prepared and signed by the city and all owners
of the property. The Declaration of Minor Subdivision shall contain the provisions as
deemed necessary by the City Council. The Declaration of Minor Subdivision shall be
recorded against the property at the County Recorder’s office. The minor subdivision
shall not become effective until the Declaration of Minor Subdivision has been signed by
all property owners and recorded with the County Recorder’s office.
(2) If approval of the minor subdivision results in the creation of more lots than
previously existed, the applicant shall be required to pay park dedication fees, interceptor
sewer charges, and other applicable fees for each additional lot created as required by the
city ordinance in effect at that time.
(3) A declaration of minor subdivision or certified copy of the resolution
waiving the platting requirements together with 1 copy of the certificate of survey, shall
be recorded with the county. In addition, a copy of the certificate of survey shall be filed
with the city. Proof of filing the resolution waiving the platting requirements shall also
be submitted to the city prior to issuance of any building permits on the property.
(E) Boundary/lot line adjustments.
(1) A boundary/lot line adjustment includes, but is not limited to, transfer of
title of a portion of 1 parcel to an adjacent parcel.
(2) The Planning Director can administratively approve a boundary/lot line
adjustment subject to the following requirements:
30
(a) Compliance with division (B) above;
(b) A common property line between two adjacent parcels in the same
zoning district may be adjusted; provided all resulting parcels conform with the Hastings
Zoning Ordinance including minimum lot area and setbacks;
(c) In case of nonconforming lot(s), a boundary/lot line adjustment shall
not result in increasing the nonconformity of either lot(s); and
(d) The Planning Director can attach the conditions deemed necessary to
protect the public interest.
(3) A boundary/lot line adjustment shall be deemed to occur when the deed
transferring title is recorded with the County Recorder’s office. (Prior Code, § 11.10)
§ 154.11 FEES.
(A) The city shall prescribe fees sufficient to defray the costs incurred by it in
reviewing, investigating, and administering an application for an amendment to an
official control established, or an application for a permit or other approval as follows:
Type Fee
Administrative Lot Split $50
Lot Line Rearrangement $50
Minor Subdivision $500
Final Plat $600
Preliminary Plat $500 + escrow as follows: $3,500 (under 10 acres);
$6,500 (10 acres and greater)
(B) Fees for actions not prescribed above may be levied by the city provided they
are fair, reasonable, and proportionate and have a nexus to the actual cost of the service
for which the fee is imposed. (Ord. 537, passed 6-20-2005)
31
§ 154.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails
to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific
provisions hereof. (Prior Code, § 11.99) Penalty, see § 10.99
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
155.01 Establishment of districts; Official Zoning Map
155.02 Definitions
155.03 Generally
155.04 Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
155.05 Application of district regulations
155.06 Nonconforming lots, uses of land, structures, uses of structures and
premises, characteristics of use
155.07 Special provisions
155.08 Signs
155.09 Parking and loading requirements
Districts
155.20 Generally
155.21 A Agriculture
155.22 R-1 Low Density Residence
155.22.5 R-1L Low Density Residence Large Lot
155.23 R-2 Medium Density Residence
155.24 R-3 Medium High Density Residence
155.25 R-4 High Density Residence
155.26 RMU Residential Mixed Use
155.27 R-6 Manufactured Home Residence
155.28 C-1 General Commerce
155.29 C-2 Highway Auto-Specialized Commerce
155.30 C-3 Community Regional Commerce
155.31 DC Downtown Core
155.32 C-4 Regional Shopping Center
155.33 O-1 General Office
155.34 I-1 Industrial Park
155.35 I-2 Industrial Park Storage/Service
155.36 PI Public Institution
155.37 VSO Vermillion Street Overlay
2
Supplemental Regulations
155.50 Residential district lot regulations
155.51 Site plan review procedure
155.52 Architectural standards
155.53 Landscape standards
155.54 Administration and enforcement
155.55 Construction and use to be as proved in application, plans, and permits
155.56 Amendments
155.57 Provisions declared to be minimum requirement
155.58 Complaints regarding violations
155.59 Fees
155.98 Violations
Appendix A: Off-Street Loading Requirements
Appendix B: Required Number of Spaces
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
(A) Official Zoning Map. The city is divided into Use Districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map(s), which with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map(s) shall be
identified by the signature of the Planning Director under the following certification: “I
certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 1 of City Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Hastings, Minnesota, passed (month, date, year). ” An index
shall be affixed to and become a part of the Official Zoning Map(s). Amendments as
approved by the Council shall be tabulated on the index, with an entry as follows:
Date Page Amendment Signature
(Date of Council (Page of Maps) (Brief Description of (Signature of
Mayor
Resolution) Amendment) and City Clerk)
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map(s) or matter shown
thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any
unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of
this chapter. Despite the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map(s)
which may, from time to time, be made or published, the Official Zoning Map(s) which
shall be located in the office of the Planning Department shall be the final authority as
to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in
the city.
(B) Replacement of Official Zoning Map. In the event that the Official Zoning
Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the Council may, by resolution, adopt the new
Official Zoning Map that shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new
Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior
Official Zoning Map, but no correction shall have the effect of amending the original
Zoning Map or any subsequent amendments thereof. The new Official Zoning Map
3
shall be identified by the Signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and
bearing the seal of the city under the following words: “This is to certify that this
official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of
adoption of map being replaced) as part of City Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Hastings, Minnesota. ” Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been
destroyed, the prior map or any significant part of it remaining shall be preserved, with
all available records about its adoption or amendment. (Prior Code, § 10.01)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas,
such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas,
such as whip antennas.
BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner or manager occupied dwelling in which a
room or rooms are rented on a nightly basis for periods of less than a week. Meals
may or may not be provided.
BED AND BREAKFAST UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
BREW PUB. A restaurant establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license in which malt liquor is brewed or manufactured solely for sale on tap on the
licensed premises that shall be owned by the brewer.
BREWERY TAPROOM. An area on the premises of a brewery or on premises
adjacent to a brewery owned by the brewer in which the brewer sells or otherwise
provides exclusively malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption with the
brewery taproom.
COCKTAIL ROOM. A facility on or adjacent to premises owned by a
microdistillery for the consumption of distilled spirits produced by the microdistillery.
MICRODISTILLERY. A distillery which produces premium, distilled spirits.
BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have
been provided.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Licensed
commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to
the general public.
4
CONVERSION. The converting of any 1-family dwelling to a multiple-family
dwelling.
DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT. The area zoned C-3 bounded by the
Mississippi River to the north, 4th Street to the south, Bailly Street to the east, and
Eddy Street to the west.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND. Any place or
premises used for sale, dispensing, or servicing of food, refreshments or beverages in
automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and
may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on site.
DWELLING, 2-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling building containing 2
dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building designed for 2 or
more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of
dwelling units provided.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit other than
a manufactured home, designed for and occupied by 1 family only.
DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof, constituting a independent
housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental, or lease and separate from
any other dwelling units that may be in the same structure and containing independent
cooking and sleeping facilities.
ESTABLISHED STRUCTURE SETBACK. The setback established by an
existing structure. The Established Structure Setback may be less than the minimum
zoning provision provided that the structure is legally nonconforming.
FAMILY. A group of individuals living under 1 roof.
FUNERAL HOME. A building, or part thereof, used for human funeral services
and which may include space for the embalming and other services used in the
preparation of the dead for burial, the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related
supplies, the storage of funeral vehicles, facilities for cremation, chapels, and other
related uses.
HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for
bulk pickups and deliveries.
LOT. A separate parcel, tract, or area of land undivided by any public street or
approved private road, established by plat, metes and bounds subdivision, or as
otherwise permitted by law, and occupied by or intended to be developed for and
occupied by a principal building or group of the buildings and accessory buildings, or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, including the open spaces and
yards as are designed and arranged or required by this chapter for the building, use, or
development.
LOT-CORNER (CORNER LOT). A lot at the intersection of 2 or more streets.
LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest
5
the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and
through lots, all sizes of a lot next to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards
shall be provided as indicated under yards in this section.
LOT-INTERIOR (INTERIOR LOT). A lot other than a corner lot with only 1
frontage on a street.
LOT MEASUREMENT. The depth of a lot shall be considered the distance
between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. Width of a lot
shall be considered the distance between straight lines connecting the front lot width at
setback.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a plat recorded in the office of the County
Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of that has
been so recorded.
LOT-THROUGH (THROUGH LOT). A lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than 1 street.
MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME). A single-family detached
housing built to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974 or as may be amended.
MEASURED DISTANCES. That all distances expressed in feet shall be to the
nearest tenth of a foot.
MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUND LOT. A facility for the temporary storage of
motor vehicles, as defined by M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to
time. This definition does not include the storage of motor vehicles for salvaging,
repairing, stripping, dismantling, sales or storage beyond time limits provided by
ordinance.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A structure in which is conducted the primary use of
the lot.
PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Licensed
telecommunications systems used by local governments and all other public and private
entities eligible under Part 90 of the FCC rules for public safety purposes including
police, fire, emergency medical, highway maintenance, and forestry conservation radio
service.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the general
public. For the purpose of this chapter, personal wireless service shall not be
considered public utility uses, and are defined separately.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, DEPENDENT. A residential facility licensed
in accordance with Minn. Rules, Chapter 4655.0100, subpart 8, as it may be amended
from time to time, now in effect, or as may be amended in the future, and used to
provide full dependent care for aged or infirm persons who require nursing care and
related services.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, SEMI-INDEPENDENT. A state licensed
6
residential facility for aged and/or disabled persons within which provides only personal
or custodial care.
RESIDENTIAL SENIOR FACILITY, INDEPENDENT. A residential facility in
which at least 1 resident per dwelling unit is 55 or older. The dwelling units must be
self-contained and physically accessible to aged persons.
ROOF LINE. The line in which an exterior wall surface of a building structure
departs from a vertical plane.
SENIOR/DISABLED CITIZEN DWELLING UNIT. Is defined pursuant to
§ 155.22.
SERVICE STATION. A retail station for servicing motor vehicles especially with
gasoline, oil, and other accessories.
SHOPPING CENTER. A group of commercial retail establishments with multiple
tenants that share parking and have a visual appearance as a contiguous structure that
may or may not be planned, constructed, or managed as a total entity.
SIGN. Any letter work, symbol, model, printed, projected or affixed device,
poster, picture, reading matter, or other representation in the nature of an
advertisement, announcement, direction or informative device including structural and
compound parts that is located outdoors and is larger than 1 square foot in area.
(1) BANNERS. A sign, flag, banner, pennant, or valance constructed of
cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, plastic or other light materials with or
without frames, which is not permanently secured and is intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time only. (Ord. No. 2014-06 3rd Series, Adopted 7-07-14)
(2) CONSTRUCTION SIGN. Any sign that displays information regarding
the construction or development of the site in which it is displayed.
(3) DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that serves primarily to direct traffic to
the location of a place, area, or activity.
(4) ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof
displaying electronic images, graphics, or pictures, with or without text information,
defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light
emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the
display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by
means of fade, repixilization or dissolve modes. ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY
SIGNS include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital
displays. ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGNS are prohibited from flashing or
pulsing. ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGNS include projected images or
messages within these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
(5) FLAG. A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design mounted on a
pole used as a symbol (as a nation), signaling device (nautical), or attention getting
device (advertising).
(6) FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is self supporting and affixed to a
frame structure, not attached to a building.
7
(7) GRADE OF SIGN. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface
of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the sign and a line 10 feet
from the sign.
(8) IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign that displays only the name, address
and title of an occupant or the name and address of a building or development.
(9) MONUMENT SIGN. Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted
on the ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign.
(10) NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign that does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter.
(11) OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that advertises anything other than the
business located on the same lot.
(12) PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign other than a temporary sign.
(13) PORTABLE SIGN. Sandwich boards and other types of durable signage
which are placed in front of a business during operating hours and are removed at the
end of the business day. Vehicle Signs shall not be considered Portable Signs. (Ord.
No. 2014-06 3rd Series, Adopted 4-7-14)
(14) PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign affixed to an outside exterior wall or
soffit of any building and is not parallel to the plane of the wall or soffit.
(15) PUBLIC SIGN. Any sign display intended primarily to promote items of
general interest to the community such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric
conditions, news, and the like. This does not include any information that would be
related to the products or services at the display site.
(16) REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign about the sale, lease, or rental of land
or buildings.
(17) ROOF LINE. The line at which an exterior wall surface of a building
structure departs from a vertical plane.
(18) ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof.
(19) SHOPPING CENTER AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A freestanding
sign used to identify single tenant or multi-tenant buildings.
(20) SIGN AREA. The area within the marginal lines or extreme outside edge
of the surface that bears the advertisement, or in the case of messages, figures, or
symbols attached directly to any part of a building, that area included in the smallest
rectangle that can be made to circumscribe any message, figure, or symbol displayed
thereon. For a sign with not more than 2 back-to-back faces, only the area of 1 side is
computed in determining the sign area.
(21) SIGN HEIGHT. The height of a sign shall be measured from the grade
of the sign.
8
(22) SIGN ILLUMINATION. A light source within or directed at the sign.
(23) TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted including ribbons, banners, pennants, and other similar attention
getting devices.
(24) TRAFFIC SIGN. A sign erected by a governmental agency for guiding
vehicular traffic and providing information to motorists.
(25) VEHICLE SIGN.
(a) Flat, one-dimensional signs painted or placed magnetically or
otherwise attached (i.e. glue) to a vehicle.
(b) Signs under 10 square feet attached to a vehicle via a structural
support.
(c) Temporary Signs and Banners affixed to vehicles shall not be
considered Vehicle Signage. (Ord. No. 2014-06, 3rd Series, Adopted 04-07-14)
(26) VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN. A sign that changes its message or background
in a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which
may or may not include text and depicts action or special effects to imitate movement,
the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which
have the illusion of motion, including but not limited to the illusion of moving objects,
moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes. VIDEO
DISPLAY SIGNS include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto
buildings or other objects.
(27) WALL SIGN. A sign affixed to the exterior wall, mansard roof, or soffit
of a building that is parallel to the building wall. A wall sign does not project more
than 12 inches from the surface to which it is attached, or extend beyond the top of the
parapet wall.
SPECIAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zoning district but, if controlled as to number, area, location,
or relation to the neighborhood, would not detract from the public health, safety, and
welfare. Special uses may be permitted in a zoning district if specific provision for the
special uses is made in this Zoning Ordinance. Conditional Uses and Conditional Use
Permits shall have a similar meaning as Special Uses and Special Use Permits. Chapter
30.02, Subd. (E)(2) established conditions governing application procedures, granting
of permits, and limitations.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The line dividing privately owned property from
property dedicated or conveyed for public use.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, and
fences.
TOWER. Any ground mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof,
including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, masts, intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above
grade.
9
TOWER, MULTI-USER. A tower designed for the antennas of more than 1
commercial wireless telecommunications service provider or governmental agency.
TOWER, SINGLE-USER. A tower designed for only the antennas of a single
user.
TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes.
VARIANCE. A modification from the literal requirements of this chapter.
YARD. A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing only
landscaping or other uses and structures provided by this zoning ordinance.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of a front line between
side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building line in depth.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear-yard depth shall be measured
at right angles to the rear line of the lot.
YARD, SIDE. A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of
the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or without either a front
or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side-yard width shall be measured at right
angles to side lines of the lot.
YARD, SPECIAL. A yard behind any required yard next to a public street,
required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but next to a lot line so
placed or oriented that neither the term side nor rear yard clearly applies. In such
cases, the administrative official shall require a yard with minimum dimensions as
generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining which shall
apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be located to the
adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and location of structures areas
thereon.
ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that 1 or
more of the building’s sides rest directly on a lot line. (Prior Code, § 10.02) (Am.
Ord. 558, 2nd Series, passed 12-4-2006)
§ 155.03 GENERALLY.
(A) Application. Except as herein provided, no buildings or land within the city
shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected,
moved, or altered unless in conformity with applicable regulations herein specified.
(B) Geographic jurisdiction. The geographic jurisdiction of this chapter shall be
the entire area within the present or future corporate limits of the city and any area
outside the city, which by state law is or may hereafter be governed by this chapter.
(C) Annexed territory. Annexed territory shall be designated by an ordinance of
the Council to a proper use zoning district after annexation, after referral to and
recommendation by the Planning Commission. No permit shall be issued for
construction or use in annexed territory until the area is clarified by the Council.
10
(D) Essential services. Essential services shall include governmentally and
privately owned and operated. Governmentally owned and operated essential services
are exempt from the application of this chapter. Privately owned and operated essential
services are subject to the provisions of this chapter unless specifically exempted by a
provision hereof or by Council. (Prior Code, § 10.03)
§ 155.04 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
(A) Generally. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply.
(B) Rules.
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets,
highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the center lines.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following the lot lines.
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following the city limits.
(4) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
midway between the main tracks.
(5) Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow
the shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as
moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streams, river canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed
to follow the center lines.
(6) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
divisions (B)(1) through (B)(5) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(7) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance
with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by
divisions (B)(1) through (B)(6) above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret the
district boundaries.
(8) Where a district boundary line divides a lot that was in single ownership at
the time of the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may permit the
extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the
district line into the remaining portion of the lot. (Prior Code, § 10.04)
§ 155.05 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
(A) Generally. The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class of structure or land,
except as hereinafter provided.
(B) Intent. No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
11
structure or part thereof shall be hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
or altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located.
(C) Building regulations. No structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed the height or bulk; to accommodate a greater number of families; to occupy a
greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side
yards, or other open space than herein allowed; or in any other manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
(D) Accessory building and structure requirements. Accessory buildings and
structures shall meet the following requirements.
(1) No accessory building shall be erected in any required front or side yard
fronting a public street or right-of-way.
(2) No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to
the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
(3) Accessory structures, except fences meeting the requirements of division
(F) below, shall not be placed in any easements.
(4) All accessory structures, except fences, shall meet the setbacks listed in
the table in division (D)(11) below.
(5) All accessory structures shall be setback at least 6 feet from all other
structures.
(6) At grade accessory structures such as basketball courts, patios, dog
kennels shall meet the accessory structures setbacks listed in the table in division
(D)(11) below. These accessory structures are not included in the total allowable
square footage allowed, as long as the total impervious surface of the lot does not
exceed 35% for the rear yard. The rear yard shall be measured from the rear building
line to the rear lot line.
(7) Accessory structures shall have weather resistive exterior finishes that are
durable and architecturally compatible with and similar in design, color, and material to
the principal structure.
(8) Accessory structures shall not exceed 1 story in height and shall not
exceed 16 feet in height as measured to the mean of the roofline, or the height of the
principal structure, whichever is more restrictive. The roofline mean height shall be
measured from the mean height of the ground grade surrounding the accessory
structure. Sidewalls shall not exceed 10 feet in height as measured from the mean
height of the floor of the structure.
(9) The height of any accessory structure shall not be taller than the primary
structure.
(10) Accessory structures 120 square feet or less require a zoning permit.
Structures over 120 square feet require a building permit.
12
(11) The following table shall determine the number, size, and setbacks of
accessory structures. In addition to the accessory structures listed in the table below,
swimming pools meeting the requirements of § 150.09 and 155.05 are permitted.
Accessory Building/Structure Number, Size,
and Setback Standards
Setbacks
Property
Zoning
Number of
Structures
Maximum
Floor Area
Size
Side Corner Side
(a)
Rear
A
R-1, R-1L, R-
2, R-3, R-4,
R-5 with
attached
garage (b)
1 1,000 square
feet
5 10 5
R-1, R-1L, R-
2, R-3, R-4,
R-5 without
attached
garage
2 Combined
total 1,000
square feet
5 10 5
R-6 1 1,000 square
feet
5 10 5
Multi-Family
4 or more
units
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Commercial/
Office Districts
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Industrial
Districts
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
Site Plan
Review
NOTES TO TABLE:
(a) Garages shall be setback 20 feet from the right-of-way.
(b) Residential properties with an attached garage are also permitted an accessory storage structure
120 square feet in size or less.
(E) Yard area regulations. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this
chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet at
least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
13
(F) Fences and walls or hedges.
(1) Location. Fences are permitted, but shall not extend into public right-of-way.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, fences, walls, and hedges are
permitted in any yard, including a required yard, or along the edge of any yard,
provided that no fence, wall, or hedge shall extend into public right-of-way.
(2) Materials. All fences built or maintained on a residential property shall be
constructed of materials capable of providing a finished appearance on the outward side
visible to the public. All materials used to construct the fence shall be sound materials,
resistant to rot, and capable of accepting and maintaining a visually attractive
appearance. The fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to be capable of
resisting the design wind loads for structures as defined by the state building code.
(3) Hazardous fences and walls. Hazardous fences and walls such as barbed
wire, electric, chain link with barbs exposed, and walls with protruding sharp edges
thereof, and other fences and walls designed for or likely to cause harm to persons are
declared hazardous and are prohibited in the city, except as follows: conventional
barbed wire fences with barbs exposed are allowed with permission of the Council by
simple resolution in commercially zoned areas, and are allowed without permission of
the Council in industrial and agriculturally zoned area. Any fence constructed in
violation of this section after the effective date shall be brought into compliance or
removed as determined by the Planning Director.
(4) Height restrictions. The maximum height of any fence installed within a
residential zoning district of the City of Hastings is 6 feet; however, fences installed
within the front yard are limited to a maximum height of 3.5 feet or 42 inches. Fences
installed around swimming pools from ground up must be a minimum of 4 feet high and
non-climbable with a self-closing, self-latching gate. Maximum height of all fences
shall be in compliance with the city zoning code or as approved by the Planning
Commission.
(5) Special consideration/corner lots. Fences that extend into front yards of
corner lots must not impair traffic visibility. No fence or hedge shall be over 30 inches
in height located within 25 feet each direction from a property corner fronting a street
right of way.
(6) Covenants. The City of Hastings does not enforce the private covenants
of subdivisions. Homeowner’s association covenants may restrict the ability to
construct fences. Homeowners should review any covenants prior to submittal of a
permit.
(7) Permits. A zoning permit is required for all fences installed in Hastings.
(8) Setbacks. All fences may be installed up to, but not on the property line.
(9) Establishing Property Lines. The City of Hastings does not provide
surveying service. It is up to the homeowner to establish the location of the lines and
make these available at time of application or upon request of the inspector.
(G) Erection or more than 1 principal structure on a lot. In any district, more than
1 structure housing a permitted principal use may be erected on a single lot provided
that yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as if it
were on an individual lot.
14
(H) Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations contained in § 155.20,
do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys,
or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy except as otherwise allowed by the City Council.
(I) Structure to have access. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be
on a lot next to a public street, or with access to a city allowed private street or
driveway and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient
access for servicing, fire protection, and required off street parking.
(J) Yard maintenance. In all districts, landscaping and fences shall be constructed
and maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health or safety
conditions.
AND
(K) Portable carport. A nonpermanent structure designed as a shelter for
motor vehicles, boats, and the like. Such structure shall not be permanently affixed to a
foundation. Temporary tarps, tents and the like erected for periods not to exceed 1
week are not considered portable carports.
(1) Portable carports must remain open on 4 sides, with no sidewalls.
(2) Portable carports must be anchored in such a manner as to prevent
wind uplift.
(3) Portable carports may not be permanently anchored to concrete slabs
or footings or otherwise anchored in a manner that would impede easy removal and
portability.
(4) All anchoring systems must be inspected and approved by the City
Building Inspector.
(5) Portable carports are allowed in the rear and side yards, not the front
yard.
(6) Portable carports must be setback 6 feet from the home and 3 feet
from the garage.
(7) The sidewall height of a carport shall be limited to 10 feet.
(8) Carports shall not be considered as an approved shelter, cover or
screening for miscellaneous materials and equipment.
(9) A zoning permit will be required before installation of a portable
carport.
(10) Pre-existing portable carports. All structures used solely as a carport prior to
February 19, 2007, shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming structure as allowed by this
chapter and state statute; however, pre-existing carports must adhere to all provisions of this chapter
including but not limited to materials and appearance standards.
(Prior Code, § 10.05) (Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003; Am. Ord. 521, passed 9-7-
15
2004; Am. Ord. 547, passed 3-20-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-05, 3rd Series, passed 9-4-
2007) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord. 2011-5, 3rd Series, passed 4-18-11)
§ 155.06 NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES OF LAND, STRUCTURES, USES OF
STRUCTURES AND PREMISES, CHARACTERISTICS OF USE.
(A) Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may
later be adopted there exist: lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and
characteristics of use that were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended,
which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or
future amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the
intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, not to be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a
structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in
combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by
attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off
the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature that would be prohibited
generally in the district involved. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun before the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual construction was lawfully
begun before the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon
which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction
is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, the excavation
or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work
shall be carried on diligently and continues to completion within 1 year.
(B) Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter not
withstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. The lots must be
in separate ownership, and not of continuous frontage with lots in the same ownership.
This provision shall apply though the lot fails to meet the requirements for area or
width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the
lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. Variance
of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustments.
If 2 or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage
in single ownership under 1 tax parcel are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements
established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided
parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or
sold in a way that diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a
lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. Any lots so
divided to lesser requirements than those of this chapter shall not be built upon.
16
(C) Nonconforming uses of land. Where at that time of passage of this chapter
lawful use of land exists that would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this
chapter the use may be continued while it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
(1) No nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter;
(2) No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion
of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by the use at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter;
(3) If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period more
than 30 days, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations specified
by this chapter for the district in which the land is located; and
(4) No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this chapter
shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land.
(D) Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter because of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the
lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, the structure may be continued
while it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
(1) No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered except as follows:
(a) A structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its
nonconformity.
(b) A nonconforming structure may be expanded provided it does not
exceed beyond the Established Structure Setback. (Ord. 2010-20, 3rd Series, passed 12-
20-2010)
(2) Should the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure
be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the
time of destruction, and no bulding permit has been applied for within 180 days of
when the properties damaged, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter. In this case, the City may impose reasonable conditions
upon a building permit to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent properties.
Nothing in this subsection shall allow a nonconforming use to be continued or expanded
if another provision of this chapter prohibits continuation or expansion of the
nonconformity.
(Ord. #2011-19, 3rd Series, Adopted 8-15-11)
(3) Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is
moved.
(E) Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in
combination. If lawful use involving individual structures or of structure and premises
17
in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
which would not be allowed in the district that it is located under the terms of this
chapter, the use may be continued while it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions.
(1) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the
district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
(2) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building that were manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, but no use shall be extended to occupy any land outside any
building.
(3) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure
or structure and premises may be changed to another non conforming use provided that
the Board of Adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific
case, find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district that the existing nonconforming use. In permitting the change, the Board of
Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
(5) When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structures and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 6 consecutive months (unless
government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structures and
premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conforming with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
(6) Where nonconforming use status applied to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming
status of the land except that in the case of destruction, application for a building permit
to replace the damaged structure within 180 days of when the property is damaged shall
prevent elimination of the nonconforming status of the land. In the case where a
building permit is not applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged, the
City may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit to mitigate any newly
created impact on adjacent properties. Nothing in this subsection shall allow a
nonconforming use to be continued or expanded if another provision of this chapter
prohibits continuation or expansion of the nonconformity. Destruction for the purpose
of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of the
replacement cost at the time of destruction.
(Ord. #2011-19, 3rd Series, Adopted 8-15-11)
(F) Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing
walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10% of the current
replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the
18
structure, provided that the cubic content existing when it becomes nonconforming shall
not be increased. If a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to
lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be
unsafe or unlawful because of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored,
repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it
is located. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any
official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of the official. (Prior
Code, § 10.06) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.07 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Temporary outdoor merchandising events. Temporary outdoor merchandising
events may be allowed as an accessory use within the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4, zoning
districts, subject to the requirements of this section. For the purposes of this section,
MERCHANDISING EVENT or EVENT is defined to include the promotion and sale
of goods and/or services, including, but not limited to, inventory reduction or
liquidation sales, distressed merchandise sales, seasonal sales, and special event sales.
The following standards shall apply to all temporary outdoor merchandising events in
private parking lots.
(1) A proposed event and any temporary structures to be used in that event
must meet all applicable building, fire, and electrical codes and adopted appendices and
city ordinances.
(2) One event shall not exceed 60 consecutive calendar days. Any
combination of events shall not exceed 60 calendar days per site per calendar year. For
purposes of this section, shopping centers shall be considered 1 site and 1 event shall
not exceed 60 consecutive calendar days and any combination of events held at a
shopping center shall not exceed 75 calendar days per calendar year.
(3) No merchandise shall be sold which would violate the city’s zoning
ordinances.
(4) Temporary structures may be used, provided they will not impair the
parking capacity, emergency access or the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on or off the site. All temporary structures shall be constructed with materials
approved for weather-exposure durability and appearance. All temporary structures
shall be removed within 24 hours after the end of the event.
(5) The site shall have adequate off-street parking will exist for the proposed
event and adjoining buildings. In multi-tenant buildings, consideration will be given to
the parking needs of the other tenants. In no event, can designated handicapped
parking spaces or handicapped access be impaired by an event.
(6) All signs related to the event shall comply with the standards of the zoning
district.
19
(7) Applicant must submit a completed application form to the Planning
Department for review and approval.
(B) Seasonal outdoor garden centers. Seasonal outdoor garden centers may be
allowed as an accessory use within the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 zoning districts,
subject to the requirements of this section. For purposes of this section, GARDEN
CENTER is defined to include the promotion and sale of goods and/or services,
including but not limited to plants, vegetation, landscaping materials, and lawn care
items. Garden centers will be permitted for a maximum period of 180 days. Garden
centers are permitted upon application to the Planning Department for review and
approval subject to the following.
(1) Applicant must submit a completed application form to the Planning
Department for review and approval.
(2) Applicant must submit a site plan with the application, indicating the
following:
(a) Location on the property;
(b) Size of the area;
(c) Method of containment area. Indicate materials and design of the
proposed garden center structure, any fencing on the site, and trash containment
systems;
(d) Pedestrian and traffic control safety measures. The sales area may
not impeded pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns on the site;
(e) Utility plan; indicate how water and electricity will be provided to the
site; and
(f) An inspection by the Fire Marshal of the garden center and
surrounding site will be required prior to the garden center opening for business. (Ord.
2010-17, 3rd Series, passed 08-02-2010) (Prior Code, § 10.07)
(C) Towers and antennas.
(1) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division (C) is to accommodate
and provide a reasonable opportunity for the establishment of wireless
telecommunications in the city. The city finds it necessary to adopt standards and
regulations that promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, while
minimizing the possible adverse effects of towers and antennas on nearby property.
The Council finds that these regulations are necessary to:
(a) Ensure standards which permit a reasonable and equitable
opportunities for the establishment of wireless telecommunications services in the city;
(b) Ensure that towers and antennas are designed, constructed, installed,
and maintained in a manner that does not adversely impact public safety;
(c) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunications antennas in order to reduce the number
20
of towers needed to serve the community; and
(d) Minimize adverse visual affects from towers through careful design
and siting standards which attempt to screen and/ or camouflage towers and antennas
from adjacent public and private property.
(2) Findings. The City of Hastings finds it necessary for the promotion and
preservation of the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community that
the construction, location, size, and maintenance of wireless telecommunication
facilities be controlled. Further, the city finds:
(a) Towers and antennas have a direct impact on, and relationship to, the
image of the community;
(b) The manner of installation, location, and maintenance of towers and
antennas affects the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community;
(c) A reasonable opportunity for the establishment of wireless
telecommunications must be provided to serve residential, business, public utility and
public safety needs; and
(d) Uncontrolled and unlimited towers and antennas adversely impact the
image and aesthetics of the community and, thereby, undermine economic value and
growth.
(3) Building permits.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, replace, re-erect, or repair any tower without first making application for and
securing a building permit as provided in this ordinance. This also includes adding
antennas to existing towers.
(b) The applicant shall provide at the time of application for a building
permit sufficient information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance
of the antenna and tower will be in compliance with applicable Building Code
requirements.
(c) Permits are not required for:
1. Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array
affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that the replacement does not reduce the safety
factor; and
2. Antennas and /or towers erected temporarily for test purposes,
for emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pick-up operations, provided
that the antennas or towers are not located on a public right-of-way, and towers are
protected against unauthorized climbing. Temporary antennas used for test purposes or
broadcast remote pick-up operations shall be removed within 72 hours following
installation.
(4) Height restrictions.
(a) The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the tower’s point of contact with the ground to the highest point of the
tower, including all antennas or other attachments.
21
(b) Except as provided in the following subdivision of this section,
maximum heights for towers are as follows.
1. In all residential zoned property, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall be 80 feet.
2. In all non-residential zoning districts, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed a height of 125
feet. The City Council may allow towers up to 150 feet high if the applicant can
demonstrate that based upon the topography of the site and surrounding areas, antenna
design, surrounding tree cover and structures and/or through the use of screening, that
off-site views of the tower will be minimized.
(5) Exceptions to height restrictions. The following are exceptions to the
maximum height restrictions for towers.
(a) Multi-use towers made to accommodate more than 1 user may exceed
the height limit by 25 feet.
(b) Antennas located on existing buildings or water towers are limited to
rise 15 feet above the structure. The City Council may permit the antenna to rise 25
feet above the structure if the applicant can demonstrate that by a combination of
antenna design, positioning of the structure and/or by screening erected or already in
place on the property, that off-site views of the antenna are minimized to acceptable
levels.
(6) Setbacks. Towers shall conform with each of the minimum setback
requirements.
(a) Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with
the exception of industrial and commercially zoned districts, where the tower may
encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear property line abuts another
industrial or commercially zoned district and the tower does not encroach upon any
easements.
(b) Towers located on property in or abutting residential districts shall be
setback the height of the tower from residential property lines.
(c) Towers located in industrial districts shall have a minimum setback
equal to the engineered fall zone, as determined in writing by a qualified engineer, and
agreed upon by the City Council.
(d) Towers shall be set back from all platted or planned public rights-ofway
by a minimum distance equal to 1/2 of the height of the tower including all
antennas and attachments.
(e) Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public
street.
(f) A tower’s setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied, at the sole discretion of the City Council, to allow the integration
22
of a tower into an existing or proposed structure, such as a church steeple, light pole,
power line support device, or similar structure.
(g) No tower shall be located in a wetland or a wetland setback.
(h) In a residential district, the required setback from property lines for
antennas and towers not rigidly attached to a building or structure shall be equal to the
height of the antenna and tower. Those antennas and towers rigidly attached to a
building or structure, and whose base is on the ground, may reduce the required
setback by the amount equal to the distance from the point of attachment to the ground.
(7) Towers in residentially zoned districts. Towers located in residentially
zoned areas are subject to the following restrictions.
(a) Towers supporting amateur radio antennas shall conform to all
applicable provisions of this code and shall be allowed only in the rear yard of
residential property.
(b) Towers supporting commercial antennas and conforming to all
applicable provisions of this Code shall be allowed in residential zoned districts in the
following locations:
1. Church sites, when camouflaged as an architectural feature such
as steeples or bell towers;
2. Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park as
determined by the Natural Resource Commission; and
3. Government, school, utility, and institutional sites.
(c) Only 1 tower shall exist at any 1 time on any 1 residential parcel with
the exception of towers designed to replicate an existing structure, such as a tree or
light.
(8) Multiple principal uses and structure on a single lot. For the purposes of
this division (C), 1 tower and multiple antennas shall be permitted on the same lot as
another principal use or structure subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(9) Construction requirements. All antennas and towers erected, constructed,
or located within the city shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) All applicable provisions of this code;
(b) Towers and their antennas shall be certified by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind
loading requirements of the Building Code and the Electronics Industry Association and
all other applicable reviewing agencies;
(c) With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and
connection lines approved by the city, no part of any antenna or tower nor any lines,
cable, equipment, or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend
across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or
property line;
23
(d) Towers and their antennas shall be designed to conform with accepted
electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the
National Electric Code;
(e) All towers shall be constructed to conform with the requirements of
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration;
(f) All towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing.
(g) Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material.
(h) The applicant is responsible for receiving approvals from the Federal
Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, and any appropriate
state review authority stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by that agency or that the tower is exempt from those regulations.
(10) Tower and antenna design. Proposed or modified towers and antennas
shall meet the following design requirements.
(a) Towers and antennas (including supporting cables and structures) shall
be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color,
camouflaging and architectural treatments. Communication towers not requiring FAA
or FCC painting/marking shall be painted an appropriate color, such as, blue, gray,
brown, white, or black finish.
(b) Commercial wireless telecommunications service towers shall be of a
monopole design unless the City Council determines that an alternative design would
better blend in the surrounding environment.
(c) Radio and television antennas may be of a design related to their
function, provided that no part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment,
or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any
part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
(d) Personal television and radio antennas on top of residential structures
shall be exempt.
(11) Co-location requirements. All communication towers erected,
constructed, or located within the city shall comply with the following requirements.
(a) A proposal for a new telecommunications service tower shall not be
approved unless the City Council finds that the telecommunications equipment planned
for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
building within a 1-mile search radius (1/2-mile search radius for towers under 120 feet
in height, towers under 80 feet are exempt from this requirement) of the proposed
tower due to 1 or more of the following reasons.
1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower or commercial building, and the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
24
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
2. The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building
and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
3. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to reasonable
function.
4. The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to colocate
on existing towers and structures within a 1-mile radius was made, but an
agreement could not be reached.
(b) Any proposed telecommunication service tower shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s
antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional user. Towers must be
designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights.
(12) Lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless the lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower. When
incorporated into the approved design of the tower for camouflage purposes, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to
the tower.
(13) Signs and advertising. No signage, advertising, or identification of any
kind intended to be visible from the ground or other structures is permitted, except
applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or
by federal, state, or local authorities.
(14) Accessory utility buildings. All utility buildings and structures accessory
to a tower may not exceed 1 story in height and 400 square feet in size and shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. The use of
compatible materials such as wood, brick, or stucco is required for associated support
buildings. Equipment located on the roof of an existing building shall be screened from
the public view with building materials identical to or compatible to existing materials.
In no case shall wooden fencing be used as a rooftop equipment screen. Site plan
review and approval is required for these accessory utility buildings.
(15) Landscaping. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by
suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects
and compliments the architectural character of the surrounding area. Removal of
existing shrubs and trees shall be minimized through careful site selection and design.
Landscaping requirements shall be determined through site plan review.
(16) Antennas mounted on roofs, walls, and existing towers. The placement of
wireless communication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers may be
administratively approved by the city, provided that the antenna meets the requirements
of this code and the following.
25
(a) The maximum height of an antenna shall not exceed 15 feet above the
roof and shall be setback at least 10 feet from the roof edge.
(b) Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend 5 feet above the
cornice line and must be constructed of a material or color which matches the exterior
of the buildings or structure.
(17) Application. In addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere
in this code, an application for a building permit for antennas to be mounted on an
existing structure shall be accompanied by the following information:
(a) A site plan showing the location of the proposed antennas on the
structure, accessory structures and wiring, and documentation that the request meets the
requirement of this code;
(b) A building plan showing the construction of the antennas, the
proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure, and documenting that the
request meets the requirements of this code;
(c) A report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer
indicating the existing structure or tower’s ability to support the antennas; and
(d) Compliance with FCC regulations is required to ensure there will be
no interference with existing tenants or public safety telecommunication providers.
(18) Appeals. An applicant may appeal an administrative decision under this
division (C) to the City Council. Following review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission, the City Council shall make a final determination on the
application.
(19) Existing antennas and towers. Antennas and towers in residential districts
and in existence as of the effective date of this division (C) which do not conform to or
comply with this division (C) are subject to the following provisions.
(a) Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now
existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all
respects with this chapter.
(b) If the towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location
and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefore, but without
otherwise complying with this chapter, provided, however, that if the cost or repairing
the tower to the former use, physical dimensions, and location would be 50% or more
of the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired
or restored except in full compliance with this chapter.
(20) Time limit on tower completion. Once a tower is approved by the city, the
tower must be substantially completed within one year, including any structures
accompanying the tower, following the date of permit.
(21) Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers. Abandoned or unused
towers or portions of towers and accompanying facilities shall be removed as follows.
26
(a) All abandoned or unused towers and associate facilities shall be
removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time
extension is approved by the City Council. In the event that a tower is not removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated
facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the
property.
(b) Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within 2 years 6 months of the time of antenna relocation, if the unused
portion exceeds 25% of the height of the tower or 30 feet, whichever is greater. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance of a new
special use permit.
(22) Interference with public safety telecommunications. No new or existing
telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All
applicants for new service shall be in compliance with FCC regulations.
(23) Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information required
elsewhere in this code, applications for a building permit towers and antennas,
applications for towers shall include the following supplemental information:
(a) A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer;
(b) Describing the tower height and design including a cross-section and
elevation;
(c) Documenting the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
(d) Describing the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate;
(e) Demonstrating the tower’s compliance with all applicable structural
and electrical standards and including an engineer’s stamp and registration number; and
(f) For all commercial wireless telecommunications service towers, a
letter of intent committing the tower owner and successor owners to allow the shared
use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and
conditions for shared use and so long as there is no negative structural impact upon the
tower, and there is no disruption to the service provided. (Prior Code, § 10.05) (Am.
Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003; Am. Ord. 521, passed 9-7-2004; Am. Ord. 547, passed 3-
20-2006)
(D) Home occupations.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this division (D) is to provide a means, through
the establishment of specific standards and procedures, by which home occupations can
be conducted in residential neighborhoods. This division (D) recognizes that home
occupations that are clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary residential use of
a structure may be conducted so long as they do not negatively affect the residential
character, health, safety, or general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In
27
addition, this section is intended to provide a mechanism enabling a distinction between
permitted home occupations and conditional or customarily more sensitive home
occupations, so that permitted home occupations may be allowed through an
administrative process rather than a quasi-judicial hearing process.
(2) General regulations.
(a) Exterior alterations or modifications that change the residential
character or appearance of the dwelling, any accessory buildings, or the property itself
for the purpose of a home occupation shall be prohibited.
(b) Exterior display or storage of equipment or materials related to the
home occupation is prohibited. No article for sale shall be visible from the street.
(c) There shall be no indication of offensive noise, vibration, smoke dust,
odors, heat, or glare at or beyond the property line.
(d) The home occupation shall be conducted indoors and shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants.
(e) The use shall not generate sewage of a nature or rate greater than
normally associated with a residential occupancy nor shall it generate hazardous waste
or solid wastes at a rate greater than that normally associated with residential
occupancy.
(f) No home occupation shall be allowed which jeopardizes the health
and safety of city residents.
(g) Shipment and delivery of products, merchandise, or supplies shall be
limited to between 8:00 am and 6:00 pm.
(h) No home occupation causing additional parking or traffic than would
be normally expected in a residential neighborhood shall be conducted between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(i) Only articles or services made or originating on the premises shall be
sold to customers on-site, unless the articles are incidental to a permitted home
occupation.
(j) Only 1 vehicle and 1 trailer specifically used for a home occupation
are permitted to be parked at the residence licensed for a home occupation. The
parking of these vehicles must be off-street and in compliance with the parking
regulations of the City Code.
(k) Signage may consist of not more than 1 single faced unlighted wall
sign per home with a maximum area of 2 square feet.
(3) Type I. Non-licensed home occupations may be allowed without a license
if in compliance with the following regulations:
(a) Compliance with division (D);
(b) Persons engaged in operation of the home occupation are limited to
28
only those members of the family residing on the premises.
(c) Traffic generated by such a permitted home occupation shall not
exceed 1 vehicle at a time. The Type I non-licensed home occupation shall remain in
effect provided it meets the requirements of this division (D). It shall be a
misdemeanor to operate a Type I home occupation in violation of this division (D).
Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense and may be punished as a separate
misdemeanor.
(4) Type II. Licensed home occupations require a license to be reviewed by
the Planning Commission and granted by the City Council. Type II licensed home
occupations must comply with the following conditions.
(a) The Type II licensed home occupation application fee shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
(b) The resident of the home must be chiefly involved in conducting the
home occupation. Persons not residing in the home may be employed in the home
occupation upon approval by the City Council.
(c) No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. Any need for
parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off of the street
in accordance with parking regulations of the City Code.
(d) Accessory structures and garages may be used in the operation of a
home occupation upon approval by the City Council and determination that its use will
not negatively affect the ability to store equipment and vehicles.
(e) The process for review of Type II home occupations requires the
following:
1. Notification of all property owners within 350 feet of a proposed
home occupation at least 10 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting where the
home occupation is to be reviewed. The notice must provide the date of consideration
before the Planning Commission and indicate that parties may be heard to consider the
application. Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate any
such proceedings as set forth within this code.
2. A fire safety inspection shall be required prior to issuance of any
home occupation license in any case where the City Council allows the home
occupation to employ outside employees. The fire safety inspection shall occur prior to
any license renewal.
3. Licenses shall be issued for a one year probationary period from
the date of City Council approval. The City Council shall consider issuance of a full
license at the end of the probationary period. The term of a license shall be 5 years.
(f) Licenses shall not run with the land and shall not be transferable.
(g) Whenever an application for a Type II home occupation license has
been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for a license
29
affecting substantially the same property and use shall not be considered again by the
Planning Commission or City Council for at least 6 months from the date of its denial
unless a decision to reconsider the matter is made by not less than 6/7 vote of the full
City Council.
(h) An applicant shall not have a vested right to a permit renewal by
reason of having obtained a previous permit. The previous granting or renewal of a
permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a license.
(i) The city hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home occupation
license to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any conditions additionally imposed.
The city shall only have the right of inspection in cases which the resolution of the
potential violation cannot be determined from outside the bounds of the property.
(j) It shall be a misdemeanor to operate a Type II home occupation in
violation of this division. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense and may be
punished as a separate misdemeanor. The Type II licensed home occupation shall
remain in effect during the license year so long as it is operated in compliance with the
provisions of this division (B)(4). The City Council may revoke the Type II license of
any individual that violated the provisions of this division (B)(4). Before any Type II
license is revoked the holder of the license will be given a hearing before the City
Council, which hearing will be preceded by 10-days’ mailed notice outlining the basis
for the revocation of the license. At the hearing, the holder of the license will be given
an opportunity to address the Council regarding the alleged violations.
(k) The City Council shall consider renewing a Type II home occupation
every five years under the following circumstances:
1. The home occupation has not intensified since being granted its
license.
2. The home occupation has not generated unresolved complaints.
3. Payment of the application fee that shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
4. Notification of all property owners within 350 feet of the home
occupation at least 10 days prior to the City Council meeting where the renewal will be
reviewed. The notice must provide the date of consideration. Failure of a property
owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within
this code. (Ord. 2011-11, 3rd Series, passed 01-03-2011)
(5) Home day care centers. Home day care centers are permitted without a
license, per the requirements of Dakota/Washington County.
(6) Effective date. All home occupations in existence on the effective date of
this division (B)(4) shall comply with all provisions of this division (D) within 180 days
from this division’s effective date. The City Council reserves all rights to modify this
division (D) in the future as it may deem appropriate. No home occupation operator,
whether Type I or Type II, shall acquire any vested rights to continue operation under
any ordinance provision that has been subsequently amended.
30
(7) Violations. It shall be a misdemeanor for anyone to violate a provision of
this division. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense and may be punished as
a separate misdemeanor. (Prior Code, § 10.12) (Am. Ord. 514, passed 8-16-2004)
(E) Residential care facilities, dependent and semi-dependent.
(1) Senior/disabled citizen dwelling unit, dependent. A dwelling unit
specifically designed for occupancy by no more than 2 individuals, 1 of whom is 62
years of age or disabled. A dependent dwelling unit shall be part of a residential
facility that is licensed in accordance with Minn. Rules, Chapter 4655, now in effect, as
it may be amended from time to time, and used to provide full dependent care for aged,
infirm, or disabled persons who require nursing care and related services.
(2) Senior/disabled citizen dwelling unit, semi-independent. A dwelling unit
containing a kitchen, bathroom, living and storage space, of not less than 350 square
feet and specifically designed for occupancy by no more than 2 individuals, 1 of whom
is at least 62 years of age or disabled.
(3) Accessory uses. Barber/beauty shops and other services intended
exclusively for the use and convenience of residents of the principal use, provided that
the accessory uses are accessible only from the interior of the principal building, and
have no signs or display relative thereto visible from the outside of the principal
building. Not more than 10% of the gross floor area of a principal building shall be
devoted to these accessory uses.
(4) Density. The maximum density shall be 3,000 square feet for each
dwelling unit.
(5) Requirements for setbacks and height. Except when adjacent to R-1 or R-
1L property, minimum setbacks are as follows:
R.O.W. Interior Side Yard Rear Yard
35 feet* 25 feet* 35 feet*
NOTES TO TABLE:
* Minimum distance to adjacent R-1 and R-1L property shall equal building height minus 30 feet
plus 80 feet.
(6) Required roof pitch. The roof shall have an angle of at least 15%.
(7) Screening. Adequate screening shall be provided adjacent to residential
care facilities, accessory structures, parking lots, loading and unloading areas.
(8) Lighting. Parking lot lighting and all other outside lighting shall conform
155.53.5 Exterior Lighting Standards and be designed so as not to be obtrusive to
adjacent residential areas nor to passing motorists on public rights-of-way.
(9) Community facilities. Principal buildings shall provide recreational,
service, and meeting facilities for the use and enjoyment of residents and guests. The
facilities shall comprise not less than 1,250 square feet, or 15 square feet of floor area
per senior/disabled resident citizen dwelling unit. The facilities shall be indoor space
and shall be conditioned for year round occupancy. Outdoor areas, laundry facilities,
storage areas, mechanical rooms, hallways, foyers, offices, circulation space, and other
similar areas shall not be included to satisfy this requirement.
31
(10) Grandfather provisions. The lawful use of any residential care facility at
the time of the enactment of this section may be continued. Any addition, alteration, or
change of any use or structure which increases the floor square footage or intensity of
use, shall comply with the requirements of this section and any other city codes
including, but not limited to, setbacks. Structures existing at the time of passage of this
ordinance, and which have nonconforming setbacks under the prior zoning code, shall
be deemed as under the prior zoning code, shall be deemed as having an approved
setback for the existing nonconforming structure or portion of a nonconforming
structure. Should the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure
be destroyed, it may be reconstructed provided the structure is reconstructed at the
same or greater setback prior to destruction. When a nonconforming structure or
portion of a nonconforming structure is destroyed, reconstruction must be completed
within 1 year of destruction, otherwise, the structure must be reconstructed in
conformance with the provisions of this section and the property development standards
of the applicable zone. Once a grandfathered use, structure, or land is altered to
become more in compliance with this section, the grandfathered use, structure, or land
shall not thereafter be altered so as to become or revert into less compliance.
(11) Development agreement. At the discretion of the city, the applicant/owner
shall execute a development agreement with the city which shall include, but is not
limited to, the requirements of division (E) above and any other conditions deemed
necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. (Prior Code,
§ 10.12)
(F) Neighborhood commercial.
(1) Any business related activity occurring on the premises shall not cause any
adverse changes to the residential character of the neighborhood;
(2) Adherence to the minimum parking standards of § 155.09;
(3) The operation of any retail business, unless it is conducted entirely by
mail, is prohibited. On-site sales shall be limited to those clearly incidental to services
provided in the dwelling;
(4) Operation of any business shall be in conformance to the residential
character of the neighborhood;
(5) Location of the property shall be considered. Properties not fronting on a
major roadway or adjacent to a commercial zoning district may be unsuitable for
operation of a neighborhood commercial uses;
(6) Any exterior changes necessary to conduct the business shall be
sufficiently screened, properly designed, or separated by distance so as to be consistent
with existing adjacent residential uses and compatible with the residential nature of the
neighborhood;
(7) Shipment and delivery of products, merchandise, or supplies shall be
limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and shall occur only in single rear axle
straight trucks or smaller vehicles normally used to serve residential neighborhoods;
(8) Any interior changes necessary to conduct the business shall comply with
all building, electrical, mechanical, and fire codes governing the use in a residential
occupancy;
32
(9) Signage may consist of not more than 1 single faced unlighted wall sign
per home with a maximum area of 2 square feet;
(10) The conduct of the business shall not generate noise, glare, vibrations,
fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to normal senses outside of the
dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television;
(11) No traffic shall be generated by the business in greater volumes than
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. The home occupation shall
not increase parking requirements by more than 4 additional parking spaces at any
given time in addition to the parking spaces required by the occupants. Any need for
parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be met off of the street;
(12) No business shall be allowed which jeopardizes the health and safety of
city residents; and
(13) The Fire Marshal may conduct a fire safety inspection of the space
proposed to be used for the home occupation. Occupancy shall meet all applicable fire
codes prior to opening for business as well as thereafter. (Prior Code, § 10.13) (Am.
Ord. 501, passed 8-18-2003)
(G) Transient Merchant - Extended Stay.
(1) Definition. Transient Merchant – Extended Stay. Transient Merchants –
Extended Stay are subject to the definition of TRANSIENT MERCHANT as defined in
Chapter 115.01 - Peddlers.
(2) General Regulations.
(a) Allowed on vacant lots within the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 zoning
districts.
(b) Applicant must submit a completed application form to the Zoning
Administrator for review and approval. Intensive uses and high traffic will require the
applicant to apply for a Special Use Permit which requires City Council and Planning
Commission approval.
(c) Permit shall be valid for 90 days with one 90-day renewal period in
one calendar year.
(d) Transient Merchants who are in operation longer than one year shall
file for an extension of the permit. The extension requires approval by the City
Council. Approval is contingent on meeting site plan improvements such as, but not
limited to, parking and landscaping. An annual inspection is required.
(e) No merchandise shall be sold which would violate the city’s zoning
ordinances. Any changes in merchandise sold from the original application will require
a new permit.
(f) Temporary structures may be used, provided they will not impair the
parking capacity, emergency access or the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on or off the site. All temporary structures shall be constructed with materials
approved for weather-exposure durability and appearance.
33
(g) The site shall have adequate off-street parking.
(h) All signs related to the Transient Merchants shall comply with the
standards of the zoning district.
(i) Transient Merchant must meet all applicable buildinq, fire, and
electrical codes and adopted appendices and city ordinances.
(H) Planned residential developments. Planned residential developments that
include all developments having 2 or more principal uses or structures on a single
parcel of land; and may include, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwellings,
manufactured homes, single-family homes, multi-use structures such as apartments with
commercial at the ground floor level, mixed residential and commercial developments,
and similar projects. Planned residential developments are subject to the requirements
of this chapter, including, but not limited to, § 155.51 and Chapter 154 as well as any
other requirements of the city. A planned residential development is intended to
provide a process which will encourage the following:
(1) Variety. Within a comprehensive site design concept a mixture of land
uses, housing types, and densities;
(2) Sensitivity. Through the departure from the strict application of minimum
lot requirements and other performance standards associated with traditional zoning,
planned residential developments can maximize the development potential of land while
remaining sensitive to its unique and valuable natural characteristics;
(3) Efficiency. The consolidation of areas for recreation and reductions in
street lengths and widths and other utility related expenses; and
(4) Density transfer. The project density may be clustered, basing density on
number of units per acre versus specific lot dimensions.
(I) Keeping of chickens.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide a means, through the
establishment of specific standards and procedures, by which chickens can be kept in
areas that are principally not used for agricultural. It is recognized that the keeping of
chickens is clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary use and will not be allowed
to negatively affect the character, health, safety or general welfare of the surrounding
area.
(2) Regulations. The keeping of chickens requires a license to be granted by
the City Council. The following conditions are requirements of the license:
(a) Allowed in specified zoning districts as an accessory use to a school
or museum;
(b) No roosters permitted;
(c) Four chickens are allowed per acre. Chickens are prohibited on
properties less than 1 acre; and
(d) Confinement restrictions. Chickens must be kept and confined as
34
follows:
1. Fenced area to keep the chickens contained on the property at all
times;
2. Food containers and feeders must not be accessible to rodents and
wild birds;
3. Sanitary conditions must be maintained;
4. Fecal matter shall not accumulate in a manner that causes odor;
5. Injury or annoyance to others. No chicken may be kept or raised
in a manner as to cause injury or annoyance to persons or other animals on other
property in the vicinity by reason of noise, odor or filth;
6. Impounding chicken. Any chicken at large or in violation of this
section may be impounded by the city, and after being impounded for 5 business days
or more without being reclaimed by the owner, may be humanely euthanized or sold
without notice. Failure to claim an impounded chicken may result in the revocation of
the license. A person reclaiming any impounded chicken shall pay the cost of
impounding and keeping the same; and
7. Covered enclosure (coop) must be provided to protect chickens
from the elements and predators. The required enclosure must meet the following
requirements:
a. All accessory building regulations under § 155.05(D);
b. Completely covered, secured and with a solid floor; and
c. Setback 25 feet from homes on adjoining lots.
(3) License. Keeping chickens requires a license to be granted by the City
Council.
(a) Staff shall notify property owners within 350 feet of the Planning
Commission meeting, at which a recommendation will be made to the City Council for
granting of a license. Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall not
invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this code.
(b) The license shall not run with the land and shall not be transferable.
(c) If the license is approved by the City Council, staff shall inspect the
property to determine if all of the provisions of this section are met prior to issuing the
license.
(d) Licenses shall be issued for a 1 year probationary period from the
date of City Council approval. The City Council shall consider issuance of a full license
at the end of the probationary period.
(e) The City Council may revoke the license if the conditions of this
section is not followed or if unresolved nuisances arise.
35
(f) An annual license fee shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of the
license. The annual license fee shall be established by ordinance. (Prior Code, § 10.14)
(Am. Ord. 2007-05, 3rd Series, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-6, 3rd Series,
passed 3-17-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-08, 3rd Series, passed 9-21-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-
08, 3rd Series, Passed 6-21-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.08 SIGNS.
(A) General provisions.
(1) Purpose. Findings, Purpose and Effect.
(a) Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows:
1. Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment.
2. Signs provide an important medium through which individuals
may convey a variety of messages.
3. Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments
to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
4. The city’s zoning regulations have, historically included the
regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote
the economic viability of the business community, while protecting the city and its
citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character that would
adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety
and welfare of the community. The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs
within the city has had a positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the
community.
(b) Purpose and intent. It is not the purpose or intent of this section to
regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this section
to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign, or any sign which
cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose and intent of this section is to:
1. Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other
physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to promote the public health,
safety and welfare.
2. Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the
city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the community.
3. Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and the
city’s goals of public safety and aesthetics.
4. Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign
regulations set for herein under the zoning authority of the city.
36
(c) Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in
the city if it is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. The effect of
this section, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
1. Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a
more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in this
section.
2. Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal
use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this section.
3. Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the communication
can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the environment and the
public health, safety and welfare.
4. Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
(2) Definitions. See § 155.02.
(3) Generally. The following are minimum requirements.
(a) All signs shall be erected or installed according to state building and
electrical codes. Furthermore, all electrical signs shall require underground wiring.
(b) All signs/sign structures shall be maintained in safe and orderly
condition with the areas around them kept free from debris, bushes, high grass/weeds,
or anything else that would be a nuisance.
(c) Address signs that are clearly legible from the street which access is
gained shall be required for each principal structure, except in non-sewered areas where
addresses shall be affixed and visible from both sides of the mailbox and/or a separate
structure visible from the access or street.
(d) Illuminated signs shall be designed so as not to be obtrusive to
adjacent property or to passing motorists on private or public rights-of-way.
(e) Except as otherwise regulated herein, the minimum setback from
property lines for all signs may be zero feet provided that no portion of the sign extends
into public right-of-way. At no time shall a sign be permitted to extend into a
Minnesota Department of Transportation right-of-way. Signs above 30 inches in height
may not be placed within the vision triangle, which is measured by 25 feet in either
direction of an intersection at the edge of the street, or within any easement.
(f) Signs permitted by this section shall be designed and constructed to
resist wind and seismic forces as specified in the 1982 Uniform Sign Code.
(g) Roof signs. To provide reasonable flexibility in respect to the sign
regulations set forth in this section, the City Council may approve an application for a
roof sign where an exception would be consistent with the intent of these regulations, in
37
cases where the applicant demonstrates practical difficulties in using a wall sign or
freestanding sign. However, no roof sign shall exceed in size the district requirements
for freestanding signs. If the City Council approves a roof sign, the area of the roof
sign may be subtracted from the allowable freestanding and/or wall signage allowed for
the property and/or building.
(h) Portable signs are allowed in all commercial districts as follows:
1. Properties zoned DC (Downtown Core) or within the East 2nd
Street Historic District are allowed to have one portable sign per business. The sign
shall be no greater than eight (8) square feet in size, six (6) feet in height, and shall not
substantially impede pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk. Signs may not be left
outdoors overnight. Signage shall complement the historic nature of downtown.
2. Commercial Districts, excluding the DC (Downtown Core) and
East 2nd Street Historic District, are allowed to have one portable sign per business. A
sign permit is not allowed if:
a. The sign is less then sixteen (16) square feet in size and six
(6) feet in height, and
b. The sign is not left outdoors overnight.
4. Additional Regulations. Portable signage may not be situated
within any public street right-of-way or easement, unless the building has a zero front
yard setback. (Ord. No. 2014-06 3rd Series, Adopted 4-7-14)
(B) Prohibited signs and sign structures.
(1) No sign shall be located within or over a public right-of-way unless
otherwise specifically permitted by this section or the City Council.
(2) No illuminated flashing or revolving signs shall be permitted with the
exception of electronic graphic display signs and movie theaters, time and temperature
provided the signs are designed so as not to be obtrusive to adjacent property or to
passing motorists on private or public rights-of-way. Furthermore, movie theaters with
illuminated flashing or revolving signs shall use light bulbs that are 25 watts or less and
shall not be operated between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) No sign shall be erected or maintained in a way that obstructs, obscures,
or otherwise physically interferes with an official traffic sign, signal/device, or driver’s
view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
(4) No sign shall be erected or maintained which imitates or resembles any
official traffic sign, signal, or device. Furthermore, no sign shall contain the wording
including, but not limited to, “stop, ” “warning, ” or “caution” which may be confused
with traffic signing or controls unless the signs are approved by the city.
(5) No sign shall be painted or placed on a utility pole, tree, or other like
structure except those signs that provide public information concerning a school, city,
county, state, or federal event.
(6) No sign shall be made of any nondurable material and attached directly to
a building.
38
(7) No sign/structure shall be placed that will obstruct safe access to doors,
windows, or fire escapes.
(8) No sign shall be supported by guy wires.
(9) No sign shall be placed on a rooftop or project above the roof line when
attached to a structure except as may be permitted by the City Council under division
(A) above.
(10) Any sign not expressly permitted by the provisions of this section.
(11) Video display signs.
(12) Signs affixed to vehicles, except Vehicle Signs. (Ord. No. 2014-06 3rd
Series, Adopted 4-7-14)
(C) Signs permitted without a permit.
(1) Traffic signs as approved by the Public Works Director;
(2) Public signs as approved by the City of Hastings;
(3) One temporary, on-site construction sign for a residential development
provided a final plat has been filed. The sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in size,
10 feet in height and must be located on a vacant lot or lot with a model home within
the subdivision at least 10 feet from the nearest property line. Furthermore, the sign
shall be removed when 90% of single-family or 75% of multiple-family lots are sold.
Construction trailers may be placed in close proximity to support construction of the
site. Placement and/or use of the trailers solely for advertising shall be prohibited;
(4) One temporary, on-site construction sign in a commercial, industrial, or
public institution development, provided a building permit has been issued. The sign
shall not exceed 100 square feet in size, 10 feet in height and shall be removed before
any building in the project is occupied. Where a building permit or certificate of
occupancy is not required for a construction project including, but not limited to,
landscaping projects, 1 on-site sign not to exceed 25 square feet in size and 10 feet in
height may be allowed up to 7 days. Construction trailers may be placed in close
proximity to support construction of the site. Placement and/or use of the trailers solely
for advertising shall be prohibited;
(5) Temporary Signs are allowed in commercial, industrial, and public
institution districts upon submittal of a sign notification form to the City. The devices
shall be removed if they become torn, discolored, or in any way damaged to modify
their original appearance. Businesses and/or property owners utilizing these temporary
devices that include advertising and/or a message shall be allowed only a total of 90
days during any 12-month period. Only 1 device shall be used at a time, and the
maximum size of the device shall be equal to or less than the monument sign area
standards for the district in which the site is located, or in the case of the East 2nd
Street Historic District or Downtown Core District, equal or less than the wall sign
standards. Signage placed on public property as part of a City Council designated
“Special Event” shall be exempt from temporary sign regulations. (Ord. No. 2014-06
3rd Series, Adopted 4-7-14)
39
(6) Signs 6 square feet or less in size per visible side on residential properties
provided that signs identifying home occupations must comply with the signage
restrictions set forth in § 155.07(D); and
(7) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, all signs of any size
containing noncommercial speech may be posted from August 1 in any general election
year until 10 days following the general election and 13 weeks prior to any special
election until 10 days following the special election.
(8) Vehicle Signs.
(Ord. 2014-06 3rd Series, Adopted 4-07-14)
(D) Signs requiring a permit.
(1) Permit required. Except for signs specifically allowed by this section
without a permit, no signs shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained or moved
in the city without first securing a permit from the city. The content of the sign shall
not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit.
Sign applications are available from the Planning Department. The applicant shall
include sign dimensions, height, colors, construction materials, method of anchoring
and location. A sketch or photograph of the proposed sign and a site plan that
adequately illustrates the location of the sign is required. In addition, the application
shall include the location and size of all other signs at the subject
property/development. Once a completed sign application is filed with the Planning
Department, City Staff shall review the plans and specifications for the proposed
sign(s). If the proposed sign meets section requirements, the Building Code and all
other city ordinances, a signed permit will be approved. The required fee as established
by resolution of City Council shall be paid to the city before issuance of a signed
permit. Unless otherwise noted, the following regulations apply to all zoning districts.
(a) One monument sign for each principal structure, unified
development, or legal parcel, whichever is more restrictive. Lots adjacent to more than
1 street may have 1 sign per street frontage. In no case shall secondary signs exceed 50
square feet in size or 6 feet in height.
(b) Wall canopy, projecting or marquee; except as otherwise noted, the
amount of signage permitted is based on the wall to which the sign will be attached.
Sign heights shall not exceed the top of the parapet wall or, if there is no parapet wall,
sign height shall not exceed height of eaves.
(c) On-site directional signs. To direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic in
a safe and convenient manner, directional signs are permitted, provided the sign does
not exceed the sizes indicated in the table in division (D)(1)(e) below. The number and
location of directional signs will be determined through sign permit review.
(d) Electronic graphic display signs must meet the following requirements:
1. Allowable zoning districts. Electronic graphic display signs may
only be located in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, P-I, and O-1 Zoning Districts. Electronic
graphic display signs shall be prohibited in all other zoning districts and the East 2nd
Street Historic District.
40
2. Setback from residential. The leading edge of the sign must be a
minimum distance of 60 feet from an abutting residential district.
3. Dimmer control. Electronic graphic display signs must have an
automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher
illumination level to a lower level for the period between 1 half-hour before sunset and
1 half-hour after sunrise.
4. Use. Electronic graphic display signs must adhere to signage
limits established in division (D)(1)(e).
5. Flashing. The messages on an electronic graphic display sign may
change at a rate of no less than 6 seconds. No flashing shall be allowed.
6. Use in Windows. Electronic graphic display signs placed within
windows and visible to the exterior must not exceed 25 percent of the window area.
(e) The table below illustrates the allowed amounts of signage permitted
in the various districts.
Zoning Districts
A, R, PI C-1, O-1 C-2 I-1, I-2 DC
Monument Maximum
Height
5 feet 6 feet 6 feet 6 feet N/A
Sign Face
Size
50 square
feet
50 square
feet
50 square
feet
50 square
feet
N/A
Cap Height
(max.)
8 inches 8 inches 8 inches 8 inches N/A
Wall Maximum
Size
Greater of 40 square feet or 5% of wall area See division
(D)(8)
below
Projecting Clearance N/A 8 feet 8 feet N/A 8 feet
Maximum
Distance
from
Building
N/A 4 feet 4 feet N/A 2.5 feet
Directionals Maximum
Height
4 feet 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet N/A
Maximum
Size
- 2 square
feet
2 square
feet
2 square
feet
N/A
41
Zoning Districts
C-3 I-1, I-2, C-4
Single
Occupant
Multiple
Occupants
Single -
under
100,000
square feet
Single -
over
100,000
square feet
Multiple
Occupant
Building
Monument Maximum
Height
6 feet 10 feet 6 feet 15 feet 20 feet
Sign Face
Size
50 square
feet
100 square
feet
50 square
feet
75 square
feet
100 square
feet
Cap Height
(max.)
8 inches 12 inches 8 inches 18 inches 24 inches
Wall Maximum
Size
Greater of 40 square feet or 5% of wall area
Projecting Clearance 8 feet 8 feet 8 feet 8 feet 8 feet
Maximum
Distance
from
Building
4 feet 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet
Directionals Maximum
Height
4 feet 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet
Maximum
Size
2 square
feet
2 square
feet
2 square
feet
2 square
feet
2 square
feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
a. 5,6 and 10 foot tall monument signs may be taller than noted if equal height bases are
used, up to 3 feet
b. 15 and 20 foot tall monument signs may be taller than noted if equal height bases are used,
up to 5 feet
(Ord. 2010-15, 3rd Series, passed 07-19-2010)
(2) A, R, and PI Districts.
(a) Residential developments with 6 or more single-family or multiplefamily
dwelling units may have 1 monument identification sign per the size indicated in
the table in division (D)(1)(e) above.
(b) Churches, public or private schools, hospitals, and residential care
facilities are permitted 1 monument identification for the purpose of displaying the
name of the institution and its activities or services.
(c) On-site directional signs are permitted for churches, public or private
schools, hospitals, residential care facilities, or government/public institutions.
(d) One monument identification sign not to exceed 50 square feet in size
or 5 feet in height for any commercial or institutional use within the PI Zoning District.
42
Lots adjacent to more than 1 street may have 1 sign per street frontage. (Am. Ord.
553, 2nd Series, passed 5-15-2006: Am. Ord. 2008-1, 2nd Series, passed 1-7-2008;
Am. Ord. 2009-06, 3rd Series, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2009-11, 3rd Series, passed
11-16-2009)
(3) C-1 and O-1 Districts.
(a) Signs as permitted per division (D)(1) above.
(b) Lots adjacent to more than 1 street may have 1 sign per street
frontage. In no case shall secondary signs exceed 50 square feet in size or 6 feet in
height.
(4) C-2 District.
(a) Signs as permitted per division (D)(1) above.
(b) Lots adjacent to more than 1 street may have 1 sign per street
frontage. In no case shall secondary signs exceed 50 square feet in size or 6 feet in
height.
(c) Additional monument signs permitted for automobile dealerships:
1. One monument sign not to exceed 50 square feet or 6 feet in
height for advertisement of sale of pre-owned automobiles; and
2. One monument sign not to exceed 50 square feet or 6 feet in
height for each additional new automobile product line (automobile make) sold on the
premises.
(5) C-3 District.
(a) Signs as permitted per division (D)(1) above.
(b) Lots adjacent to more than 1 street may have 1 sign per street
frontage. In no case shall secondary signs exceed 50 square feet in size or 6 feet in
height.
(c) Those properties located within the East 2nd Street Historic District
are subject to the regulations of division (D)(8) below.
(6) C-4 Districts.
(a) Signs as permitted per division (D)(1) above.
(b) Lots adjacent to more than 1 street may have 1 sign per street
frontage. In no case shall secondary signs exceed 50 square feet in size or 6 feet in
height.
(c) For movie theatres, the primary wall sign may not exceed 10% of the
building facade on which the sign is erected. Secondary signs on the other building
facades may not exceed 5% of the building facade on which the sign is erected, or 40
square feet, whichever is greater.
43
(7) I-1 and I-2 Districts. Signs as permitted per division (D)(1) above.
(8) DC Downtown Core and East 2nd Street Historic District.
(a) Downtown Hastings is a remarkably intact and compact example of
commercial architecture from the 1860' s to the 1920' s. This historic character is
considered an important asset of Downtown and, therefore, it is the intent of the this
section that this character be preserved. To accomplish this objective, all permanent
signage within the East 2nd Street Historic District or on property zoned DC
Downtown Core shall comply with the following requirements and guidelines.
1. Wall signs not to exceed 2 square feet per linear foot of building
frontage. The size of a sign should be appropriate to the building.
2. Signs should not cover up the traditional design elements of a
building as identified in the following sketch. When feasible, signage shall be at
traditional locations, including: painted inside the windows, door pane or transom
pane; flush on the storefront cornice or lintel; letters painted or attached directly on the
cornice or lintel; mounted flush between the lintel and second floor windows.
44
45
3. The style, colors, lettering, and materials of the sign should
reflect the age of the building. Examples may be found in old photographs and
surviving signs.
4. Contrast between a dark background and light lettering, or vice
versa, is more important than size. The lettering style should be chosen for its
legibility.
5. Plastic, aluminum, and back lit signs are not usually appropriate
on older buildings because of their materials, colors, size, and style of lettering. The
content and logo of corporate and product signs can be transferred to more traditional
materials and styles of sign.
6. Signage shall be permitted on canvas or treated cloth awnings
where they are compatible with the age of the building and character of Downtown.
7. Projecting signs must conform to the following.
a. Minimum height above grade is 8 feet. Maximum height
above grade is 11 feet for the sign, and 12 feet for the bracket.
b. Sign may not project more than 2 and 1/2 feet from the face
of the building.
c. Total sign face may not exceed 6 square feet.
d. Materials must be wood and/or metal. Plastic signs are not
permitted.
e. Projecting signs may not be lit, internally or externally.
f. Plans must be submitted to show how the sign will be
anchored to the building and masonry.
g. Only 1 projecting sign permitted per business.
h. Signs must be advertising a specific business name, not a
generic product.
i. The sign area of the projecting sign comes off the total
signage allowed for the building under these requirements.
(b) All signs proposed to be constructed on properties that are designated
as Heritage Preservation Sites or are in a Historic District are subject to approval by the
Heritage Preservation Commission.
(c) Freestanding signs are prohibited in the East 2nd Street Historic
District or on properties zoned DC Downtown Core.
(E) Permit requirements.
46
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no sign or structure shall be
erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt, or relocated until a permit has been issued by the
city.
(2) Sign applications are available from the Planning Department. The
applicant shall include sign dimensions, height, colors, construction materials and
method of anchoring. A site plan that adequately illustrates the location of the sign is
required. In addition, the application shall include the location and size of all other
signs at the subject property/development.
(3) Once a completed sign application is filed with the Planning Department,
staff shall review the plans and specifications for the proposed sign(s). If the proposed
sign(s) meets ordinance requirements, the building code and all other laws and
ordinances of the city, a sign permit will be approved.
(4) The required fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be
paid to the city before issuance of a sign permit.
(5) Signs erected without a permit are subject to payment of twice the
established sign permit fee.
(F) Nonconforming and illegal signs.
(1) Any sign legally existing on the effective date of this section that does not
conform to the requirements set forth in this section shall become a nonconforming use
and/or structure. Except as otherwise provided in this section, nonconforming signs
shall be allowed to continue, but shall not be rebuilt, relocated, replaced, or altered
without being brought into compliance with all the requirements of this section.
Furthermore, nonconforming signs are subject to the provisions contained at § 155.06.
(2) Any sign that is in violation of this section shall be removed or altered to
comply with this section.
(3) Maintenance of existing signs, including the replacement of faceplates of
the same size, or smaller shall be permitted on nonconforming signs.
(4) Temporary ribbons, banners, pennants, and similar devices that are in use
as of the adoption of this section must comply with the provisions of division (C)(11)
above.
(5) Repairs. Any sign located in the city which may be or hereafter become
out of order, rotten or unsafe, and every sign which shall hereafter be erected, altered,
resurfaced, reconstructed or moved contrary to the provisions of this section shall be
removed or otherwise properly secured in accordance with the terms of this section by
the owners thereof or by the owners of the grounds on which said sign shall stand, upon
receipt of proper notice so to do, given by the issuing authority. No rotten or other
unsafe sign shall be repaired or rebuilt except in accordance with the provisions of this
section and upon a permit issued by the issuing authority.
(6) Removal. In the event of the failure of the owner or person, company or
corporation having control of any sign, or the owner of the ground on which the sign is
located, to remove or repair said sign within 60 days after the use is terminated, a
notice shall be given to the owner of the sign and the sign may be removed by the city
at the expense of the owner or manager of the sign, or the owner of the ground upon
47
which the sign stands.
(G) Substitution clause. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this
section may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any commercial or
noncommercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any
noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision
prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. (Prior Code, § 10.08)
(Am. Ord. 485, passed 2-3-2003; Am. Ord. 541, passed 10-17-2005; Am. Ord. 558,
2nd Series, 12-4-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-01, 3rd Series, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord.
2008-01, 2nd series, passed 1-7-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99; (Ord. 2014-06, 3rd Series,
passed 4-07-14)
155.09 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) General provisions.
(1) No change of use, tenancy, or occupancy of a parcel of land or building,
including construction of new building or an addition to a building, which requires
additional parking or loading spaces shall be allowed until the additional parking or
loading spaces are approved and furnished. Review may be required under the site plan
review procedures of § 155.51.
(2) Required parking shall be available for the parking of operable vehicles of
residents, customers, and employees. A required loading space shall not be used for
any other purpose than the immediate loading or unloading of goods or passengers.
(3) Parking and loading spaces shall meet all requirements of this chapter
before the building for which they serve is occupied, except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter.
(4) Required parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same
development site as the use served. Except residential uses in the R-1, R-1L and R-2
48
zoning districts, the city may approve off-site parking if the City Council finds the
following.
(a) Reasonable access shall be provided from the off-site parking facilities
to the use being served.
(b) The parking shall be within 400 feet of a building or lot for the use
being served.
(c) The parking area shall be under the same ownership as the site
served, under public ownership or the use of the parking facilities shall be protected by
a recorded instrument, acceptable to the city.
(d) Failure to provide on-site parking shall not encourage parking on the
public streets, other private property or in private driveways or other areas not
expressly set aside for the purposes.
(e) The off-site parking shall be maintained until on-site parking is
provided or an alternate off-site parking facility is approved by the city as meeting
ordinance requirements.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, a land
use may provide the required off-street parking area for additional land uses on the
same development site if the following conditions are met.
(a) Because of the hours of operation of the respective uses, their sizes
and their modes of operation there will be available to each use during its primary
hours of operation an amount of parking sufficient to meet the needs of the use.
(b) The joint use of the parking facilities shall be protected by a recorded
instrument, acceptable to the city.
(B) Design requirements.
(1) Standard dimensions. Except as permitted in division (B)(2) below, a
parking space shall have a minimum width of 9 feet and a minimum length of 18 feet
not including access driveways and turnarounds sufficient to permit a standard
automobile to be parked in and removed from the space without the necessity of moving
other vehicles. The minimum dimensions of stall and aisles are as follows.
Curb Angle Stall Length Length Aisle
45 degrees 12.0 feet 18.0 feet 13 feet*
60 degrees 10.0 feet 18.0 feet 18 feet*
75 degrees 9.0 feet 19.0 feet 21 feet*
90 degrees 9.0 feet 18.0 feet 22 feet**
Parallel 20.0 feet 8.0 feet 22 feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
* One-way aisles only.
** Aisles that are not between 2 rows of 90 angle parking spaces may be 18 feet wide.
49
50
(2) Compact car dimensions. A compact car space shall have a minimum
width of 8 feet and a minimum length of 16 feet not including access driveways and
turnarounds sufficient to permit a compact automobile to be parked in and removed
from the space without the necessity of moving other vehicles. The minimum
dimensions of compact stalls shall be as follows.
Angle Curb Length Stall Length
45 degrees 10.0 feet 16.0 feet
60 degrees 8.5 feet 17.5 feet
75 degrees 8.0 feet 16.5 feet
90 degrees 8.0 feet 16.0 feet
Parallel 16.0 feet 8.0 feet
(3) Compact car parking conditions. Compact car parking may be provided if
the following conditions are met.
(a) A maximum of 25% of the total number of required parking spaces
may be used for compact cars, provided the total parking area has at least 20 stalls.
(b) Compact car stalls shall be clearly marked with directional signs as
approved by the city.
(c) Compact car stalls shall be distributed throughout the parking area to
have reasonable proximity to the structure(s) served by and shall not have generally
preferential locations such that their use by non-compact cars will be discouraged.
(d) Compact car stalls shall be designed to discourage their use by noncompact
cars.
(4) Access and location.
(a) Parking areas shall be designed to provide an adequate means of
access to a public alley or street. The driveway access shall not exceed 30 feet in width
for residential uses and 32 feet in width for commercial, office, or industrial uses at the
property line and driveways shall be so located as to cause the least interference with
traffic movement. All driveway widths shall be measured from the property line, not
the roadway. Driveways must be located at least 3 feet from the extension of the side
lot line from the property line to the curb to accommodate the driveway apron.
Driveways abutting a public street must have a minimum 3-foot landscaped separation
between any adjacent driveway. (Am. Ord. 549, passed 4-17-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-
05, 3rd Series, passed 9-4-2007)
(b) Driveway widths up to 50 feet will be permitted only by special
permission of the Planning and Public Works Directors. All off-street parking spaces
shall access off driveways and not directly off a public street unless otherwise approved
by the Planning and Public Works Directors.
(C) Surfacing.
51
(1) Generally.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all parking spaces,
access, maneuvering areas, and driveways shall be engineered according to city
specifications and constructed with an asphalt or another impervious surface, and
concrete curb and gutter. Single- and 2-family homes shall be graded and paved with
asphalt or another impervious surface, but are exempt from curb and gutter
requirements. All parking areas shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance
with city specifications.
(b) If access is gained from an improved street, that portion of the access
in the public right-of-way also shall be paved.
(c) Any improvement that expands or modifies the surface of an existing
parking lot or drive aisle by more than 25% within a 5-year period shall trigger full
compliance with city specifications for the entire parking lot.
(2) Exemptions. Exemptions from surfacing requirements shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Provide gravel, oil mat, and\or durable dustless surface to control
dust;
(b) Pave driveways and aprons to prevent debris from entering the street
right-of-way or sidewalk;
(c) Install gates at the access to catch gravel and dirt;
(d) Direct traffic through other paved portions of the parking area; and
(e) Provide adequate drainage to dispose of runoff. (Am. Ord. 479,
passed 12-2-2002)
(D) Setbacks/buffers.
(1) Access drives, driveways, and aisles shall not be allowed to intrude into a
required parking setback except at the access point or where a joint drive serving more
than 1 property will provide better/safer traffic circulation.
(2) For residential structures, no parking space shall be within 5 feet of any
building.
(3) Parking structures/ramps shall be subject to site plan review, including the
following criteria for establishing setbacks.
(a) A parking structure shall be deemed an underground garage for the
level(s) of parking which are below grade and are unexposed except entrance and exit
points. Where the roof or any portion of the roof of such a qualifying structure is used
as surface parking, the parking shall meet the applicable zoning district and other
ordinance requirements regarding surface parking location, setbacks, and screening.
(b) A parking structure with 1 or more parking levels that is completely
or partially below grade and does not qualify as an underground garage shall meet the
applicable zoning district and other ordinance requirements regarding surface parking
location, setbacks, and screening.
52
(c) Any parking structure or portion thereof which is partially or
completely above grade shall be deemed a structure for meeting the applicable zoning
district and other ordinance requirements regarding building setbacks/screening. (Am.
Ord. 551, 2nd Series, passed 5-1-2006)
(E) Drainage, lighting, signs, and curb and gutter.
(1) Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to prevent ponding and to
dispose of the runoff from the impervious surface of the parking area. Provisions shall
be made for the on-site collection of drainage waters to eliminate sheet flow of water
onto sidewalks, public right-of-way, and abutting private property, subject to the
approval of the Public Works Director.
(2) Lighting. Lighting shall conform with 155.53.5 Exterior Lighting
Standards.
(3) Signs. Except as permitted in § 155.08, no signs shall be located in any
parking area except as necessary for orderly operational movement, including, but not
limited to:
(a) Parking stalls shall be clearly marked with painted stripes showing the
full 18 or, for compact cars, 16-foot length and access lanes with directional arrows to
guide internal movements;
(b) Areas used for compact cars shall be clearly marked;
(c) Handicapped parking spaces shall be designated according to state
standards; and
(d) Additional signs and markings shall be required if determined by the
Public Works Director to be necessary for traffic circulation of safety.
(4) Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter is required for all parking lots with 6 or more
parking spaces.
(F) Minimum and maximum off-street parking requirements.
(1) Floor area for calculating the number of parking spaces shall be the total
gross floor area for each story of the building/structure.
(2) The amount of parking shall be computed according to the standards of
this section and the formulas listed in Appendix B at the end of this chapter. The
maximum number of parking stalls shall not exceed 20% of the minimum required
unless the City Council grants an exception.
(3) Parking requirements for a use not specifically mentioned shall be
computed at the requirement for the use it most closely resembles at the discretion of
the Planning Director.
(4) For mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall
be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately.
(5) The minimum number of parking spaces shall be based on the maximum
53
number of employees and/or seating capacity/occupancy at peak hours of operation.
(6) Existing structures and uses within the DC and RMU Zoning Districts
existing prior to the adoption of the Downtown Master Plan (5-5-2003) and located
south of the Mississippi River, west of the CP Railroad, north of 6th Street, and east of
Spring Street shall be considered in conformance with the minimum parking and
loading requirements of this section, provided the use and intensity is unchanged.
Conversion of existing building space of no grater than 10,000 s. f. into a restaurant,
tavern, or lounge may be exempt from meeting additional parking and loading
requirements upon approval of a Special Use Permit. All parking and loading
requirements for any intensification of an existing building or use, or construction of a
new building shall be determined by a proof of parking study. When a study is
required, the Urban Land Institute’s 1983 publication, Shard Parking Standards, the
Institute of Transportation Engineers Shared Parking Standards Planning Guidelines
(1995), or equivalent study shall be used to determine the number of spaces needed for
a single or shared use.
(Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003)
(G) Loading requirements.
(1) Off-street loading shall be required of uses or buildings that receive or
distribute merchandise by truck and shall be adequate to handle the needs of the
particular use or building and as designated by Appendix A at the end of this chapter.
(2) All schools having a capacity of 25 or more students shall have a driveway
designed for a continuous flow of passenger vehicles for loading and unloading
students.
(Prior Code, § 10.09) (Am. Ord. 551, 2nd Series, passed 5-1-2006) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 155.10 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURES IN RIGHT OF WAY.
(A) Small Wireless Facilities within Right of Way are Permitted Uses in all zoning
districts, subject to the regulations of City Code Section 90.07.
(B) Wireless Support Structures within Right of Way are Special Uses in the A, R-1, R-
1L, R-2, and R-3 Districts, as well as all National Register Historic Districts, subject to
the regulations of City Code Section 90.07.
(C) Wireless Support Structures within Right of Way are Permitted Uses in districts in
areas outside of National Register Historic Districts and within the R-4, RMU, R-6, C-
1, C-2, C-3, DC, C-4, O-1, I-1, I-2, and PI Zoning Districts, subject to the regulations
of City Code Section 90.07.
(D) Notwithstanding any inconsistent limitations in Chapter 155, the height and
placement of Wireless Support Structures within Right of Way shall be as allowed
under Minnesota Statute Section 237.163, subdivision 3(b), as amended.
DISTRICTS
54
§ 155.20 GENERALLY.
(A) Zoning districts. The city is hereby divided into the following use districts:
(1) A Agriculture;
(2) R-1 Low Density Residence;
(3) R-2 Medium Density Residence;
(4) R-3 Medium-High Density Residence;
(5) R-4 High Density Residence;
(6) RMU Residential Mixed Use;
(7) R-6 Manufactured Home Park Residence;
(8) C-1 General Commerce;
(9) C-2 Highway Auto-Specialized Commerce;
(10) C-3 Community Regional Commerce;
(11) DC Downtown Core;
(12) C-4 Regional Shopping Center;
(13) O-1 General Office;
(14) I-1 Industrial Park;
(15) I-2 Industrial Park Storage/Service;
(16) PI Public Institution; and
(17) VSO Vermillion Street Overlay. (Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003)
(B) Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the above use districts are as
shown on the Zoning Map, and the Map is hereby made a part of this chapter. The
Map and all notations, references, and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by
reference into this chapter and shall be as much a part of it as if all were fully described
herein. All amendments to the Zoning Map are generally described in Table II of the
Table of Special Ordinances. It is unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or
premises within the city for any purpose other than as listed. (Prior Code, § 10.10)
55
§ 155.21 A AGRICULTURE.
(A) Generally. Any land that may be annexed to the city shall be placed in the A
Agricultural District until action by the Council that assigns the land to another district.
(B) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing an Agricultural District is to
allow maximum freedom of operation for agricultural purposes and to protect the uses
from untimely encroachment by potential conflicting urban uses. It is also the intent to
protect the natural amenities of the Hastings area from harmful exploitation.
(C) Uses permitted.
(1) Farmsteads and agricultural operations;
(2) Single-family detached dwellings;
(3) Public parks and non-commercial recreational uses;
(4) Cemeteries;
(5) Home occupations subject to the standards listed at § 155.07;
(6) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses such as private
garages and sheds;
(7) Recreation facilities, including, but not limited to, golf courses, pistol and
rifle ranges, sportsmen clubs and camping areas subject to site plan review;
(8) Nurseries and greenhouses subject to site plan review;
(9) Kennels and veterinary establishments subject to site plan review;
(10) Storage rental facilities subject to site plan review;
(11) Agricultural service operations, heavy equipment contractors, tree service
contractors, or other uses subject to site plan review;
56
(12) Other uses similar in nature to the above uses and which, in the opinion of
the Council, will not be detrimental to the integrity of the Agriculture District;
(13) Cluster developments so as to provide an alternative to rural subdivisions.
Home locations may be placed closer together as long as the overall subdivision density
still meets the 1 home per 10 acres density. Cluster developments are intended to
preserve and enhance open space and natural amenities. Cluster developments are
subject to the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, § 155.51 and
Chapter 154. Variation in lot sizes and yards are permitted while maintaining the
overall density required by the underlying zoning district.
(D) Uses by special permit.
(1) Temporary asphalt hot mix plants accessory to mineral extraction subject
to site plan review.
(2) Land reclamation, mining, soil processing, and general land grading
subject to the following.
(a) Land reclamation. Under this chapter, land reclamation is the
reclaiming of land by the depositing of material so as to elevate the grade. Any lot
upon which 400 cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited shall be land reclamation.
The application for land reclamation permit shall include a finished grade plan which
will not adversely affect adjacent lands, the type of fill to be used, program for fire and
rodent control, and general maintenance of the site, controls of vehicular ingress and
egress, and for control of material disbursed from wind or hauling of material to or
from the site. The plan shall also include necessary drainage structures to divert or
convey storm water runoff.
(b) Mining. The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from the
land, in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more and removal thereof from the site
without processing shall be mining. The application for a mining permit shall include a
plan for a finished grade which will not adversely affect adjacent lands or the
development of the site on which the mining is being conducted, and the route of trucks
moving to and from the site.
(c) Soil processing. The operation of processing of sand, gravel, or other
material mined from the land shall be permitted. The application for soil processing
permit shall include a site plan where the processing is to be done, showing the route of
the trucks moving to and from the site, and the condition in which the site is intended to
be left upon completion. The Council may restrict the duration of the permit for
operation after which the permit will have to be renewed.
(d) General land grading. This section restricts all excavations, pits,
holes, or earthly deposits of any kind to more than 3 feet depth upon any property
within the city.
1. It is unlawful for any person to dig and leave open, unfenced,
unbarricaded, or uncovered, any pit, quarry, hole, or excavation, including basements,
wells, septic tanks, or cesspools; and for any person to deposit earthly material
including rock, sand, gravel, organic or other fill material to a depth of over three feet
57
without a permit as required under the grading chapter of the International Building
Code or as may be amended.
2. No grading permit shall be required by any person making any
excavation or earthly deposit as part of contractual work for construction of utilities for
which appropriate permits have been secured or under any contract with the city.
(e) Application for land reclamation, mining, and soil processing.
Application for the permit shall be made in writing to the Council which shall set forth
the location and plan for removal from or deposits upon property in accordance with
this chapter. The application shall include:
1. A legal description of the lands upon which grading operations
shall be performed;
2. Copies of any agreements contemplated or entered into between
the owner of the property and any other person charged with performance of the
grading;
3. If requested by the city a plat and topographical map of the
proposed area to be graded, and the other pertinent information as deemed necessary;
4. The full name and address of the person applying for permit
hereunder;
5. A permit fee is required in accordance with the city fee schedule;
6. In all cases, each application for permits for the above must be
approved by the Public Works Director before the permit is granted. Also, in all cases
of the above, the Public Works Director has the right to review procedures, processes,
and results in view of the operations to determine whether they are in accordance with
general public welfare and safety through regular on-site inspections. The Public
Works Director upon determining the permittee’s operation creates a serious and
immediate safety hazard may order the operation ceased for a period of 72 hours.
Upon so ordering the Public Works Director shall immediately notify the Mayor and
the permittee in writing of the hazard and the Mayor shall call a special meeting of the
Council. The permittee shall be requested to attend this meeting. If the Council
determines that an immediate safety hazard exists, the permit shall be withdrawn until
the permittee complies with Council directives to eliminate the hazard;
7. Within 10 days after City Council approval of the permit and
before work begins, the applicant shall submit to the city an irrevocable bond or other
forms of security acceptable to the city. This bond or other form of security shall be in
an amount determined by the City Council, upon recommendation by the Public Works
Director, to be sufficient to guarantee the applicant’s full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and all other conditions of the permit issued by the city,
including, but not limited to, any restoration required by the city or the extraordinary
cost and expense of repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets, or other public
ways where the repair work is made necessary by the special burden resulting from the
hauling and removal of material from any operation. The bond or other approved
security shall remain in effect for at least 1 year after the expiration of the permit issued
under this chapter. The Council may review and modify the amount of terms of the
bond or other approved security as a condition of any permit renewal; and
8. Prior to commencing work under a mining or soil processing
58
permit, the applicant shall secure insurance as provided herein. At the time the Council
issues land reclamation, the Council shall determine if the applicant must comply with
the following insurance requirements. All applicants required to provide insurance
herein shall, prior to commencing work, secure, maintain and file with the City Clerk a
liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance from an insurance company
authorized to write casualty insurance in the state as will protect the applicant, its
agents and the city from claims for bodily injury, death, or property damage which may
arise from operations under a permit issued under this chapter. Each insurance policy
shall contain a clause providing that it shall not be cancelled by the insurance company
without 10-days’ written notice to the city of intention to cancel. The amounts of the
insurance shall not be less than the following:
a. Worker’s compensation and employer’s liability which shall
be secured and maintained as required by state law;
b. Public liability, personal injury, and property damage;
c. Injury or death of 1 person - $250,000;
d. Injury or death to more than 1 person in a single accident -
$500,000; and
e. Property damage - $200,000.
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07.
(4) Motor vehicle impound lots, subject to the following conditions.
(a) Motor vehicles cannot be kept in an impound lot for more than 14
days unless a police hold has been placed on the motor vehicle.
(b) No sales of motor vehicles, salvaging, repairing, dismantling, or
stripping of motor vehicles shall be allowed in the impound lot.
(c) 100% opaque fencing or landscaping at least 6 feet high must be
placed around the entire lot and must be adequately maintained.
(d) All motor vehicles impounded shall be kept within the opaque fenced
or landscaped area.
(e) All buildings on the lot must be permanent structures with permanent
foundations.
(f) The entire impound lot shall be surfaced with a bituminous covering,
class 5 gravel, or other surface covering as approved by the city.
(g) A sufficiently sized bituminous area shall be provided for the parking
of vehicles which may be leaking fluids or other pollutants.
(h) Any lighting in the impound lot shall not be obtrusive to neighboring
property.
(i) Employees of the city or its duly appointed representatives, shall be
allowed on the property at any time to inspect the impound lot to verify compliance
59
with the City Code.
(j) Any special use permit issued hereunder shall be reviewed annually
and at other times deemed appropriate by the city, to verify compliance with the City
Code and any special conditions of the permit. As part of the review procedure, the
city may hold a public hearing, preceded by the appropriate mailed and published
notice. As part of any review procedure, the city may amend the permit by adding or
deleting any conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(k) All conditions imposed by § 30.02 must be met. Additionally, the
city may impose any other conditions it feels are necessary to protect the public, health,
safety, and welfare.
(l) Any violation of this subdivision or any conditions imposed upon the
special use permit shall be cause for termination of the permit by the city. (Prior Code,
§ 10.11) (Am. Ord. 2009-09, 3rd Series, passed 9-8-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99
(E) Interim Use Permit
(1) Businesses may apply for an Interim Use Permit to operate up to 18
months on a temporary basis in areas outside the Metropolitan Urban Service Area
(MUSA), subject to the following:
(a) Interim Use Permits shall be issued for a six month
probationary period as determined by City Council. The City Council may consider full
issuance of an Interim Use Permit at the end of the probationary period. The term of the
Interim Use Permit shall be 1 year after probation.
(b) Following the one year Interim Use Permit, the Interim Use
Permit is no longer valid and the business must meet permanent business standards.
(c) The site must be returned to its pre-development condition if
the business does not convert to a permanent business.
(d) The business must present an acceptable plan for on-site
portable restrooms and trash removal.
(e) All temporary and permanent signage will require a separate
sign permit.
(f) As a condition of approval, the City will need to review and
approve any temporary or mobile structure.
(g) The construction of or movement of any buildings onto the
property would require Site Plan Approval.
(h) Interim Use Permits shall be subject to the requirements of
Chapter 30.02 (E) (2) – Special Use Permits.
(i) Hours of operations shall be reviewed.
60
(2) The City Council may issue an Interim Use Permit granting
permission for an interim use of property if:
(a) The use conforms to the zoning regulations;
(b) The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified
with certainty;
(c) Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the
public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future; and
(d) The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems
appropriate for permission of the use.
(3) Any interim use may be terminated by a change in zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2011-22, 3rd Series, Passed 10-03-11)
§ 155.22 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a low density residence
district is to provide for the normal outward residential expansion of Hastings according
to current standards of development, and to protect the desired quiet living environment
from encroachment from potential conflicting uses.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) One-family detached dwellings:
(a) All single-family detached dwellings to be located on a lot in a
residential zone shall be installed on perimeter foundations that form complete
enclosures under exterior walls;
(b) The width of a 1-family detached dwelling that is located on a lot in a
residential zone, shall not be less than 20 feet. The width shall be the narrowest
dimension measured to the exterior of the building regardless of how it is oriented on
the lot. The width is the installed width and does not include bay windows, roof
projections, overhangs or eaves under which there is not interior space. Provided,
however, this minimum width regulations shall not apply to seasonal use rooms such as
porches and breeze ways, nor to garages or carports, and provided further, that these
minimum width requirements shall not apply to additions to existing structures, where
the addition is less than 400 square feet in area; and
(c) Sheet metal siding shall not be permitted except that horizontal lap
61
type metal siding with sections overlapping in sections no wider than 12 inches shall be
permitted. Other metal sidings may be permitted on review by the Board of Design
Control.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, country clubs, athletic fields, and other
recreational uses of a non-commercial nature;
(3) Churches, libraries, and public and parochial schools;
(4) Home occupations, pursuant to § 155.07.
(5) Cluster developments so as to provide an alternative to the conventional
lot and block residential design. Cluster developments are intended to preserve and
enhance open space and natural amenities. Cluster developments are subject to the
requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, § 155.51 and Chapter 154.
Variation in lot sizes and yards are permitted while maintaining the overall density
required by the nderlying zoning district;
(6) Accessory uses if incidental to the foregoing principal uses such as private
garages and sheds; and
(7) Residential care facility - independent.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Fire stations and cemetery;
(2) Residential care facilities, dependent and semi-independent, subject to the
conditions listed at § 155.07.
(3) Towers are regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.12) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 155.22.5 R-1L LOW DENSITY RESIDENCE LARGE LOT.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a very low density residence
district is to protect the desired character of the larger lot environment from the
possible progression of a more dense nature.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Same as permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residence District. (Ord.
2007-05, 3rd Series, passed 9-4-2007)
§ 155.23 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a medium density residence
district is to protect those predominately single-family residential areas within Hastings
that were developed in most part prior to World War II, encroachment from potential
conflicting uses, and to provide for future residential and related development consistent
with proper existing development existing neighborhood character and with minimum
maintaining standards for the provision of health, light, air, and visual appeal.
62
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Same as permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residence District;
(2) Two-family/multiple-family dwellings, including both new construction
and conversions of existing single-family dwellings;
(3) Fire stations and library; and
(4) Bed and breakfast lodging facilities subject to the following criteria:
(a) That the facility shall be part of a formally designated local, state, or
national historical structure;
(b) That a maximum of 10 bed and breakfast units may be established in a
structure;
(c) That the facility shall have a minimum size of 2,500 gross square feet;
(d) That all bed and breakfast units shall be established within the
principal structure;
(e) That 1 off-street parking space shall be provided for the home plus 1
space for each bed and breakfast unit;
(f) That not more than 1 identification sign not exceeding 2 square feet in
area may be attached to each wall that faces a street; and
(g) That the lot on which a bed and breakfast facility is proposed shall
have a minimum area of 7,000 square feet plus 1,000 square feet for each unit in excess
of 5 units.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Residential care facilities, dependent and semi-independent, subject to the
conditions listed at § 155.07.
(2) Neighborhood commercial subject to the site plan requirements of
§ 155.07.
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07.
(4) Funeral Homes
(D) Original Hastings design standards.
(1) Intent. Original Hastings Design Standards (OHDS) preserve and enhance
traditional neighborhood design by reflecting the general characteristics of buildings
dating from 1845 to 1940, the predominate era for building construction within the
OHDS District. OHDS regulations ensure traditional neighborhood design by
incorporating design features such as alleys, carriage houses, front porches, period
63
sensitive housing design, sidewalks, and traditional street lighting. Design standards
create and enhance the character of older neighborhoods by establishing regulations to
guide property development and rehabilitation consistent with the unique historic
character of the neighborhood. The OHDS are derived from the Design Guidelines for
Original Hastings, adopted in 2003 by the City Council as part of the Heart of Hastings
Master Plan.
(2) Designated District. OHDS shall be effective for portions of the R-2
District as indicated in the figure below and shall be further identified on the Official
Zoning Map. Areas not zoned R-2 are excluded from the OHDS.
(3) Applicability. The OHDS are applicable to all new residential
development within the OHDS District. Substantial modifications to existing residential
buildings shall also adhere to the design standards. Substantial modifications are
defined as building improvements affecting the exterior of a structure, and exceeding
10% of its current building market value as defined by the Dakota County Assessor.
This percentage shall be reviewed by the City Council on a regular basis. Substantial
Modifications may include the following:
(a) Projects in corner side yards abutting a right-of-way.
(b) Accessory structures over 120 square feet.
(c) Any project that would negatively affect the historic appearance of the
streetscape.
(4) Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from Original
Hastings Design Standards:
(a) Accessory buildings under 120 square feet;
64
(b) Fences, decks, porches and patios within the rear yard or interior
side- yard. Corner side yards abutting a right-of-way shall not be exempt from the
design standards;
(c) Areas of a home or structure not directly part of an alteration or
improvement;
(d) Alterations or improvements to the interior of a structure not affecting
the outward appearance;
(e) Exterior modifications to homes built after 1950; and
(f) Demolition of home
1. The HPC shall have 10 days to visually record a structure after
an application is submitted to demolish a structure that is over 50 years old within the
OHDS. If a formal designation study has already been completed for the property, the
HPC shall have up to 6 weeks to request that the City Council begin a designation
process as outlined in § 30.10(D). If the City Council initiates the designation process,
the demolition application must be handled in accordance with § 30.10(D).
(5) Relationship to historic preservation districts and standards. Original
Hastings Design Standards are different from and complimentary to established historic
preservation districts and standards. Original Hastings Design Standards focus less on
historic re-creation, but on the consistency of new and rehabilitated buildings to the
established traditional character, bulk, height and form of the neighborhood.
Provisions of § 30.10 still apply to properties within the OHDS that are within a
designated Heritage Preservation District or individually designated as a Historic
Preservation Site.
(6) Garages. New garages directly accessing a public street shall be
prohibited if an improved alley way abuts the property.
(7) Immediate neighborhood. The immediate neighborhood as used to
determine OHDS applicability shall include all properties along street frontages within
150 feet of the subject parcel as indicated in the figure below.
[Text continues on
page 177]
(8)
65
Immediate neighborhood average. The immediate neighborhood average is defined
as a range between 10% above and 10% below the mean for a given design standard
within the immediate neighborhood.
(9) Frontage types. Application of OHDS are based upon the following
frontage types.
(a) Front yard. Front yards contain a landscaped lawn between the
street\sidewalk and the residence. Structure setbacks shall be consistent with the
immediate neighborhood average. Fences may be constructed in accordance with the
§ 155.05. Raised porches are encouraged.
(b)
Garage\alley.
Neighborhood
alleys provide service and garage access to residential uses in order to preserve the
pedestrian character of the primary street frontage. Detached or semi-detached garages
can front the alley in 1 of the 2 configurations shown in the sketch below. Lofts in 1.5-
story garages may be suitable for residential use. Garages are further regulated under
the accessory structure provisions of this chapter.
[Image follows on next page]
66
(10)
Outline of
design standards.
Front Yard Garage/Alley
Yard Use Pedestrian only. No vehicle
parking or drives in front yard
if abutting an improved alley
way
Vehicle Parking. Pedestrian
path to rear entry. If abutting
an improved alley way
Yard and Street Wall Materials Landscaping predominant.
Concrete, brick, or stone paths.
Paved driveway. Landscaped
buffer. Screen walls – Brick or
painted wood.
Yard and Street Wall
Technique
Lawn and Trees predominant.
Wall or fence shall match
building style. Ground floor
shall be raised above grade 24
to 48 inches if containing a
porch.
Wall or fence to match building
style.
Front Yard Garage/Alley
67
Front Yard Garage/Alley
Building Wall Front Yard setback varies to
match immediate neighborhood
average. Side yard setback
conforms to Residential Lot
District Requirements of
§ 155.50
Side loaded garage must have 5
foot green space between drive
and alley. Maximum setback
for all garages is 25 feet.
Building Width Must conform to the immediate neighborhood average
Entry Level Wall Openings 30% to 50% transparent
window and door openings
Size and shape of windows to
match main building.
Entry Level Wall Materials Brick or stone masonry in
historic size and pattern.
Cement Stucco. Wood lap,
vinyl, metal, cementitious, or
drop siding with maximum 5
inches exposed.
Same materials as on main
building.
Entry Level Wall Technique Historic window, door, and
porch detailing. Main entry
from roofed porch. Porch
optional with a minimum 8-foot
depth, but no less than 5 feet
from sidewalk/curb.
Historic window and door
detailing to match main
building.
Upper Level Wall Openings Reflect bay pattern and size of
immediate neighborhood
average. 25% to 50% window
openings.
Reflect entry level bay width.
Upper Level Wall Materials Brick or stone masonry in historic size and pattern. Cement
stucco. Wood lap, vinyl, metal, cementitious or drop siding with
maximum 5 inches exposed.
Upper Level Wall Technique Detailing to be consistent with historic building style of the
immediate neighborhood average.
Front Yard Garage/Alley
68
Front Yard Garage/Alley
Entry Shelter Type Cantilevered roof shelter over
entry or covered porch. Relate
to entry openings. Door must
face the front street.
Residential use of garage shall
require a cantilevered roof
shelter over entry.
Entry Shelter Materials Wood or iron-framed structure. Wood, metal, or composition
shingle roof consistent with immediate neighborhood average.
Entry Shelter Technique Detailing consistent with historic building style and immediate
neighborhood average.
Roof Style and Pitch Steep pitch (8:12 minimum)
gable roof. Lower pitch
Italianate hip or porch roof.
Same as main building.
Roof Materials Low slope membrane roof.
Steep pitch metal, wood, slate
or composition shingle roof.
Same as main building.
Roof Technique Cap parapet with integral or
projecting cornice. Consistent
with historic building style and
the immediate neighborhood
average.
Same as main building.
Roof Height Roof height shall be consistent with the immediate neighborhood
average.
(11) Administration. The Planning Department shall administer the design
standards consistent with § 155.51. New residential development and substantial
modifications to existing development shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and approved by the City Council. Substantial modifications are defined as building
improvements changing the exterior of a structure, and exceeding 10% of its current
building market value as defined by the Dakota County Assessor. The Planning
Director shall have the authority to determine conformance of any project to the
Original Hastings Design Standards that do not require Planning Commission review
and City Council approval. (Ord. 2011-02, 3rd Series, passed 01-03-2011)
(12) Appeals. Any appeal of an administrative decision shall be forwarded to
the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals as outlined in § 30.02.
(13) Effective date. The provisions of this section shall apply to all properties
in the R-2 OHDS Overlay District immediately upon passage and publication. (Prior
Code, § 10.13A) (Am. Ord. 546, passed - -; Am. Ord. 561, 2nd Series, passed 2-5-
2007; Am. Ord. 2009-2, 3rd Series, passed 1-20-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99 (Ord.
2017-02 3rd Series, passed on 12-18-17)
69
§ 155.24 R-3 MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY RESIDENCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a moderate high density
residential district is in recognition of the growing demand for rental housing in
Hastings and of the desire to provide for multi-family housing upon fairly sizeable
tracts of land, thereby allowing increased design flexibility and a more compatible land
use development pattern.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Multiple-family and single-family dwellings when part of a PRD;
(2) Residential care facility, dependent and semi-independent, residential
senior facility-independent, dormitories, public and parochial schools and churches, fire
stations, professional offices, day care center, library, gift or craft shop and similar
uses of a public service nature;
(3) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses such as private
garages and sheds;
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 155.07; and
(5) Planned residential developments pursuant to § 155.07
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Neighborhood commercial subject to the requirements of § 155.07.
(Am. Ord. 501, passed 8-18-2003)
(2) Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.14) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 155.25 R-4 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a medium density residence
district is in recognition of the growing demand for multiple-family housing and of the
desire to encourage high quality developments less than 3 stories in height in strategic
locations within the city.
(B) Uses permitted. Same as permitted in the R-3.
(C) Uses by special permit. Same as permitted in the R-3 District. (Prior Code,
§ 10.15) Penalty, see § 10.99
70
§ 155.26 RMU RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE.
(A) Intent. The intent of the RMU zone is to encourage the development of higher
density multiple-family dwellings and limited commercial activities adjacent to the
downtown area to support the activities in the Downtown Core District, to serve as a
transitional district from commercial to lower density residential districts, provide an
area for restricted commercial activities and to provide a variety of housing types to
satisfy individual preferences and financial capabilities.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings;
(2) Library, public and private schools, and similar uses of a public service
nature;
(3) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses including, but not
limited to, garages, and recreational facilities;
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 155.07;
(5) Planned residential developments in accordance with § 155.07; and
(Ord. 477, passed 10-21-2002)
(6) Commercial activities are permitted but limited to the first floor of the
building, and shall not exceed 50% of the entire structure.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Multiple-family dwellings greater than 40 feet in height as measured by
the International Building Code; and
(2) Neighborhood commercial subject to the requirements of § 155.07.
(Am. Ord. 501, passed 8-18-2003)
(3) Conversion of existing building space of no great than 10,000 s. f. into a
restaurant, tavern, or lounge per Section 155.09, Subd. F.6.
(D) Building and site design. Approvals granted through building permit, site
plan, special use permit, or planned residential development shall require conformance
with the Original Hastings Design Guidelines as adopted by the City Council. (Prior
Code, § 10.16) (Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003; Am. Ord. 2009-09, 3rd Series,
passed 9-8-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.27 R-6 MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a manufactured home
residence district is to provide for the development of well designed manufactured
homes in areas consistent with the Hastings Comprehensive Plan.
(B) Permitted uses. Manufactured homes, community centers, storm shelters,
71
subdivisions, parks, office for management of the manufactured home park, accessory
uses if incidental to the foregoing principal uses such as private garages, storage sheds,
decks, patios, play equipment. All permitted uses are subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Manufactured homes in an approved subdivision; and
(2) Manufactured home parks subject to the site plan review pursuant to
§ 155.51 and the following requirements.
(a) Each manufactured home shall be equipped with skirting around the
entire perimeter of the home. The skirting shall be compatible with the principal
structure and shall be functional and non-permanent. It shall be unlawful to construct,
erect, attach, or cause to be constructed, erected, or attached any foundation, wall, or
embankment under, around, or near any manufactured home in any manufactured home
park in the city or to otherwise impede the removal of the manufactured home.
(b) It is unlawful for any type vehicle to travel at a rate in excess of 10
mph within the limits of a manufactured home park. The park owner shall adequately
post the speed limits within the manufactured home park.
(c) No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes while parked in a manufactured home park.
(3) Design and operation standards for manufactured home parks:
(a) Parking.
1. Each manufactured home lot shall have an approved hard
surfaced off street parking space for 2 automobiles, which shall not be less than 20 feet
in width and 20 feet in depth.
2. If street widths do not permit on-street parking as stipulated in
Chapter 154, each manufactured home park shall provide an approved hard surfaced off
street parking lot for guests of occupants in the amount of one space for each 5
manufactured home lots. All off-street parking shall be located within 400 feet of the
unit to be served.
(b) Utilities.
1. A central underground fuel distribution system shall be installed
to serve all manufactured home lots. No individual fuel tanks shall be allowed for the
purpose of providing a source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes for a
manufactured home or accessory building.
2. All utilities shall be underground. There shall be no overhead
wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes.
3. Water and sewer charges shall be determined from a water
meter(s) with the meter(s) to be located on public right-of-way at the entrance(s) to the
park.
4. The park owner shall pay to the city any inspection and testing
72
fees for utility service to the park.
(c) Lighting. The manufactured home park grounds and streets shall be
lighted as approved by the city from sunset to sunrise. Entrances to manufactured
home parks shall be clearly defined and well lit.
(d) Patio and sidewalks. Each manufactured home site shall contain a
concrete patio and a concrete sidewalk leading from the patio to the off-street parking
area for the site. The sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete with a minimum of 4-
inch thickness.
(e) Registration. It shall be the duty of the operator of the manufactured
home park to keep a record of all manufactured home owners and occupants located
within the park. The park operator shall keep the register available for inspection by
authorized city, county, and state and other public officials whose duty necessitates
acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register shall contain the
following information:
1. The name and address of each manufactured home occupant;
2. The name and address of the owner of each manufactured home;
and
3. The date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home.
(f) Review procedures. Upon making application for site plan approval
of a manufactured home park plan, all information required by this subdivision shall be
submitted to the city for review in accordance with the same procedure and time
schedule for platting procedures as outlined in Chapter 154.
(g) Fees. The applicant shall reimburse the city for any expenses
associated with reviewing the proposal such as, but not limited to, fees for consultants,
engineering, legal and environmental studies.
(4) Home occupations in accordance with § 155.07.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Neighborhood commercial subject to § 155.07. (Am. Ord. 501, passed 8-
18-2003)
(2) Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.17) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 155.28 C-1 GENERAL COMMERCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter is to have an area that allows a variety of
commercial development similar to the downtown, but has more restrictive setbacks
than the downtown.
73
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) All uses permitted in C-3 Community-Regional Commerce District;
(2) Gasoline dispensing and car washes, provided auto repair is not included;
and
(3) Residential dwellings on the first floor level provided the dwelling is
accessory to a commercial use.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Small animal clinics, excluding establishments with outside runs and nonpatient
overnight boarding; and
(2) Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.18) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 155.29 C-2 HIGHWAY AUTO-SPECIALIZED COMMERCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a highway-auto-specialized
commerce district is to provide appropriate areas for commercial establishments which
are oriented to the motoring public or which require large sites for off-street parking or
display of merchandise.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Commercial establishments which are oriented to the motorist including,
but not limited to, eating places, automobile service stations, auto repair shops, car
wash, and motel.
(2) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses including, but not
limited to, off-street parking.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Commercial establishments requiring large sites for off-street parking or
for outdoor display and sales such as farm implement sale, auto and truck dealers,
manufactured home sales, and building material sales. Open sales or rental lots are
subject to the site plan review requirements of § 155.51; and
(2) Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.19) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 155.30 C-3 COMMUNITY REGIONAL COMMERCE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a community-regional
commerce district is in recognition of the existing downtown commercial development
and of the need for its future expansions, rehabilitation and redevelopment.
74
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Commercial establishments including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Retail and service establishments excluding automobile repair;
(b) Offices;
(c) Entertainment and amusement services; and
(d) Lodging services including hotel and motel.
(2) Public and semi-public buildings;
(3) Private clubs;
(4) Residential dwellings provided they are located above the first floor level;
(5) Automobile parking lots;
(6) Churches; and
(7) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Automobile service stations and motor vehicle repair and wash;
(2) Small animal clinics, excluding establishments with outside runs and nonpatient
overnight boarding;
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07; and
(4) Residential dwellings on the first floor level provided the dwelling is
accessory to a commercial use, less than 50% of the first level floor area and is located
in the rear of the building with a separate outside entrance. (Prior Code, § 10.20A)
Penalty, see § 10.99
(5) Brew Pub
(6) Brewery Taproom, provided that a minimum 20 percent of the floor area
devoted to use as retail sales and a brewery production and distribution
area up to 7,500 square feet.
(7) Microdistillery with Cocktail Room, provided that a minimum 20 percent
of the floor area is devoted to use as retail sales and a microdistillery
production and distribution area up to 7,500 square feet.
(8) Conversion of existing building space of no greater than 10,000 s. f. into a
restaurant, tavern, or lounge per Section 155.09, Subd. F.6.
(Ord. 2015-12, 3rd Series, passed 10-19-15) (Ord. 2017-13, 3rd Series, passed
on 12-18-17)
75
§ 155.31 DC DOWNTOWN CORE.
(A) Intent. The intent of the Downtown Core District is to create a vibrant mixeduse
core with an aesthetic character that is distinctly different than other areas of the
community and mix of uses arranged in a manner that encourages pedestrian movement
and accessibility. The Downtown Core District focuses on the vertical integration of
uses requiring certain uses to integrate residential housing above street level businesses.
These high density residential developments have historically contributed to the lifecycle
housing mix available in and around the downtown. Maintaining historical
residential housing densities is also a contributor to downtown commerce and street
level activity. The preservation and growth of connected first floor commercial activity
is essential in maintaining the viability of downtown. First floor residential units
interspersed within areas of predominant commercial activity will diminish the
cohesiveness and viability of downtown. Maintaining the historic distribution of
business and density of housing is essential to protect municipal and private investment.
Planning efforts to secure a transit center in the downtown will further the objectives
maintaining and enhancing a pedestrian scale core. Careful design of buildings, public,
and private spaces is also a primary focus in the Downtown Core District which shall
be guided by the Original Hastings Design Guidelines as adopted by the City Council.
The guidelines establish design criteria for building fronts that are bases on street types.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Commercial retail and service establishments that have floor areas of less
than 15,000 square feet on any single level including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Retail and service establishments excluding automobile repair;
(b) Offices;
(c) Entertainment and amusement services; and
(d) Lodging services including hotel and motel.
(2) Public and semi-public buildings;
(3) Private clubs;
(4) Residential dwellings provided they are located above the first floor level;
(5) Automobile parking lots subject to following conditions:
(a) Parking lots shall not have frontage or driveway access points on
streets with an east/west orientation, if an alternate access to the property is available;
(b) Parking lots may front on street with a north \south orientation when a
landscape buffer is provided along the perimeter of the parking areas in accordance
with § 155.09;
76
(c) Every attempt shall be made to locate parking lots internally within a
block to allow building to front on street corridors; and
(d) Existing alleys should be utilized whenever practical to facilitate
orderly access and use of land.
(6) Churches; and
(7) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Outdoor patio areas for entertainment, dining, and recreational activities;
(2) Small animal clinics, excluding establishments with outside runs and nonpatient
overnight boarding;
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07; and
(4) Residential dwellings on the first floor level of buildings fronting the
following streets:
(a) 1st Street between Vermillion Street and the CP Railroad Tracks;
(b) 3rd Street between Eddy Street and the CP Railroad Tracks;
(c) 4th Street between Eddy Street and the CP Railroad Tracks;
(d) Sibley Street between 3rd Street and 4th Street;
(e) Ramsey Street between 1st Street and 4th Street;
(f) Tyler Street between 1st Street and 4th Street; and
(g) Bailey Street between 1st Street and 4th Street.
(h) 2nd Street between Tyler Street and the CP Railroad Tracks.
(i) 2nd Street between Spring Street and Vermillion Street.
(5) Dairies and Creameries
(6) Brew Pub
(7) Brewery Taproom, provided that a minimum 20 percent of the floor area
is devoted to use as retail sales and a brewery production and distribution
area up to 7,500 square feet.
(8) Conversion of existing building space of no greater than 10,000 s. f. into
a restaurant, tavern, or lounge per Section 155.09 Subd. F.6.
(Ord. 2015-12, 3rd Series, passed on 10-19-15)
77
(D) Uses prohibited. First floor residential dwellings fronting the following streets
shall be prohibited: 2nd Street between Vermillion Street and Tyler Street.
(E) Bulk standards.
(1) Minimum lot width - 22 feet;
(2) Minimum lot depth - 80 feet;
(3) Maximum building height - 47 feet or 756.5 feet above sea level;
whichever is greater. Maximum of 4 stories in height;
(4) Minimum residential density - 14 dwelling units per acre; and
(5) Minimum floor area ratio for non-residential uses (vertically mixed
buildings) - 1.5.
(F) Building and site design. Approvals granted through building permit, site
plan, special use permit, or planned residential development shall require conformance
with the Original Hastings Design Guidelines as adopted by the City Council. (Prior
Code, § 10.20B) (Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003; Am. Ord. 530, passed 4-5-2005;
Am. Ord. 532, passed 4-18-2005) Penalty, see § 10.99; (Ord. No. 2015-09, 3rd Series,
passed
6-15-15)
§ 155.32 C-4 REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a regional shopping center
district is in recognition of future needs for one or more large commercial areas to
serve the city and surrounding areas.
(B) Uses permitted. All uses permitted in C-3 Community Regional Commerce
District.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) All uses permitted by special use in the C-3 Community Regional
Commerce District and the following.
(2) Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments (as defined in
Chapter 114) subject to the following minimum requirements:
(a) Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments shall be
located at least 500 feet away from any residential property;
(b) Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments shall be
located at least 500 feet away from any church, school, library, park and public
recreation area;
(c) Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments shall be
located at least 500 feet away from any other Adult Establishment or Accessory Adult
78
Establishments; and
(d) Adult Establishments and Accessory Adult Establishments shall obtain
all city licenses required in Chapter 114 before commencing operation.
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07.
(4) (a) Temporary auto sales may be allowed to support he activities of a
non-profit community organization (such as a fund-raiser for a sports team or school).
Each auto dealership may be allowed 1 sale per year, with the sale not to exceed 14
calendar days per year. Each parcel of land in the C-4 District is allowed 1 sale per
year. If a business consists of more than 1 parcel, only 1 sale may be allowed.
(b) The following shall be considered in granting a special use permit:
1. The effect on the total number of parking spaces at the business
the sale is held.
2. The effect of the ingress and egress at the parking lot.
3. The effect on accessibility of emergency services.
4. The effect on neighboring businesses or residential areas from an
increase in traffic. (Prior Code, § 10.21) (Am. Ord. 555, 2nd Series, passed 8-7-
2006; Am. Ord. 2007-02, 3rd Series, passed 7-16-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-11, 3rd
Series, passed 9-15-2008) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.33 O-1 GENERAL OFFICE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a general office district is to
provide the city and its residents with a zoning designation that permits limited business
applications in certain areas of the community as determined by the Hastings
Comprehensive Plan. This designation can be used as a buffer zone to insulate
residential areas from high movement areas or provide neighborhood convenience
establishments.
(B) Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Offices excluding uses with drive-through facilities;
(2) Retail and service facilities within an office building but limited to 50% of
the gross floor area; and
(3) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principle uses.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Office uses with drive-thru facilities;
(2) Retail and service facilities;
79
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07; and
(4) Small animal clinics, excluding establishments with outside runs and nonpatient
overnight stays. (Prior Code, § 10.22) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.34 I-1 INDUSTRIAL PARK.
(A) Purpose and intent. The I-1 Industrial Park District is established to provide
land to serve industrial, manufacturing, and warehouse needs that provide vital services
and increase the tax base of the city. The nature of I-1 uses prohibits their operation in
most other districts in the city. Operations that are incompatible in most commercial
zoning districts and require additional separation from residential properties shall be the
primary use of land. The predominance of retail and service uses shall be discouraged.
Limited retail or service uses may be acceptable, provided it is incidental to the primary
use of property, or does not detract from operation of primary uses. Land designated I-
1 shall be located to minimize conflict with incompatible uses. The I-1 designation of
land is limited to only those areas identified Industrial in the Comprehensive Plan to
serve the following objectives:
(1) Prevent expansion of scattered industrial operations;
(2) Limit industrial uses to planned industrial parks where uniform
performance standards and land use regulations can be applied;
(3) Protect industrial areas from encroachment by non-industrial uses;
(4) Preserve industrial areas for the advancement of the city’s tax base; and
(5) Maximizing creation and retention of jobs in conformance with adopted
minimum wage criteria.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) All fabricating, manufacturing, production or processing of materials,
goods, and products provided the activity shall be undertaken within completely
enclosed buildings, and provided further that any outdoor storage of raw materials or
finished products shall be effectively screened by natural or manmade means from
adjacent properties and public streets and highways;
(2) Wholesaling, all commodities except live animals;
(3) Building material sales and storage, provided that any outdoor storage of
materials or finished products shall be effectively screened by natural or man made
means from adjacent properties and public streets and highways; and
(4) Retail and service uses incidental to the primary use of a building.
(5) Brew Pub
(6) Brewery Taproom
80
(7) Microdistillery
(Ord. 2015-12, 3rd Series, passed 10-19-15)
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Retail and service establishments as primary uses of a building or
property;
(2) Religious institutions; and
(3) Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.23) (Am. Ord. 498,
passed 7-21-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.35 I-2 INDUSTRIAL PARK STORAGE/SERVICE.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing an industrial park
storage/service district is in recognition of the need to segregate for aesthetic and
functional reasons uses that involve exterior storage of products, raw materials,
equipment or vehicles and that require a lesser degree of public improvements that is
typically provided in the I-1 Industrial Park District. It shall be recognized that the
intensity and type of industrial uses that shall be permitted in the I-2 District will be
based upon a determination by the city that an adequate level of public services to
support the uses can be provided based upon the level of public improvements available
to the district. The District serves to regulate existing I-2 uses. Further expansion of
the I-2 District geographic limits is not anticipated. Future rezoning of land for
industrial storage and services uses shall be designated I-1, subject to the provisions of
§ 155.34.
(B) Permitted. Same as permitted in the I-1 District.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) Motor vehicle impound lots, subject to the following conditions.
(a) Motor vehicles cannot be kept in an impound lot for more than 14
days unless a police hold has been placed on the motor vehicle.
(b) No sales of motor vehicles, salvaging, repairing, dismantling, or
stripping of motor vehicles shall be allowed in the impound lot.
(c) 100% opaque fencing or landscaping at least 6 feet high must be
placed around the entire lot and must be adequately maintained.
(d) All motor vehicles impounded shall be kept within the opaque fenced
or landscaped area.
(e) All buildings on the lot must be permanent structures with permanent
foundations.
(f) The entire impound lot shall be surfaced with a bituminous covering,
and concrete curbing to city standards.
81
(g) A sufficiently sized bituminous area shall be provided for the parking
of vehicles that may be leaking fluids or other pollutants.
(h) Any lighting in the impound lot shall not be obtrusive to neighboring
property.
(i) Employees of the city or its duly appointed representatives, shall be
allowed on the property at any time to inspect the impound lot to verify compliance
with the city code.
(2) Any special use permit issued hereunder shall be reviewed annually and at
other times deemed appropriate by the city, to verify compliance with the city code and
any special conditions of the permit. As part of the review procedure, the city may
hold a public hearing, preceded by the appropriate mailed and published notice. As
part of any review procedure, the city may amend the permit by adding or deleting any
conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(3) All conditions imposed by § 30.02 must be met. Additionally, the city
may impose any other conditions it feels are necessary to protect the public, health,
safety, and welfare.
(4) Any violation of this division (C) or any conditions imposed upon the
special use permit shall because for termination of the permit by the city.
(5) Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code, § 10.24) (Am. Ord. 498,
passed 7-21-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.36 PI PUBLIC INSTITUTION.
(A) Intent. The intent of this chapter in establishing a public institution district is
in recognition of the substantial amount of land within Hastings now devoted to medical
care, government service, and community service facilities. The city shall protect the
Public Institution District from encroachment by incompatible uses.
(B) Uses permitted.
(1) Hospitals, sanitariums, residential care facilities, dependent and semiindependent,
residential senior facility - independent, dormitories, and other medical
care facilities of a similar nature;
(2) Specialized educational facilities above the secondary level;
(3) Governmental buildings when the use is considered to be an office use or
jail;
(4) Accessory uses incidental to the above principal uses including, but not
limited to, signs and off-street parking;
(5) Churches;
(6) Community gymnasiums and fitness facilities;
82
(7) Museums in structures of special historical significance; and
(8) Keeping chickens pursuant to 155.07.
(C) Uses by special permit. Towers as regulated by § 155.07. (Prior Code,
§ 10.25A) (Am. Ord. 542, passed 12-5-2005; Am. Ord. 2009-08, 3rd Series, passed
9-21-2009) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.37 VSO VERMILLION STREET OVERLAY.
(A) Intent. The intent of the Vermillion Street Overlay District is to preserve the
character of existing residential and religious buildings while allowing conversions of
their use to accommodate residential, institutional, and commercial activities.
Preservation of building and site character elements are critical to ensure this corridor
maintains its vitality, and traditional character. Conversions of structures to uses other
than the original are based on performance criteria as defined in this section. This
district recognizes that because each building and site has its own unique design
characteristics, some structures will have greater conversion potential than others.
(B) Uses permitted. All permitted uses identified in the underlying zoning district
shall be permitted uses in the VSO District.
(C) Uses by special permit.
(1) All uses by special permit identified in the underlying zoning district shall
be uses by special permit in the VSO District in addition to the following:
(a) Commercial activities in residential buildings. Use conversion shall
meet all requirements of the adopted building code;
(b) Commercial activities in buildings previously used for institutional or
religious purposes;
(c) Professional offices in residential districts; and
(d) Mixed residential use of commercial structures.
(2) Limited disruption or change to the inherent character of the building, site,
and corridor shall be predominant criteria in determining approval of a special use
permit in the VSO District.
83
(D) Uses prohibited. The following uses shall be prohibited in the VSO District:
(1) Assembly, storage, and manufacturing activities; and
(2) Outside sales.
(E) Site plan review. Any building site construction or alteration shall be subject
to the site plan review procedure as stipulated in § 155.51. In addition to the
requirements of § 155.51, review of site plans within the VSO District shall be subject
to the following: the existing building and site character shall be maintained consistent
with the Original Hastings Design Guidelines, as adopted by the City Council. (Prior
Code, § 10.25B) (Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 155.50 RESIDENTIAL LOT REGULATIONS.
It is unlawful to erect or alter any building within the city unless the following
minimum lot and yard areas are provided and maintained in connection with the
building.
District A R-1 R-
1L
R-2, NC, and
OSR
R-3 R-4 RMU R-6
Minimum Lot
Area
10 acres 9,00
0
othe
r*
18,0
00
othe
r*
7,000-one
9,700-two
other*
5,000 2,500 12 d.u. per
acre
2,500
Width At
Setback
150 75 75 50-one 66-
two
- - - -
Front 20 20 20 20 20 20 5 15
Interior Sideb
10 10 10 7 7 1/2
building
height
1/4 building
height-g
5
Corner 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 10
Sidec
and d
Rearb
and d
20 20 20 20 20 20 ½ bldg.
height
5
Height 25-e 25-e 25-e 25-e 25-e 25-e 40-f 25-e
NOTES TO TABLE:
* Minimum lot area requirements for other uses and all other districts not listed above shall be determined by the city
during site plan review. The Planning Director may, at his or her discretion, determine setbacks for accessory
structures.
a - Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different from those required, the minimum front yard setback
shall be the average setback of the structures, but in no case shall the front yard setback be less than 10 feet.
b - In the R-1 and R-1L Districts, an accessory structure (garage, shed, open deck, and the like) shall be no closer than
5 feet to the rear or adjacent interior side lot line.
c - In the R-2 District, an accessory structure (garage, shed, open deck, and the like) shall be no closer than 5 feet to
the rear or adjacent interior side lot line.
d - Garages facing the street/alley R.O.W. shall be setback at least 20 feet.
e - Buildings over 25 feet in height shall require 1/2 foot additional setback for each additional 1 foot of building height
on the required minimum side yard.
f - Except as allowed by § 155.25.
g - The maximum setback required shall be 15 feet, but in no case less than 5 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10.26) (Am. Ord. 497, passed 7-7-2003; Am. Ord. 2007-05, 3rd
Series, passed 9-4-2007) Penalty, see § 10.99
84
§ 155.51 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.
(A) Every person, before commencing construction or major alterations of a
structure, except 1- and 2-family dwellings and buildings accessory thereto, shall
submit to the Planning Department the following:
(1) A detailed drawing drawn to scale showing pertinent existing conditions;
and
(2) A complete set of scaled preliminary drawings that include at least the
following:
(a) An accurately scaled and dimensioned site plan indicating parking
layout including access provisions, designation and locations of principal and accessory
buildings, landscaping, including trees and shrubbery with an indication of species,
planting size and location;
(b) Fences, walls, or other screening, including height and type of
material;
(c) Lighting provisions, type and location to conform with 155.53.5
Exterior Lighting Standards.
(d) Curbs;
(e) Building elevations including materials proposed;
(f) Existing and proposed land elevations and drainage provisions,
including:
1. Plan showing existing and finish grades and surface drainage
including overall final contours at a minimum of 2-foot intervals;
2. Existing conditions surrounding the proposed development to a
distance of 100 feet, including existing ground elevations, buildings, utilities,
landscaping, trees, and drainage ways;
3. All drainage swales and critical areas shall be clearly identified
with grade and spot elevations; and
4. Erosion and sedimentation control plans which specify the control
measures to be used before, during, and after construction until the soil and slope are
stabilized by permanent cover. Erosion control plans shall be designated per city
approved standards.
85
(g) Location of all existing and proposed utilities including, but not
limited to, location and size of water mains, storm and sanitary sewers (including rim
and invert elevations), fire hydrants, gas lines, electric and telephone poles, street
lights, curbs, gutter, culverts, catch basins, manholes and other facilities. Site plans
with significant private street and/or utility improvements shall be required to submit
plan and profile construction drawings to the Public Works Department for review and
approval;
(h) Location of existing and proposed fire hydrants and a fire protection
system plan;
(i) Complete plans for storage of waste and garbage;
(j) Boundary line of property, clearly indicated, along with identifying
any adjacent public and private streets, sidewalks, railroad right-of-way and drainage
and utility easements and any other easements and their purpose; and
(k) Existing benchmarks used for surveying the site plan.
(B) A declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions or the equivalent
document shall be submitted for review and approval by the city to ensure maintenance
of any common elements including open space, common drives, and common utilities.
The declaration shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) A statement requiring the deeds, leases or documents of conveyance
affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses, or apartments be subject to the
terms of the declaration;
(2) A provision for the formation of a property owners association or
corporation and that all owners must be members of the association or corporation
which may maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which may
assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common costs. The
association or corporation must remain in effect and may not be terminated or
disbanded;
(3) Membership in the association shall be mandatory for each owner and any
successive buyer;
(4) Any open space restrictions must be permanent and may not be changed or
modified without city approval;
(5) The association is responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the
maintenance of the open space facilities deeded to it;
(6) Property owners are responsible for their pro-rata share of the cost of the
association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association which meet the
requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota
Statutes; and
(7) The association may adjust the assessment to meet changing needs.
(Am. Ord. 525, passed 1-3-2005)
86
(C) The Planning Director shall forward site plans to the Planning Commission for
its review and recommendation to the City Council. After receiving the Commission’s
recommendation, the Council shall approve or reject the site plan. If the Council
approves the plan and unless the Council states otherwise, all documents submitted and
information contained therein shall constitute a condition of approval by the Council
that must be complied with by the applicant. Any proposed variation from the
approved plans must receive prior approval from the Planning Director or, where
applicable, the Public Works Department. No occupancy permit shall be issued until
all conditions of approval imposed by the Council have been satisfied by the applicant,
except as provided by this section.
(D) Based upon an approved site plan, the Public Works Department shall make a
determination of the cost for site improvements including, but not limited to,
earthwork, sewer and water extensions, storm sewer, paving, curbing, lighting, and
landscaping. Before any occupancy permit shall be issued, the developer (i.e.
applicant) shall provide the city with a performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit
or other form of security, approved by the city, in the amount of 125% of the estimated
cost of any uncompleted site improvements.
(E) Upon Council approval as provided in division (C) above of the site plan, the
Council shall determine if a developer’s agreement shall be required. Any developer’s
agreement required by this division (E) shall contain all conditions of approval imposed
by the Council, shall be signed by the city and all parties having an interest in the
subject property and shall be recorded by the city with the Dakota County Recorder’s
office. All conditions imposed by the City Council shall run with the land and bind all
successors in interest in the property. (Prior Code, § 10.27)
§ 155.52 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of establishing criteria for architectural design and
exterior treatment of buildings is to ensure high standards of development that is
compatible with neighboring development and contributes to a community image of
permanence, stability, and visual aesthetics, while preventing impermanent construction
and use of materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate, contribute to depreciation of
neighborhood property values, or cause urban blight. The standards are further
intended to ensure coordinated design of building facades, additions, and accessory
structures in order to prevent visual disharmony, and to reduce visual monotony
through variation of building materials, heights, offsets, changes in building plane, and
the like.
(B) Applicability. Architectural standards in this section shall apply to the exterior
construction of new commercial, industrial, institutional buildings, and the like, as well
as multiple family buildings exceeding 8 units, and as follows.
(1) Existing buildings. Building additions and remodeling of existing
commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings shall also be subject to architectural
standards, however the effect of the architectural standards on the buildings existing
appearance shall be considered, to ensure visual harmony, and consistency with the
purpose of the architectural standards section.
87
(2) Heritage Preservation Sites and Heritage Preservation District. Buildings
and properties within the Heritage Preservation District, or designated as a Heritage
Preservation Site shall also be subject to conformance with § 30.10. In areas of
discrepancy between standards, the City Council shall decide on the applicability of the
standard.
(3) Original Hastings Design Guidelines. Buildings and properties as
identified in the Original Hastings Design Guidelines (adopted by the City Council on
5-5-2003) must adhere to the requirements of the adopted guidelines in addition to the
provisions of this section. In areas of discrepancy between standards, the City Council
shall decide on the applicability of the standard.
(C) General requirements.
(1) Building design and construction standards must be used to create a
structure with equally attractive sides. Primary emphasis shall be placed on the most
visible sides of a building.
(2) Primary building entrances must be clearly defined to promote visual
interest and architectural presence.
(3) Large, uninterrupted expanses of a single building material shall not be
permitted, unless the use meets the purpose or intent of this section as determined by
the Administrative Official.
(4) No wall that faces a public right-of-way, parks, the public view from
adjacent properties or a residential use or district may have an uninterrupted length
exceeding 100 feet without including at least 2 of the following:
(a) Change in plane;
(b) Change in texture or masonry pattern;
(c) Inclusion of windows; and/or
(d) Equivalent change or incorporation of a building element that
subdivides the wall into smaller proportions.
(5) All buildings on a lot, or as part of a unified development, shall be of
compatible design and materials. Emphasis shall be given on the position of buildings
on the site to give visual interest.
(D) Specific requirements.
(1) Design creativity. Creativity and innovation in building design is
encouraged. Design creativity shall be a determining factor in deviating from the
specific materials standards listed in this section
(2) Classes of material. For the purposes of this section, acceptable exterior
materials are divided into Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 categories as presented in the
table below.
88
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
Brick EIFS or Drivit Industrial grade concrete
precast panels
Natural Stone Masonry Stucco Smooth concrete
Glass (including block,
windows, or opaque mirrored
panels)
Specialty Integral Colored
Concrete Block (including
textured, burnished block, rock
face block)
Ceramic
Seamless metal panels
(including copper)
Architecturally textured
concrete precast panels
Wood
Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by the
Administrative Official
Tile (masonry, stone, or clay) Aluminum or Vinyl Siding
Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by the
Administrative Official
Other materials not listed
elsewhere as approved by the
Administrative Official
(3) Required combinations of materials. Buildings must incorporate classes of
materials for each facade in the following manner.
(a) Office, retail, service, or institutional buildings.
1. Front facades, and side and rear facades visible from public
right(s)-of-way, the public view from adjacent properties, parts, or residential uses or
districts must be composed of at least 65% of Class 1 or 2 materials, with Class 1
materials comprising at least 25% of the total facade.
2. Side and rear facades not visible from public right(s)-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential uses or districts may use any
combination of Class 1, 2, or 3 materials.
(b) Industrial and warehouse buildings, multi-tenant
office/industrial/warehouse, or showroom/warehouse or other combination.
1. Front facades must be composed of at least 75% of Class 1 or 2
materials, with Class 1 materials comprising at least 25% of the total facade.
2. Side and rear facades visible from public right(s)-of way, parks,
public view from adjacent properties, or residential uses or districts must be composed
of a least 25% of Class 1 or 2 materials.
3. Side and rear facades not visible from public right(s)-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential uses or districts may use any
combination of Class 1, 2, or 3 materials.
(c) Multiple-family residential buildings exceeding 8 units.
1. Front facades, and side and rear facades visible from public
right(s)-of-way, the public view from adjacent properties, parts, or residential uses or
districts must be composed of at least 25% of Class 1 materials, and at least 25% of
Class 2 materials.
89
2. Side and rear facades not visible from public right(s)-of-way,
parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential uses or districts may use any
combination of Class 1, 2, or 3 materials. (Prior Code, § 10.28) (Ord. 506, passed
11-17-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.53 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.
(A) Intent and purpose. The City of Hastings places a high value on landscaping
and greenery in both the natural and the built environments. Landscaping and
screening provide many aesthetic, ecological, economic, and health safety benefits.
The provisions of this section are intended to:
(1) Enhance the overall aesthetic conditions within the city;
(2) Provide screening and mitigation of potential conflicts between different
land uses;
(3) Improve air quality and provide a buffer from air and noise pollution;
(4) Ensure significant tree canopy shading to reduce glare and heat build-up;
(5) Add visual interest to open spaces and blank facades; and
(6) Provide definition for public walkways and open space areas.
(7) Serve the following ecological functions:
(a) Interception and filtration of precipitation and stormwater through
maximizing multiple-layered vegetative cover, rainwater gardens, and vegetative
swells.
(b) Reduction of reflectance and urban heat islands through increasing
canopy cover.
(c) Conservation of energy through strategic shading and the use of
windbreaks.
90
(d) Conservation of water through xeriscaping design strategies including
using decorative rock as ground cover, limiting turf areas, selecting low-water-use
plants and designing efficient irrigation systems.
(e) Selection and placement of plant materials to limit required
maintenance of landscaped areas.
(8) Preservation or restoration of natural amenities.
(B) Applicability.
(1) A detailed landscape plan must be submitted to the Planning Department
in the following cases:
(a) Application for new development. With any application for new
development requiring site plan review;
(b) Changes to existing landscape plan. When changes are made to an
existing landscape plan on file with the city; or
(c) Redevelopment or large addition. When either substantial
redevelopment of a site is proposed or an addition that would increase total floor area
on a site by 25% or more, a landscape plan for the entire site, demonstrating
compliance with the requirements of this section, must be submitted for approval.
(d) Small addition. When an addition is proposed that would increase
total floor area of a site by less than 25%, but would physically impact the existing
landscape, a modified landscape plan for the portion of the site affected by the addition,
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this section, must be submitted for
approval.
(e) Constrained sites. The City of Hastings recognizes that highly
constrained redevelopment may have difficulty meeting the standards of this section.
Given that the city would like to encourage redevelopment rather than interfere with
redevelopment, highly constrained redevelopment sites may seek relief from the
landscape standards. In considering planned development flexibility to landscape
standards, the city shall:
1. Balance the public interest in promoting redevelopment with
the public interest in providing landscaping; and
2. Consider whether reduced landscaping levels are balanced by
alternative methods of providing visual interest to the site including but not limited to
sculpture, public art or higher quality landscaping materials.
(C) Landscape plan components.
(1) Landscape plans shall be prepared consistent with the general site plan
requirements in § 155.51. The applicant shall submit a landscape plan prepared by a
landscape architect, nursery designer, or other qualified person. Landscape plans shall
91
be reviewed and approved by the Planning Department.
(2) When a landscape plan is required, the following information shall be
included.
(a) General information.
1. Name of project, owner and developer and street address of
project; and
2. Name, address, phone number of plan preparer and, if
applicable, Minnesota license/certification number of the Landscape Architect or
Certified Nursery and Landscape Professional (CNLP).
(b) Landscape plan features.
1. Scale and north arrow;
2. Locations of existing and proposed buildings and all other
structures;
3. Location, height, and materials of any existing and proposed
screening;
4. Location, approximate size, and common name of existing trees,
shrubs, and other vegetation that are to be retained as part of the new landscaping and
description of how they will be protected during construction;
5. Location and details of irrigation systems;
6. Location, width, and height of all proposed earth berms and
retaining walls;
7. Planting details illustrating proposed locations of all new plant
material;
8. Planting schedule containing:
a. Plant key;
b. Common and botanical plant names;
c. Quantity of plants for each species;
d. Size of plant material at time of planting and at maturity;
e. Root condition (balled and burlapped, bare root, container,
and the like); and
f. Special planting instructions
9. Any other existing or proposed features that relate to or affect site
finish and landscaping.
(D) Residential building requirements (1 to 8 units per building). The developer or
92
builder of any new residence (or substantial modification to an existing residence)
between 1 to 8 housing units that is exclusively residential must adhere to the following
requirements:
(1) Boulevard tree requirements. Boulevard trees shall be planted every 50
feet along public right-of-ways. The tree must be planted within 10 feet of the curb and
shall not encroach within the site visibility triangle.
(2) Front yard tree requirements. One front yard tree shall be planted for
every unit in addition to boulevard tree requirements. The tree shall be planted outside
the city right-of-way.
(3) Vegetative cover requirement. Vegetative cover including sod, shrubs,
trees and related landscaping materials must be established in all front yard areas, and
within the first 20 feet from the primary structure of all side yard and rear yard areas.
The vegetative cover requirement shall not preclude the construction of the following
provided minimum zoning setback requirements are met: decks, patios, and placement
of rock and related landscape materials associated with foundation planting adjacent to a
structure.
(4) Landscaping in drainage and utility easements. Shallow root plantings
including sod, turf, grass and shrubs shall be established in drainage and utility areas.
The placement of landscaping or structures that significantly changes or impeded the
designed drainage pattern shall be prohibited. The city reserves the right to review all
landscaping plans subject to the provision of the city’s landscape fence and easement
policy, April 2005, as amended.
(E) Commercial, industrial, institutional, and multiple-family (greater than 8 units
per building) requirements. Landscaping for all commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multiple-family building greater than 8 units shall consist of a combination of
deciduous, coniferous, and ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges, flowers, sod, ground
cover and other natural materials. Landscaping shall cover all areas not used for
structures, drives, sidewalks, or parking.
(1) Interior parking lot.
(a) In any aisle in excess of 30 parking stalls, an interior landscaped
island shall be provided.
(b) Landscaped islands shall be provided at each end of all rows of
parking in parking lots in excess of 40 parking stalls.
(c) One tree per 4,000 square feet of paved surface is required of which
75% must be deciduous, overstory trees. Trees shall be planted in medians or directly
adjacent to the parking lot perimeter.
(d) The following requirements apply to all parking lot islands:
1. Each island shall contain at least 1decidous shade tree.
2. Each island shall not contain any shrub over 18 inches in height.
3. Islands shall have a minimum inside width of 10 feet.
(2) Streetscape and open space.
93
(a) One tree per 50 feet of lot perimeter is required. Trees shall be
planted every 50 feet along public and private street frontages between the front lot line
and back of curb. Remaining trees can be placed somewhere else on the site.
(b) At least on shrub per 40 feet of lot perimeter must be planted.
(c) An opaque landscaping feature a minimum of 30 inches in height is
required between any parking lot or driveway and the adjacent street. Said feature shall
be one or combination of the following:
1. A 10-foot wide landscaped strip which must screen at least 70%
of the length of the lot frontage with an opaque barrier 30 inches high at initial planting.
2. Landscaped berms at least 3 feet in height measured from the top
of street curb adjacent to the berm at a slope not greater than 3:1.
(3) Properties adjacent to residential uses. All off-street parking, loading
facilities, exterior storage areas, mechanical area, and driveway shall be effectively
screened from areas zoned or guided residential by 1 or a combination of the following:
(a) A 6-foot high opaque fence or wall. Chain link fences with slats are
not acceptable.
(b) Berming or landscaping measuring at least 6 feet in height measured
from the top of the parking lot or drive aisle curb. Landscaping must provide yearround
screen opacity of 75% at initial planting.
(4) Landscaping in drainage and utility easements. Shallow root plantings
including sod, turf, grass and shrubs shall be established in drainage and utility
easement areas. The placement of landscaping or structures that significantly changes
or impeded the designed drainage pattern shall be prohibited. The city reserves the
right to review all landscaping plans subject to the provision of the city’s landscape
fence and easement policy, April 2005, as amended.
(F) Performance standards.
(1) Rainwater gardens. Rainwater gardens shall be encouraged to
accommodate stormwater drainage and to meet landscape vegetation requirements.
Rainwater gardens may be eligible for a reduction in the open space tree planting
requirements upon approval of the Planning Director as follows:
(a) One square foot of raingarden shall be equal to 1 square foot of tree
coverage (based on mature tree growth.)
(b) Tree planting requirements shall not be reduced greater than 50%.
(c) Raingardens cannot be substituted for landscape screening.
(2) Site triangle/visual clearance. No fence, wall, dense landscaping, or
other visual obstruction above a height of 30 inches from the established street grade
shall be permitted within the site triangle as formed by a straight line drawn between
94
points on the property line at a distance of 30 feet in each direction from the
intersection of any street, alley, parking lot entrance, or loading area.
(3) Utility clearance. Access to utilities (manhole covers, fire hydrants,
electrical transformers, etc.) must be maintained.
(4) Minimum planting sizes.
(a) Deciduous trees: 1.5 inches trunk diameter, measured 6 inches above
ground.
(b) Ornamental trees: 1.5 inches trunk diameter, measured 6 inches
above ground.
(c) Coniferous trees: 6 feet tall.
(d) Shrubs: minimum of 18 inches tall at planting.
(5) Spacing.
(a) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than 3 feet from the
fence line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict with public plantings,
sidewalks, trails, fences, parking areas, and driveways based on the judgement of the
Planning Department.
(b) Where plant materials are planted in 2 or more rows, plantings shall
be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Planning Department.
(c) Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large deciduous
shrubs shall be planted 4 feet on center or closer, and/or, evergreen shrubs shall be
planted 3 feet on center or closer.
(6) Permitted deciduous trees. Deciduous tree plantings shall be reviewed by
the City Forester. Please reference the Hastings Tree Guide for suggested planting
varieties.
(7) Overhead utility lines. When trees are to be installed under overhead
utility lines, discretion must be used in the selection of the type of species. The trees
installed must not interfere with the utility lines as maximum growth.
(8) Certificate of occupancy. All required landscaping must be installed prior
to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In cases where occupancy will occur during
winter months, a temporary certificate of occupancy will be issued and planting will be
required by the next July 1. Prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy,
the developer or builder shall post a cash deposit/bond as established by the Building
Department.
(G) Maintenance.
(1) Surety. To ensure that landscaping and screening is installed as proposed
and survives through at least 1 full growing season, a landscape performance surety
must be submitted prior to .issuance of building permits for new development where a
landscape plan is required.
95
(a) A landscape surety for providing, installing and warranting typical
landscaping and screening materials must be submitted in the amount of 125% of the
value of the proposed landscaping.
(b) Once the landscaping and screening has been in place for 1 year,
Planning Department staff will review the landscaping on site. If site conditions match
the approved landscape plan and all material is healthy, the surety will be released. If
landscaping or screening is missing or incorrectly placed or some material is not in a
healthy condition, the owner will be contacted and given an opportunity to correct these
issues. Once the issues are resolved, the landscape surety will be released.
(2) Material maintenance. The property owner must maintain all landscaping
and screening materials shown on the approved landscape plan in a manner consistent
with the intent and purpose of the plan. Approved landscaping and screening materials
that die, become diseased or are significantly damaged must be replaced at the next
appropriate planting period with new materials in conformance with the approved
landscape plan.
(3) Structure maintenance. Landscaping and screening structures such as
fences and walls must be maintained in good condition, free of graffiti, peeling paint,
decay or warping, must be repaired when needed and replaced periodically to maintain
a structurally sound condition. (Ord. 539, passed 10-3-2005; Am. Ord. 551, 2nd
Series, passed 5-1-2006) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.53.5 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS.
(A) Intent and purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to define practical and
effective measures by which the obtrusive aspects of excessive and \or careless outdoor
light usage can be minimized, while preserving safety, security, and the nighttime use
and enjoyment of property. These measures will curtail the degradation of the
nighttime visual environment by encouraging lighting practices that direct appropriate
amounts of light where and when it is needed, decreasing the unnecessary light and
glare resulting from over-lighting and poorly shielded or inappropriately directed
lighting fixtures.
(B) Applicability. For all proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, and
structures that require Site Plan or Special Use Permit approval, all outdoor lighting
fixtures shall meet the requirements of the Ordinance. All existing and future lighting
shall adhere to the footcandle illumination requirements of subsection (C)(4). Building
additions or modifications of twenty-five (25) percent or more in terms of additional
dwelling units gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single additional or
with cumulative additions within a five (5) year period, shall invoke the requirements of
this Ordinance for the entire property.
(C) Shielding and Outdoor Lighting Standards.
(1) All non-exempt outdoor lighting fixtures including pole lighting and wallpack
lighting shall not be directed onto any adjoining property, or controlled in some
manner so as not to light adjacent property. Mitigative measures shall be employed to
limit glare and spill light to protect neighboring parcels. These measures may include
96
lenses, shields, louvers, prismatic control devices and limitations on the height and type
of fixtures.
(2) Automatic Switching Requirements. Controls shall be included on the
installation of lighting that allow for the reduction in lighting levels when the building
or property is not in operation such as a photoelectric switch, astronomic time switch,
or equivalent functions from a programmable lighting controller, building automation
system or lighting energy management system. Building and properties that are in a
continual, twenty-four (24) hour a day operation, or utilize motion activated lighting are
exempt from this provision.
(3) Service Station Canopies and Parking Structures. All lighting fixtures
mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies or parking
structures shall be fully shielded or utilize flat lenses so as not to extend below the
bottom face of the canopy or structure.
(4) Illumination Limits. Reflected glare or light from non-exempt outdoor
lighting may not exceed the following limits as measured from the property line of the
lighting source:
(a) 0.5 footcandles at when abutting any residential parcel property line.
(b) 1.0 footcandles at when abutting any non-residential parcel property
line.
(c) Abutting parking lots on separate parcels shall be exempt from
illumination limits.
(D) Exemptions.
(1) Streetlights along public and private streets within a public right-of-way.
(2) City Council Authorized Special Event.
§ 155.54 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The Planning Director is hereby designated as the administrative official for
purposes of administration and enforcement of the sections of the City Code having to
do with zoning matters, in particular § 30.02 and this section.
(B) Duties of the Administrative Official:
(1) Provide zoning information;
(2) Determine that all building and other related permits comply with the
terms of this chapter and issue or deny the permits;
(3) Receive, file, and forward all applications for appeals, variances, special
uses, or other matters to the designated official bodies or person(s);
(4) Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, all maps, amendments and special uses, variances, appeals and applications
therefore;
97
(5) Notify affected property owners of required official and unofficial public
hearings, and publish notice of the hearings, all as required by this chapter;
(6) If the administrative official shall find that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for
the violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to
correct it;
(7) The administrative official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal
additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance
with or to prevent violation of its provisions; and
(8) Institute in the name of the city, with the cooperation of the City Attorney,
any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law.
(C) The Building Official shall assist in the enforcing of this chapter and in
addition thereto, and in furtherance of the authority he or she shall:
(1) Conduct inspections of building and use of land to determine compliance
with provisions of this chapter;
(2) Investigate and report to the administrative official all alleged violations of
conformance with the provisions of this chapter; and
(3) Perform other duties prescribed by the Council or Planning Director.
(Prior Code, § 10.30) (Am. Ord. 506, passed 11-17-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.55 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVED IN APPLICATIONS,
PLANS, AND PERMITS.
Building or other permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by
the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
forth in the approved plans and applications; and any other use, arrangement, or
construction, at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this chapter
and punishable under § 10.99. (Prior Code, § 10.31)
§ 155.56 AMENDMENTS.
Amendments to this chapter shall be in accordance with procedures set forth in
M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time, provided, however, that
when a proposed amendment involves change in district boundaries a notice of the time,
place, and purpose of a public hearing thereof shall be mailed to all property owners
within 350 feet. Published notice or other notice requirements shall be in accordance
with state statutes. (Prior Code, § 10.32)
98
§ 155.57 PROVISIONS DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENT.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance
with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed
restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards
shall govern. (Prior Code, § 10.33)
§ 155.58 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint. The complaints stating fully the causes and basis
thereof shall be filed with the administrative official. He or she shall record properly
the complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.34) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 155.59 FEES.
(A) The city shall prescribe fees sufficient to defray the costs incurred by it in
reviewing, investigating, and administering an application for an amendment to an
official control established, or an application for a permit or other approval as follows.
Type Fee
Annexation $500 + Legal Expenses
Comprehensive Plan Amendment $500
Environmental Assessment Worksheet (EAW) $500 + $1,000 escrow
Garden Center $50
House Move $500
Rezoning $500
Roof Sign Approval $100
Signs Based on Estimated Value:
$1-$500 = $30
$501-$1,000 = $50
$1,001-$2,500 = $75
Over $2,500 = $100
Site Plan- Residential $500 + escrow as follows:
$2,000 (8 units and under)
$3,250 (9 - 40 units)
$4,500 (41 units and greater)
Site Plan- Commercial/Industrial $500 + escrow (based on building square footage)
as follows:
$2,000 (0 - 5,000 square foot)
$3,000 (5,001 - 10,000 square feet)
$3,750 (10,001 - 50,000 square feet)
$4,500 (50,001 square feet and greater)
Special Use Permit $500
99
Variance $250
Vacation of ROW\Easement $400
(B) Fees for actions not prescribed above may be levied by the city provided they
are fair, reasonable, and proportionate and have a nexus to the actual cost of the
service for which the fee is imposed. (Ord. 537, passed 6-20-2005)
§ 155.98 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision of this
chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or
fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in
specific provisions hereof. (Prior Code, § 10.99) Penalty, see § 10.99
APPENDIX A: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Square Feet of Floor Area or
Outside Storage Area
Loading Space Special Requirements
1,000 - 5,000 250 square feet None
5,000 - 20,000 300 square feet None
20,000 - 50,000 750 square feet 1 space must measure 10 feet
by 50 feet
50,000 + 1,000 square feet 1 space must measure 10 feet
by 50 feet
(Prior Code, § 10.09)
APPENDIX B: REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
Residential Required # of Spaces
Single-Family/Duplex 2 per dwelling unit
Multi-Family 2 per dwelling unit
Manufactured (Mobile) Home Park 2 per dwelling unit
Residential Care Facility, Semi-Independent 1 per 2 units
Residential Care Facility, Dependent 1 per 3 units
Residential Senior Facility 1 per dwelling unit
Tourist Lodging Required # of Spaces
Hotels and Motels:
1. With no other facilities than guest rooms: 1 per room + 1 per employee on the major shift
2. With other facilities, including restaurants,
conference facilities, or meeting rooms:
1 per room + 1 per each 4 persons of capacity
in other facilities
Bed and Breakfast See relevant provisions in Chapter 155
Commercial Required # of Spaces
General Retail 1 per 200 square feet
Professional/General Office 1 per 300 square feet
Banks/Credit Unions, including stacking spaces 1 per 300 square feet
Self-Service Laundry 1 per 3 washing machines
Bowling Alley 5 per lane
100
Commercial Required # of Spaces
Theater 1 per 6 seats based on design capacity
Furniture and Appliance Store 1 per 500 square feet
Restaurant, tavern, or lounge (sit down full service):
1. Without on-sale intoxicating liquor or
dance hall license
1 per 60 square feet or 1 per 3 seats
2. With on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance
hall license
1 per 50 square feet or 1 per 2 seats, except that
in cases that there is a bar area separate from
the food service area, a dance area larger than
100 square feet, or other public areas, additional
parking may be required.
Recreation-Participant/Spectator:
1. Indoor and Outdoor 1 per 4 seats or 8 feet of bench length.
2. Shopping Center* At least 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of area.
Automobile Service or Gas Station 2 parking spaces for each service stall plus 1
parking space for each 200 square feet of gross
building area and adequate parking for gas
pump areas.
Auto, Boat, Trailer/Mobile Home Sales or
Service
1 per 500 square feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
* - If a center contains substantial interior common space, required parking spaces may be reduced
based on an analysis of parking demand and proof of parking to be installed if needed at the request
of the city.
Places of Assembly Required # of Spaces
Churches, Mortuaries, and the like 1 per 3 seats based on design capacity
Youth-oriented church services
(ages 17 and under)
1 per 6 seats based on design capacity
Schools Required # of Spaces
Preschool, Nursery, Kindergarten 1 per classroom + 1 for each 30 student
capacity
Elementary, Jr. High/Middle 1 per classroom + 2 per each 30 student
capacity
Senior High and Post Secondary 1 per classroom + 1 per each 6 students based
on design capacity
Public/quasi-public Required # of Spaces
Hospital 3 per 2 beds
Library 1 per 500 square feet, plus 1 per employee
Government 1 per 300 square feet
Industrial Required # of Spaces
Warehouse and Manufacturing 1 per 1,000 square feet but no less than 1 per
employee
Wholesale Establishment 1 per employee plus 1 per 1,000 square feet
(Prior Code, § 10.09
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 156: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
156.01 Adoption by reference
§ 156.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
The 2006 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full. If any provision of the IPMC is inconsistent with a specific
provision of this city code, the more restrictive provisions of the city code shall control.
Cross-reference: Structure Maintenance Code for Rental Residential Properties, see Ch. 157
(Ord. No. 2014-10 3rd Series, Adopted 5-19-14)
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 157: STRUCTURE MAINTENANCE CODE FOR RENTAL
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
Section
157.01 Short title
157.02 Policy, purpose, intent
157.03 Adoption of 2006 International Property Maintenance Code by reference
157.04 Definitions
157.05 Application
157.06 Duties of owners and occupants
157.07 Administration; enforcement; inspection
157.08 Licensing of rental units
157.09 Enforcement authority
157.10 Minimum requirements; implementation standards; policies
157.11 Reporting forms, records
157.12 Hazardous conditions, built-in deficiencies, procedure
157.13 Inspections
157.14 Appeals; right of appeal
157.15 Restrictions on transfer of ownership
157.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
International Property Maintenance Code, see Ch. 156
§ 157.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the City of Hastings Structure Maintenance Code, or the Structure
Code. (Prior code, § 17.01)
§ 157.02 POLICY, PURPOSE, INTENT.
(A) Policy. It is the policy of the city to enhance the supply of safe, sanitary and adequate
structures for its citizens and to prevent the deterioration of the existing structures of the city.
(B) Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the policy stated in Section 2.1 by
establishing minimum standards, and procedures for their enforcement consistent with the right to
personal privacy, for the protection of life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the general
public and the owners and occupants of residential buildings.
2
(C) Objectives. The objectives of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Protection and preservation of the stability and character of residential areas in the city.
(2) The prevention and correction of structure conditions that adversely affect the life, safety,
health and general well-being of persons occupying dwellings in the city.
(3) The establishment of minimum standards for light, ventilation, cooling, heating and
sanitary equipment necessary to insure the health and safety of occupants of rental dwellings.
(4) The establishment of minimum standards for the maintenance of rental residential
dwellings.
(5) The prevention of the emergence of blighted and deteriorating structures in the city.
(6) The prevention of overcrowding of rental dwellings.
(7) The preservation of the value of land and structures in the city.
(D) Intent, relation to the provisions of city code. The City Council intends that the Structure Code
be an integral part of the city’s program of health, safety, building and land use regulation. This chapter
is to be construed liberally in conjunction with other provisions of the City Code to give effect to the
policy, purpose and objectives of this section, but is not to be construed to modify, amend or otherwise
alter the provisions of the city code relating to health, safety, structure, or land use regulation. (Prior
code, § 17.02)
§ 157.03 ADOPTION OF 2006 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE BY
REFERENCE.
(A) Code adopted. The 2006 International Property Maintenance Code, published by International
Code Council, Inc., except as modified or amended herein, is adopted by reference and is made a part
of this code as if fully set out at length.
(B) Copy on file. One copy of the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code will be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk and available for public inspection at reasonable times. (Prior code,
§ 17.03)
§ 157.04 DEFINITIONS.
(A)General. For purposes of this chapter the terms defined in this section have the following
meanings given them.
BUILDING CODE means Chapter 50 and 150 of the city code.
CITY CODE means the Hastings City Code.
3
CODE or THIS CODE means the Structure Maintenance Code.
HOUSING OFFICIAL means the Supervisor of Inspections and Code Enforcement, the Building
Official, or their designees. (Ord. 2014-11 3rd Series, Adopted 5-19-14)
COMMON AREAS means halls, corridors, passageways, utility rooms, recreational rooms and
extensive landscaped areas, not under the exclusive control of 1 person or family, in or adjacent to a
multiple dwelling.
DWELLING means a building or a portion of a building designed for residential occupancy: The
term includes single-family, 2-family and multiple-family apartments, condominiums, hotels, motels
and Bed and Breakfasts.
DWELLING UNIT means:
(1) A single-family dwelling; and
(2) A discrete portion of a dwelling designed for occupancy by 1 family.
HOUSING OFFICIAL means Supervisor of Inspections and Code Enforcement or designee.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY means close relatives by birth or marriage including siblings, parents,
children, in-laws and any financial dependants.
OPERATOR means Building Manager or owner representative charged with the maintenance or
operation of the building.
OWNER, OWNER-OPERATOR or OPERATOR means any person, firm or corporation who
alone, jointly, or separately with others is in actual possession of or has charge, care or control of a
dwelling or dwelling unit or structure in the city as owner, employee or agent of the owner or as trustee
or guardian of the estate or the person is the title holder, and such person is bound by the provision of
this code to the same extent as the owner.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means an occupied single- or multi-family rental
dwelling or dwelling unit that is let to a party other than the registered owner of the property.
REPAIR means to restore to a sound acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance.
REPLACE means to remove an existing item or portion of a system and to construct or install a
new item of similar or new quality as an existing item when new when repair of the item is impractical.
STRUCTURE means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any
piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
ZONING ORDINANCE means the Chapter 155 of the city code.
(A) Relation to other code definitions. Except as expressly provided in this code, the words, terms
4
and phrases as used in this code have the meanings given them by the City Code. In cases where
conflicting definitions of a word, term or phrase make its precise meaning unclear in its application to
particular facts, the City Administrator shall resolve the conflict. (Prior code, § 17.04) (Am. Ord.
2009-09, 3rd Series, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 157.05 APPLICATION.
(A) General. This code applies to rental residential properties including: structures, their
premises, accessory structures thereto, and dwelling units therein, used or designed to be used for
human habitation or storage.
(B) Existing structures.
(1) A building lawfully existing under the Minnesota State Building Code must conform to
this code. A building need not be altered or changed to exceed the requirements of the Minnesota State
Building Code in effect at the time of its construction, except in the following cases:
(a) If the structure is altered or enlarged pursuant to Minnesota State Building Code;
(b) If the structure is moved or relocated; or
(c) If the structure is determined to be unsafe or hazardous by the Building Official
pursuant to the Minnesota State Building Code, 2006 International Property Maintenance Code or state
law.
(2) Occupancy in structures lawfully existing under the Building Code may be continued
under this code. (Prior code, § 17.05)
§ 157.06 DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
(A) Sanitation. The occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit must maintain in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and yard that the occupant occupies and controls; and
is responsible for the occupant’s own misuse of areas and facilities available in common. The owner or
operator of a 2-family dwelling or multiple dwelling must maintain in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or public areas of the dwelling and yard. The occupant of a dwelling unit must keep all
mechanical equipment and appliances, including furnace, water heater, plumbing fixtures, air
conditioner, stove, refrigerator, dishwasher and the like in a clean and sanitary condition and is
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
(B) Removal of waste matter. The occupant of a dwelling unit must dispose of rubbish, ashes,
garbage and other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner as required in the city code. The owner
or operator of a multiple dwelling is responsible for the clean and sanitary maintenance of common
storage or disposal facilities and must dispose of rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner as required in
the city code.
5
(C) Pest extermination. The occupant or owner of a single dwelling unit is responsible for the
extermination of vermin infestations or rodents on the premises. The occupant or owner of a dwelling
unit in a building containing more than 1 dwelling unit is responsible for such extermination when the
dwelling unit is infested. When infestation is caused by the failure of the owner or operator to maintain
a building containing dwelling units in a reasonable rodent-resistant or reasonably vermin-resistant
condition, pest extermination is the responsibility of the owner or operator. After extermination it is the
responsibility of the owner or operator, to provide evidence that the infestation has been eliminated and
steps have been taken to prevent a reoccurrence as designated by appropriate city officials. If
infestation exists in 2 or more dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units, pest extermination is the responsibility of the owner or
operator.
(D) Heat. The owner or operator of a building containing 2 or more dwelling units must supply
facilities capable of providing adequate heat to every habitable room therein. For the purposes of
subdivision ADEQUATE HEAT means heat sufficient to maintain a temperature of 68 degrees
Fahrenheit at a height of 3 feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments.
(E) Utilities. Except as otherwise provided by law, an owner, operator or occupant may not cause
service equipment or utility service that is required by this code to be removed, shut off or discontinued
for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by that person, except for such temporary interruption as
may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies.
(F) Transfer of responsibility. A contract between owner and operator, operator and occupant, or
owner and occupant, with regard to compliance with this code, does not relieve the owner or operator
of a duty imposed by this chapter.
(G) Notice of maximum occupancy. An owner or operator must advise the occupant, in writing, by
insertion in the lease between the parties or otherwise, the maximum number of occupants permitted in
occupied premises subject to this code. (Prior code, § 17.06)
§ 157.07 ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION.
(A) Administration and enforcement. The Building Official is responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter.
(B)Compliance. When the Housing Official determines that there exists in a building or a portion
thereof conditions that constitute a violation of this code, the Housing Official may begin
enforcement procedures. (Prior code, § 17.07)
6
§ 157.08 LICENSING OF RENTAL UNITS.
(A) General rule. Owners of rental dwelling units shall be required to obtain a license. The
license is issued every year and expires on July 31 each year. License renewal notices will be sent via
U.S. Mail 60 days prior to the expiration date. Penalties for late payment will be added as outlined in
Section 110.19 of the Hastings City Code. Site inspections are performed initially, then every two
years from then on. Exempt: Rental dwelling units housing immediate family members.
(B) Application. This section is intended to provide standards for licensed rental housing and to
allow resolution of complaints regarding licensed rental housing. All rental dwellings shall conform to
the requirements of this section, without regard to when it was constructed, altered or repaired. This
section establishes minimum standards for maintaining rental dwellings and their accessory structures
and related premises.
(C) License fees. Owners of rental dwellings shall pay an annual license fee. License fees are due
by July 31 of each year. License fees are due upon occupancy of newly rented dwelling units. License
fees are set by ordinance adopted from time to time by the Hastings City Council.
(D) Conditions. A license is non-transferable. The license fee is not refundable upon revocation
or suspension. The license fee is refundable prorated monthly, upon proof of transfer of legal control or
ownership.
(E) Licensing phase-in policy. Commencing on April 1, 1998, initial licensing inspection will
begin according to inspection areas established by the Housing Official.
(F) Application information. Applications for a license or renewal of a license must be made by
the owner of a rental dwelling. Application forms are filed with the Housing Official. The application
form must supply:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of dwelling owner, partners if partnership,
corporate officers if corporation;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of designated operator or agent, if any;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of vendee, if the dwelling is being sold through a
contract for deed;
(4) Legal address and parcel identification number;
(5) Number of dwelling or rental units;
(6) Description of procedure by which tenant inquiries and complaints are to be processed.
(G) Notice of change. The licensee must give notice in writing to the Housing Official within five
business days after any change of information in the application. Notice of transfer of ownership is
governed by division (L).
7
(H) Resident agent required. An operating license will not be issued or renewed for a nonresident
owner of rental dwelling units (an owner who does not reside in any of the following
Minnesota Counties: Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Goodhue, Scott or Washington)
unless the owner designates in writing the name of a resident agent or operator (an agent who does
reside in 1 of the aforementioned counties) who is:
(1) Responsible for maintenance and upkeep;
(2) Legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of violation of the
provisions of city ordinances, to receive orders and to institute remedial action to effect such orders;
and
(3) To accept service or process pursuant to law. The Housing Official must be notified in
writing by the owner of a change of resident agent.
(I) Conformance to laws. An operating license will not be issued or renewed unless the rental unit
and its premises conform to this section, the ordinances of the city and laws of the State of Minnesota.
(J) Inspection condition. An operating license will not be issued or renewed unless the owner of
the rental unit agrees in the application to permit inspection pursuant to § 157.09.
(K) Posting of license. The licensee of a building containing three or more dwelling units must
conspicuously post the current license in the main entry way or other conspicuous location in a frame
with a glass or plastic cover.
(L) Transfer. The licensee must give notice in writing to the Housing Official within 5 business
days after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the effective control of licensed rental
property. The notice must include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of the rental dwelling or dwellings.
(M) License, suspension and revocation. An operating license is subject to suspension or
revocation by the Housing Official or designee if the licensed owner fails to operate or maintain
licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with this chapter. Suspension or revocation of an
operating license may be appealed pursuant to provisions of § 157.14. If an operating license is
suspended or revoked by the staff, it is unlawful for the owner to permit new occupancy of vacant
rental units until a valid operating license is issued by the city. (Prior code, § 17.08) (Ord. 423, passed
12-15-1997; Am. Ord. 2009-09, 3rd Series, passed 9-8-2009)
§ 157.09 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
(A) Inspection authority. The Housing Official may inspect on complaint, change in ownership,
or otherwise when reason exists to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being
committed. Except in the case of emergency, inspections must be conducted during reasonable daylight
hours. The Housing Official must present evidence of official authority to the occupant in charge of a
rental dwelling unit.
8
(B) Inspection access. If an owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling unit licensed
under this section fails or refuses to permit free access and entry for inspection purposes, the Housing
Official may, upon a showing of probable cause, obtain orders from a court of competent jurisdiction
for the inspection. (Prior Code, § 17.09)
§ 157.10 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; IMPLEMENTATION STANDARDS; POLICIES.
(A) Minimum requirements. The minimum requirements imposed by this chapter include those
standards or requirements in effect on the date of the construction of a building subject to this chapter.
It is not the intention of this code to require all buildings to be upgraded to meet all requirements of the
present Building Code.
(B) Implementation standards. In administering this code, the Housing Official will treat the
following as conditions constituting an immediate hazard to health and safety:
(1) Heating systems, woodburning stove, fireplaces, oil burners and alike, that are unsafe due
to: burned out or rusted heat exchanger (fire box); burned out or plugged flues; not being vented; being
connected with unsafe gas supplies; or being incapable of adequately heating the living space;
(2) Water heaters that are unsafe due to: burned out or rusted out heat exchanger (fire box);
burned out, rusted out, or plugged flues; not being vented; being connected with unsafe gas supplies; or
lack of temperature and pressure relief valves;
(3) Electrical systems that are unsafe due to: dangerous overloading; damaged or deteriorated
equipment; improperly tapped or spliced wiring; exposed uninsulated wires; distribution systems of
extension cords or other temporary methods; ungrounded systems; ungrounded appliances in contact
with earth;
(4) Plumbing systems that are unsanitary due to: leaking waste systems fixtures and traps;
lack of water closet; lack of washing and bathing facilities; or cross connection of pure water supply
with fixtures or sewage lines;
(5) Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings, roofs, foundations and floor systems, that
will not safely carry imposed loads;
(6) Refuse, garbage, human waste, decaying vermin or other dead animals, animal waste,
other materials rendering it unsanitary for human occupancy, including lack of light and air;
(7) Infestation of rats, insects and other vermin.
9
(C) Foundations, exterior walls and roof. The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof shall
be substantially water tight and protected against vermin and rodents and shall be kept in sound
condition and repair. The foundation element shall adequately support the building at all points. Every
exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any
other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls or to the
exterior spaces of the structure. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which admit rain, and roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls. All exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or
other protective covering or treatment.
(D) Exterior doors and windows. Every window, exterior door, and other exterior openings shall
be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. Every window, other than a fixed
window or storm window, shall be capable of being easily opened. Every window, door and frame
shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction as to completely
exclude rain, wind, vermin and rodents from entering the building. Garages attached or detached shall
have a fully operational overhead door or barn-type doors. (Prior Code, § 17.10)
§ 157.11 REPORTING FORMS, RECORDS.
The Housing Official must prepare forms and certificates necessary to carry out the provisions of
this code. The Housing Official must design appropriate systems of accumulating or organizing and
cataloging data relating to the condition, adequacy, and availability of rental residential housing in the
city and must report on these matters from time to time to the City Council at its request. The Housing
Official’s report must also contain recommendations for modifications in the provisions of this chapter
and its administration. (Prior Code, § 17.11)
§ 157.12 HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS, BUILT-IN DEFICIENCIES, PROCEDURE.
(A) Procedure. If the Housing Official determines that there exists in a building a condition that
constitutes an immediate hazard to the health and safety of its occupants, the Housing Official may:
(1) Issue a compliance order requiring immediate compliance if the condition can reasonably
be corrected;
(2) Proceed against the building pursuant to applicable city code provisions and state laws
relating to hazardous or unsafe structures; or
(3) Recommend that the City Council proceed to correct the condition by abating it as a
nuisance under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this clause is to be
construed as authorizing the imposition and billing of charges for the cost thereof and the assessment of
unpaid charges against the property on which the building is located in the manner provided by M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
10
(B) Built in deficiencies. It is determined that certain conditions within existing buildings, lawful
at the time of the construction of the building, may not comply with the minimum requirements of this
chapter. Such conditions are herein referred to as built-in deficiencies, and the Housing Official, in
administering this chapter, must consider the following built-in deficiencies as being beyond
reasonable correction:
(1) Ceiling heights. An existing habitable room with less than a 7-foot ceiling height.
(2) Superficial floor area. An existing habitable room with less than 70 square feet.
(3) Natural light and ventilation. An existing habitable room with window area less than 8%
of the floor area provided, however, that in no case may the required area of light and ventilation be
less than 5% of the floor area. (Prior Code, § 17.12)
§ 157.13 INSPECTIONS.
(A) Records. Except in the case of emergency, inspections must be conducted during reasonable
hours. The Housing Official must present evidence of authority to the owner or occupant in charge of a
dwelling unit. Subject to the provisions of law, the Housing Official must keep evidence, exclusive of
the inspection records, discovered or obtained in the course of an inspection confidential.
(B) Unfit for human habitation. A dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit or portion thereof that
is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin- or rodent-infested or which lacks
provision for basic illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities to the extent that the defects create a
hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or of the public may be declared unfit for
human habitation. If a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit has been declared unfit for human
habitation, the Housing Official must order the same vacated within a reasonable time and post a
placard on same indicating that it is unfit for human habitation.
(C) Correction. It is unlawful for a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit or portion thereof to
be used for human habitation until defective conditions have been corrected and written approval has
been issued by the Housing Official. It is unlawful to deface or remove the declaration placard from a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit.
(D) Secure unfit and vacated dwellings. The owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
that has been declared unfit for human habitation or that is otherwise vacant for a period of 60 days or
more must make the same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of
the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. A vacant dwelling open at doors, windows, or wall
opening, if unguarded, is deemed to be a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public and a
public nuisance within the meaning of this section.
(E) Hazardous building declaration. If a dwelling has been declared unfit for human habitation
and the owner has not remedied the defects within a prescribed reasonable time, the dwelling may be
declared a hazardous building and may be removed, razed or corrected pursuant to the city code and
provisions of M.S. Chapter 463, as it may be amended from time to time.
11
(F) Compliance procedure order. If the Housing Official determines that a rental dwelling, rental
dwelling unit or rooming unit or portion thereof is in violation of an order of this chapter, the Housing
Official may issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of such and ordering the
owner/occupant, operator or agent to correct such violation. The compliance order must:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this section;
(3) Establish a reasonable time for the correction of the violation and notify the owner of
appeal procedures;
(4) Be served upon the owner, owner’s agent, or the occupant, as the case may be: the notice
is deemed to be properly served upon owner or agent, or upon any such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
(a) Served upon the owner or agent; or
(b) Sent by registered mail to the owner or agent’s last known address; or
(c) Upon failure to effect notice through division (F)(4)(a) or (F)(4)(b), service may be
made pursuant to M.S. § 463.17, Subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, which reads
as follows:
“Service. This order shall be served upon the owner of record, or his agent if an agent is in
charge of the building, and upon the occupying tenant, if there is one, and upon all lien
holders of record, in the manner provided for service of a summons in a civil action. If the
owner cannot be found, the order shall be served upon them by posting it at the main
entrance to the building and by four weeks’ publication in the official newspaper of the
municipality if it has one, otherwise in a legal newspaper in the county;” or
(d) Pursuant to M.S. § 145A.04, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 17.13)
§ 157.14 APPEALS; RIGHT OF APPEAL.
(A) Appeals. Any person who may be aggrieved by a violation notice and or a compliance order
to repair property shall have the right to appeal any action of the Housing Official or designee to the
Board of Appeals and Adjustment (City Council). The Board may support the violation as described by
the Housing Official; void all violations; or, change any described violation by adding violations,
removing violations or changing the order to repair as seen fit. (Ord. No. 2014-11 3rd Series, Adopted
5-19-14)
12
(B) Appeals procedure. Any property owner or property owner’s agent that has been served with
a violation notice and an order to repair under the provisions of this chapter that believes such orders
are without just cause shall have the right to appeal the orders to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments
within 20 days after receiving the order of repair. All appeals shall be made to the Housing Official in
writing with any information to substantiate the appeal. The appeal shall be considered by the Board
under provisions established for consideration of appeals under § 30.02. (Prior Code, § 17.14) (Ord.
No. 2014-11 3rd Series, Adopted 5-19-14)
§ 157.15 RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
It is unlawful for the owner of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit upon whom a Compliance
Order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage or lease or otherwise dispose the dwelling, dwelling
unit, or rooming unit to another person until the compliance order has been complied with, unless the
owner furnishes to the grantee, lessee or mortgagee a true copy of any notice of violation or
compliance order and obtains and possesses a receipt of acknowledgment. A person obtaining an
interest in the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who has received notice of the existence of a
compliance order is bound by the order without further notice and is subject to the penalties and
procedures provided by this chapter. (Prior Code, § 17.15)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
(A) General. It is unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure within the City contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Non-compliance. Failure to comply with a lawfully issued compliance order is a violation of
this chapter.
(C) Violation a misdemeanor. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall separately for each and every
violation and non-compliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of 1 penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and, all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within reasonable time. When not otherwise
specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 17.99) (Ord. 365, 2nd Series, passed 11-28-1994; Res. 1-9-00, passed 1-18-2000)
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 158: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
158.01 Purpose and policy
158.02 Definitions
158.03 Enforcement
158.04 Property maintenance requirements
158.99 Penalty
§ 158.01 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
(A) Purpose and policy.
(1) This chapter provides a practical method to regulate the maintenance and use of existing
properties and buildings within the City of Hastings for the purpose of protecting the public health,
safety and welfare.
(2) This chapter:
(a) Establishes minimum standards for maintenance property and buildings; and
(b) Provides for administration and enforcement.
(B) Intent. The Council finds there exists in the city numerous properties which are substandard
in 1 or more important features of structure or appearance. Such conditions adversely affect public
health and safety and lead to the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight. Adequate
protection of public health, safety and welfare requires the establishment and enforcement of minimum
property maintenance standards. The City Council intends that this chapter be an integral part of the
city’s program of health, safety, building and land use regulation. This chapter is to be construed
liberally, in conjunction with other provisions of the City Code, to give effect to the policy, purpose
and objectives of this section, but is not construed to modify, amend or otherwise alter the provisions of
the City Code relating to health, safety, structure or land use regulation. (Prior Code, § 18.01)
2
§ 158.02 DEFINITIONS.
The following terms as used in this subchapter shall have the meaning stated:
APPROVED. As approved by the Property Maintenance Inspector.
BOARD OF APPEALS. The City Council of the City of Hastings.
CARPORT. A shelter for an automobile, consisting of a roof extended from the side of a building,
sometimes with an additional wall.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES/EQUIPMENT. Includes but is not limited to backhoes, dump
trucks, landscaping equipment, skid steers, wood chippers, cube or box type trailers or trucks, tow
trucks, tractor trailers, semi-trailers, farm trailers, custom service vehicles, such as, but not limited to,
well-drilling machines, wood- sawing machines, cement mixers, rock crushers, road grader, ditch
digger, grading equipment; typical household or property maintenance service vehicles, any service
vehicle engaged in a business which includes the repairing or servicing of vehicles, snow removal and
road maintenance equipment and vehicles and all trailers designed for, or frequently used to transport
any of the above.
DETERIORATED. Materials or conditions that are substandard and are in need of repair or
replacement.
EXTERIOR SURFACE. Any surface exposed to weather conditions.
FAILED PAINT. Paint which is cracked, flaked, blistered, pealed, chalked, scaled over 20% or
more of any wall surface or fence surface, or has failed to provide a protective surface for the base
material.
FULLY SCREENED. Enclosed by use of a wall, fence or partition to hide the view of an object
or property so as not to be readily visible from adjacent property.
HAZARDOUS TREES or BRUSH. Any tree(s) or brush that jeopardizes the structural integrity
of a building, fence or structure or endangers human safety.
LOT. A separate parcel, tract or area of land undivided by any public street or approved private
road, established by plat, metes and bounds subdivision, or otherwise permitted by law, and occupied
or intended to be developed for and occupied by a principal building or group of buildings or accessory
buildings, or utilized for a principle uses and uses accessory thereto, including such open spaces and
yards as are designed and arranged or required by this city code for such building, use or development.
MISCELLANEOUS MATERIAL. MISCELLANEOUS MATERIAL includes, but is not limited
to, wood pallets and miscellaneous construction materials, glass, wire, metal items, vehicle or bicycle
parts, tires, gasoline cans, plastic containers, indoor furniture, cookware or other items meant for indoor
use, propane tanks, used oil, used antifreeze, paper, wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, leaves, yard
clippings, bricks, batteries, plaster, cement and mattresses.
3
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally manufactured to operate
primarily upon public roads and highways. It includes any vehicle propelled or drawn by a selfpropelled
vehicle.
MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground, including motor scooter and
bicycles with motor attached, other than those vehicles defined as motorized bicycles.
MOTORIZED BICYCLES. A bicycle that is propelled by a motor of a piston displacement
capacity of 50 cubic centimeters or less, and a maximum of 2 brake horsepower, which is capable of a
maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on a flat surface with no more than 1% grade in
any direction when the motor is engaged.
ORDER TO REPAIR. An order from the City of Hastings to a property owner that requires
maintenance or repairs to be done to correct a Property Maintenance Ordinance violation.
OWNER’S AGENT. A person with written permission from the owner, legal guardian or power
of attorney, able to represent the owner’s interests.
PASSENGER VEHICLES. Passenger automobile, pick-up truck, van, self-propelled recreational
vehicle motorcycle, motorized bicycle, school bus or farm truck.
PICK-UP TRUCK. Any truck with a manufacturers nominal rated carrying capacity of 3/4 ton or
less, commonly known as a pick-up truck.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTOR. The person or persons who have been authorized
by the Hastings City Council to enforce the Property Maintenance Ordinance, which shall include the
building Official and the Supervisor of Inspections and Code Enforcement. (Ord. No. 2014-12 3rd
Series, Adopted 5-19-14)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES/EQUIPMENT. Motorized or non-motorized; includes but is not
limited to boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers and coaches, tent campers, tent trailers,
canoes, motor homes, jet skies, all-terrain vehicles, go-karts, mud trucks, stock cars, stock car trailers,
buses, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, jet ski trailers, truck toppers, and enclosed box trailers,
whether occupied or not with equipment or vehicles, and all trailers designed for or frequently used to
transport any of the above.
SEMI-TRAILER. SEMI-TRAILER means a vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in
conjunction with a truck-tractor that a considerable part of its own weight or that of its load rests upon
and is carried by the truck-tractor and includes a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor semi-trailer
combination.
SPECIFIC AREA. One part or piece of a larger surface or assembly.
TRAILER. Trailer means any vehicle designed for carrying property or passengers on its own
structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
4
TRUCK-TRACTOR. Also known as a TRACTOR-TRAILER, a TRUCK-TRACTOR is a motor
vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load
other than a part of the weigh of the vehicle and load drawn.
VAN. Any vehicle of box-like design with no barrier or separation between the operators and the
remainder of the cargo-carrying area, and with a manufacturers nominal rated capacity of 3/4 tons or
less.
VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, passenger vehicle, recreational vehicle/equipment or commercial
vehicle/equipment.
VIOLATION NOTICE. Notice in writing given to the owner of record of a violation of the City
of Hastings Property Maintenance Ordinance. (Prior Code, § 18.02)
§ 158.03 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Enforcement. The Hastings City Council shall authorize the Inspections and Code
Enforcement staff as assigned by the Supervisor of Inspections and Code Enforcement to enforce this
chapter under the title of Property Maintenance Inspector.
(B) Inspections. The Property Maintenance Inspector shall make inspections and take any such
action as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Right of entry. Whenever the Property Maintenance Inspector has reasonable cause to believe
that there may exist in any building or on any property any condition that is in violation of this chapter,
the Property Maintenance Inspector may enter the building or property at reasonable times to make
inspections or to perform any duty required to administer said chapter. The Property Maintenance
Inspector shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If the property is unoccupied the
inspector shall mail notice to the owner of record by certified mail 7 days prior to inspection. If entry is
refused the building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry,
including the right to secure a proper inspection warrant.
(D) Violations. When a property or building is in violation of this ordinance, the property owner
of record shall be issued a Notice of Violation and Compliance Order in writing to include the
following information:
(1) A description of the property sufficient for identification.
(2) Description of the violation(s) and the action required to remedy the violation(s).
(3) Provision of reasonable time to perform any remedy to be completed.
(4) Notice of any action that may be taken by the city if repairs are not made in a reasonable
time period.
5
(5) Notice of any right of appeal.
(E) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a violation notice and order to make repairs to property
shall have the right to appeal. The Board may uphold the violation; void all violations; or, change any
described violation by adding violations, removing violations or changing the order to repair.
(F) Appeal procedure. Any property owner or owner’s agent that has been served with a violation
notice and an order to repair shall have the right to appeal the order to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments within 20 days after receiving the compliance order. All appeals shall be made to the
Supervisor of Inspections and Code Enforcement in writing with any information to substantiate the
appeal. The appeal shall be considered by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments under provisions
established for consideration of the appeals under § 30.02. (Prior Code, § 18.03) (Ord. 2014-12 3rd
Series, Adopted 5-19-14)
§ 158.04 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Abandoned and non-operational motor vehicles. It is unlawful to park or store on any
property within the city any abandoned or non-operational or unlicensed motor vehicle, unless housed
within a building which complies with City Code.
(B) Parking and storage of vehicles.
(1) It is unlawful to park or store on a residential lot, outside of a building that complies with
city code, vehicles in excess of the amount permitted by this division.
(2) In the Agricultural and R-1 Zoned Residential Districts, it is unlawful to park or store
more than a combined total of 5 vehicles outside of a structure on a lot. Of these 5 no more than 2 may
be of the recreational vehicle/equipment category or the commercial vehicle/equipment category,
combined.
(3) In R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 Residential Districts, it is unlawful to park or store on a residential
lot more than a combined total of 3 vehicles per residential dwelling unit outside of an enclosed
structure on any lot. Of these 3, only 1 may be of the recreational vehicle/equipment or commercial
vehicle/equipment category.
(4) For those allowed in this division, the following conditions shall apply:
(a) No recreational vehicle/equipment or commercial vehicle/equipment shall be parked
or stored at the street end of a driveway within the boulevard portion of the public right-of-way.
(b) No more than 1 currently licensed recreational vehicle/equipment or commercial
vehicle/equipment may be parked in a driveway on a residential lot and it must also be 8 feet or less in
height.
(c) One currently licensed recreational vehicle/equipment or commercial
vehicle/equipment may be parked on the lot behind the nearest portion of the building closest to a
6
street.
(d) No motor vehicles, passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles/equipment or
commercial vehicles/equipment shall be used for the purpose of a residence and/or housekeeping, in
any zoning district, unless approved by the City.
(e) Except as provided in (B)(4)(b) above, no commercial vehicles/equipment may be
parked or stored on a residential lot outside of a structure, except while work is being performed at the
property.
(f) Except as provided in (B)(4)(b) above, recreational vehicles/equipment can be parked
in a driveway for a period not to exceed 72 hours for the purpose of loading and unloading.
(C) Storage of miscellaneous materials and equipment.
(1) Screened. All miscellaneous materials and equipment not enclosed within an approved
shelter or approved cover, shall be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties.
(2) Exceptions. Hot tubs, clothes lines, playground type equipment, construction,
agricultural, landscaping materials or equipment currently being used to perform work on the premise.
(Ord. 518, 2nd Series, passed 7-1-2004)(Ord. 2014-12 3rd Series, Adopted 5-19-14)
(D) Grass and weeds on private property.
(1) It is unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of any lot or parcel of land in the city to
allow any vegetation such as weeds or grass growing upon any such lot or parcel or land to grow to a
height greater than 12 inches or to allow such weeds or grass to go to seed.
(2) If any such owner, occupant or agent fails to comply with this height limitation and after
notice given by the Property Maintenance Inspector, or his or her agent, has not complied within 72
hours of such notice, the city shall cause such weeds or grass to be cut and the expenses thus incurred
shall be a lien upon such real estate. The city shall certify to the Dakota County Auditor, a statement of
cost incurred by the city. Such amount, together with interest, shall be entered as a special assessment
against such lot or parcel of land and shall be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes.
(Ord. 513, passed 4-22-2004)
(E) Trees, brush, shrubs on private property.
(1) Any tree, shrub or brush that grows against any building or fence which represents a
hazard to the structural integrity of said building or fence shall be removed or trimmed to prevent
damage.
(2) Trees, tree limbs, brush or shrubs that are dead, damaged and hazardous by nature shall
be removed and disposed of in a legal manner.
(F) Electrical wires, fixtures, and devices on private property.
7
(1) No electrical wires shall hang less than 10 feet above the ground or 12 feet from a
driveway surface.
(2) Loose hanging electrical fixtures, wires and devices shall be repaired, replaced or
properly abandoned.
(G) Storm water runoff. Storm water runoff from roofs, decks, yards and other surfaces shall
drain so as not to represent a hazard to other properties or stain, discolor or degrade siding and other
building surfaces.
(H) Repair and maintenance of existing buildings. All buildings within the city shall be
maintained as indicated below. Existing uses shall comply with these provisions within 12 months
following passage of this chapter.
(1) All surfaces in general.
(a) All exterior surfaces shall be of material manufactured or processed specifically for
use in weather exposed location.
(b) All surfaces must be kept reasonably weather tight and rodent proof.
(c) Exterior wood, not decay resistant by processed or natural means must be protected
by paint, stain or other approved treatment and applied as approved for use by the manufacturer.
(d) Exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, tears, breaks from deterioration
or neglect.
(e) Exterior protective surfaces on all buildings shall be maintained in good repair so as
to provide a sufficient covering and protection of structural members, insulation and interior finishes.
(f) All visible rot shall be deemed deteriorated and must be replaced or repaired.
(2) Roof.
(a) Roofs shall be maintained in a weather tight and water proof condition.
(b) Loose, broken and missing roofing materials shall be repaired or replaced as per
manufacturers’ recommendations. All repairs shall match original color, style and application as close
as possible or as approved by the city.
(c) All roofing materials shall be applied to suitable base or sheathing according
manufacturer’s recommendations. Rotted or deteriorated structural members and sheathing shall be
replaced prior to the installation of roofing materials.
8
(d) Severely deteriorated roofing materials shall be replaced. When 25% or more of
granule mineral surface coating is missing from the surface of asphalt roofing products, the roofing
shall be considered severely deteriorated.
(3) Foundations.
(a) All foundations shall be constructed of materials that are resistant to rot such as:
concrete, stone, brick or FDN .60 CCA retention preservative treated lumber to a point 6 inches above
the finished grade.
(b) All foundations shall be maintained to support the intended loads.
(c) All foundations shall be repaired if any brick, stone, block or other component has
fallen out or has deteriorated.
(d) All foundations shall be deemed out of repair if more than 20% of mortar is loose or
has fallen out.
(e) All foundations shall be rodent proof and shall not have cracks more than 1/4 inch in
width.
(4) Exterior walls, soffit, fascia and trim.
(a) All surfaces shall be free of rot, damaged or missing pieces and shall provide
complete weather protection.
(b) All exterior surfaces on which the paint has blistered, peeled, cracked, flaked, scaled
or chalked away or has failed to provide a protective surface over any wall to an extent of 20% or more
of surface area, including windows, doors, trim, rails, cornice, siding, fascia, soffit and other such areas
shall be deemed to be out of repair and must be repainted with materials approved for use, applied per
manufacturer’s recommendations. Patching of existing painted areas shall be matched in color as close
as possible.
(c) All missing trim pieces shall be replaced to match existing trim.
(5) Exterior doors, windows.
(a) All exterior doors and windows shall be set square in secured frames and fully
operable. Doors and windows may be secured in a closed position if not necessary for egress or fire
escape.
(b) All broken or missing glazing or screens shall be replaced in doors and windows with
new glazing or screens. All broken or missing glazing in doors or areas subject to human impact shall
be replaced with safety glass as approved by the Building Official or which meets UBC Standard No.
(c) Exterior paint must be maintained per as described herein.
(d) Exterior masonry or brick chimneys will be deemed to be out of repair if 10% or
more of the pointing is loose, has fallen out or if any brick, masonry unit or stone is loose or fallen out.
9
(6) Steps, sidewalks, porch, decks, etc.
(a) All exterior steps, porches, decks, and sidewalks (located on private property) shall
be repaired with decay resistant materials unless protected by a roof.
(b) All rotted or missing materials shall be repaired.
(c) Steps, porches, and decks shall be repaired if settlement has occurred at a rate of 1/2
inch in 1 foot.
(d) Cracked or buckled sidewalks (located on private property) with 1 inch difference in
height between must be repaired.
(e) Exterior paint must be maintained as per division (H)(4)(d).
(7) Fences.
(a) Fences shall be deemed deteriorated if any of the following conditions occur: rotted,
missing or broken parts, if they are unstable leaning or failed paint over more than 20% of any fence
surface.
(b) Existing fences shall not be constructed with materials designed to cause an injury
such as fencing charged with electricity or barbwire.
(c) Fences may not cause a hazard by blocking a drivers view of an oncoming vehicle or
pedestrian. (Prior Code, § 18.04) (Ord. 418, 2nd Series, passed 11-3-1997; Res. 1-9-00 passed 1-18-
2000; Am. Ord. 2007-05, 3rd Series, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-10, 3rd Series, passed 8-18-
2008)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter hereby adopted or fail to
comply therewith, or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build
in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, and
from which no appeal has been taken, modified by the Board of Appeals or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall separately for each and every violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of 1 penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and, all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violation or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each
day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions. (Prior Code, § 18.05) (Ord. 418, 2nd Series, passed 11-3-1997; Res. 1-9-00
passed 1-18-2000)


ORDINANCE NO. 2019-07
~~~~~~~~~
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HASTINGS, MINNESOTA ALLOWING AN
INCREASED NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS IN HISTORIC PROPERTIES
IN THE R-2 DISTRICT BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Hastings as follows:
Chapter 155 of the Hastings City Code - Zoning Code is hereby amended as follows
(Additions to the ordinance are underlined, deletions are stricken through, and section
numbers may be renumbered):
§ 155.23 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE .
(C) Uses by special permit
(5) Historic apartments, subject to the conditions listed at§ 155.07.
§ 155.07 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
(J} Historic apartments - Historic structures may be granted by SUP, a number of dwelling
units above what is normally allowed within the zoning district upon adherence to the
following provisions:
W That the facility shall be part of a formally designated local. state, or national
historic site or district;
.(hl That all dwelling units shall be established within the principal structure;
{fl That the number of units may be dependent on the amount of off-street
parking, as required by the Parking and Loading Requirements of§ 155.09;
1Ql That the structure shall have a minimum size of 4,000 finished square feet;
kl That the lot shall have a minimum area of 9,000 square feet;
ill That the SUP application be reviewed by the Heritage Preservation
Commission as required by §30.10;
i&l That necessary and approved changes are made to the structure with all
applicable building permits, HPC review, and payment of applicable fees.
llil Dwelling units shall be determined as follows:
1. One residential dwelling unit per 1,000 square feet of finished
structure size shall be allowed.
2. An additional 1,800 square feet of lot area shall be required for
each additional unit in excess of 5 units
§ 155.50 RESIDENTIAL LOT REGULATIONS.
It is unlawful to erect or alter any building within the city unless the following minimum
lot and yard areas are provided and maintained in connection with the building.
District A R-1 R-1L R-2, [:>,!(;;, aml R-3 R-4 RMU R-6
G&l?
Minimum Lot 10 acres 9,000 18,000 7,000-one 5,000 2,500 12 d.u . per 2,500
Area Other* Other* 9,700-two acre
other*
*Minimum lot area requirements for other uses and all other districts not listed above
shall be determined by the city during site plan review or by Special Use Permit for§
155.07(J).
All other sections shall remain unchanged.
ADOPTED by the Hastings City Council on this 61h day of January, 2020
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above is a true and correct copy of an ordinance presented
to and adopted by the City of Hastings, County of Dakota, Minnesota, on the 61
h day of
January 2020, as disclosed by the records of the City of Hastings on file and of record in
the office.
This instrument drafted by:
City of Hastings (JJF)
101 4th St. East
Hastings, MN 55033
(SEAL)
ORDINANCE NO. 2020--0-2 -THIRD SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HASTINGS, MINNESOTA AMENDING SECTION 155.01,
ZONING CODE OF THE CITY CODE HAVING TO DO WITH:
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Hastings that approximately 2 acres of
property generally located at the northwest Corner of 4th Street West and Whispering
Lane, legally described as follows, is rezoned from R-1 - Low Density Residence to R-3 -
Medium-High Density Residence, subject to approval of the concurrent Comprehensive
Plan Amendment by Metropolitan Council:
That portion of Lot 1, Block 1, SCHUMACHER 3RD ADDITION, Dakota County Minnesota
located east of the following described line: Commencing at the southeast corner of said
Lot 1; thence South 89 degrees 43 minutes 53 seconds West, assumed bearing, along the
southern property line of said Lot 1 a distance of 371.80 feet to the point of beginning of
the line to be described; thence North 00 degrees 09 minutes 57 seconds West, assumed
bearing, to the intersection of the northern property line of said Lot 1, thence terminating.
EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication, as required by law and/or charter.
ADOPTED by the Hastings City Council on this 3rd day of February, 2020.
Julie Fl en, City Clerk
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above is a true and correct copy of an ordinance presented to
and adopted by the City of Hastings, County of Dakota, Minnesota, on the 3rd day of
February, 2020, as disclosed by the records of the City of Hastings on file and of record in
the office.
(SEAL)
This instrument drafted by:
City of Hastings (JJF)
101 4th St. East
Hastings, MN 55033

