HOME RULE CHARTER And CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF INTERNATIONAL FALLS, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Republished by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
M MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION C C Tallahassee, Florida       2001  
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
INTERNATIONAL FALLS, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Robert Anderson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Harley Droba, Councilor at Large 
Leon Ditsch, East Ward 
Joe Krause, Center Ward 
Walt Buller, West Ward 
City Council 
____________ 
Steve Shermoen 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kenneth R. Anderson 
City Administrator 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
INTERNATIONAL FALLS, MINNESOTA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Harry G. Swendsen 
Mayor 
____________ 
Julie Melstrom 
Terry Carew 
Paul McLaughlin 
John McCarthy 
Brian Briggs 
Gail Rognerud 
Rickie Blanchard 
Shawn Mason 
City Council 
____________ 
Joseph M. Boyle 
City Attorney 
____________ 
David P. Richards 
City Administrator 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of International Falls, Minnesota. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5, or new chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Effective Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 4, 5th series  7- 7-08 Included 3 6, 5th series 12-31-10 Included 3 7, 5th series  6-18-12 Included 3 8, 5th series 11- 5-12 Included 3 9, 5th series  2-11-13 Included 3 10, 5th series  3-11-14 Included 3 11, 5th series  3-11-14 Included 3 12, 5th series  6- 4-14 Included 3 13, 5th series 11-22-14 Included 3 14, 5th series  9-30-15 Included 3 15, 5th series  6-11-16 Included 3 16, 5th series  7-13-16 Included 3 17, 5th series  8-10-16 Included 3 18, 5th series 12- 3-16 Included 3 19, 5th series 12-10-16 Included 3 20, 5th series  7- 1-17 Included 3 3, 5th series  2-11-08 Included 3 23, 5th series  1-16-18 Included 3 27, 5th series  9-22-18 Included 3 28, 5th series 10-15-18 Included 3 29, 5th series 12-20-18 Included 3 30, 5th series  4-20-19 Included 3  
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER 
FOR THE CITY OF 
INTERNATIONAL FALLS 
MINNESOTA 
Chapter I - NAME, POWERS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1. - Name and Powers. 
    All that part of the County of Koochiching in the State of Minnesota contained within the limits and boundaries in the next section described, and all the people now inhabiting and those who shall hereafter inhabit the said territory, shall be a city and shall form a municipal corporation, under the name and style of "City of International Falls," and shall have perpetual succession. 
    Said corporation save as herein otherwise provided and save as prohibited by the constitution of statutes of the State of Minnesota, shall have and exercise all powers, functions, rights, and privileges possessed by it prior to the adoption of this charter; also all powers, functions, rights, and privileges now or hereafter given or granted to municipal corporations having "home rule charters" by the constitution and laws of the State of Minnesota; also all powers, functions, rights, and privileges usually exercised by, or which are incidental to, or inhere in, municipal corporations of like power and degree; also all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities, of every name and nature whatsoever; and in addition shall have all the powers and be subject to the restrictions contained in this charter. In its corporate name it may take and hold, by purchase, condemnation, gift, or devise and lease and convey any and all such real, personal, or mixed property, within or without its boundaries, as its purposes may require, or as may be useful or beneficial to its inhabitants; and it may contract with the county or with other municipalities for such joint services and utilities as may seem desirable and for all other legitimate purposes. 
    The provisions of this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, to the end that it may have all necessary powers for the efficient conduct of its municipal affairs, as contemplated by the municipal home rule provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Minnesota. The specific mention of particular municipal powers in other sections of this charter shall not be construed as limiting the powers of the City in the premises to those thus mentioned. 
Sec. 2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City are on record at the Minnesota Department of Administration, Office of Municipal Boundary Adjustments or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 3. - Ward and Precinct Boundaries. 
    The ward boundaries shall be established by City resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1, 3rd series, eff. 12-25-91; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 4. - Election Districts. 
    Each of said wards shall constitute a separate election precinct of said City of the holding for all general or special elections provided for under the laws of this State or under this Charter. 
Sec. 5. - Annexing Additional Territory. 
    In any case where territory adjacent to and adjoining the territory of said City has been or shall hereafter be platted into lots or blocks and said plat shall have been filed for record in the office of the County Recorder in and for Koochiching County, Minnesota, the same may be annexed to said City by an Ordinance duly adopted by the City Council. 
    Such territory so annexed shall thereafter form a part of said City and be subject to the jurisdiction thereof. 
    A copy of such ordinance describing said territory shall thereupon be filed in the office of the County Recorder in and for said County of Koochiching. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Chapter II - ELECTIONS, APPOINTMENTS, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING OFFICERS 

Sec. 6. - Time of Election. 
    An annual election for the election of City officers shall be held in said City on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even year for the election of such officers as shall be provided therein. 
    Such election shall be held at such place in each ward as shall be designated by the City Council. 
    Ten days previous notice of such election and of the officers to be elected and of the subjects to be voted upon shall be given by the City Administrator by posting the same in some public place in each of said wards or by publishing the same in the official paper of said city. 
    That such notice shall be given at least ten days previous to the day of such election. 
    Provided, that failure to give such notice shall not invalidate such election. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 7. - Elective and Appointive Officers. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor, a councilor at large and a councilor from each ward. 
    Each of said Councilors shall be a qualified voter and actual resident of the ward for which he is elected, except the Mayor and Councilors to be elected at large who, together with all other elective officers, shall be residents and qualified electors of said City. 
    The City Council by majority vote shall appoint a Health Officer. The City Council shall retain or hire a City Administrator and may retain or hire other officers as they deem necessary for the proper conduct and management of the affairs of the city, however that the City Council may, prior to the making of such retainers or hirings, combine any offices as it shall deem for the best interests of the City. The City Council may specify duties and minimum qualifications for each of the officer positions. 
    "Covered Employees" are all part-time or full-time employees of either city, including appointees, who received a monthly salary and pension and health benefits on January 1, 1988 and who are requesting a position with said consolidated city shall be entitled to employment with the consolidated city. No employee shall lose their job due to the consolidation of International Falls and South International Falls. The original appointments of the new consolidated city must be from the aforesaid "covered employees". 
    All "covered employees" shall be entitled to employment with the consolidated city. However, the issue of assignment, classification, pay and benefits excluding pension shall be based on job classification and ratings determined after the referendum. 
    If a "covered employee" makes an application for a position with the new consolidated city, he/she waives his right to seek elective office prior and during his employment with said city since he is give employment upon consolidation subject to this Charter and the laws of the State of Minnesota. 
    The term of all elective and appointive officers shall, except as otherwise provided herein, commence on January 1st of the odd years following election or appointment, and such officers shall serve until their successors are elected or appointed and qualify. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. of 11-2-04, § 1; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 8. - Removal of Officers. 
    Any person appointed to any office under the provisions of the charter during said person's term or upon said person's written request for reappointment may be removed from such office by a vote of four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the Council as a whole, except as otherwise provided herein. But no such officer shall be removed except for cause, nor unless he shall first have been furnished with a copy of the charges against him, and shall have had a reasonable opportunity to be heard by himself or counsel in his own defense. 
    The City Council shall have power to fix the time and place for the trial of such officer, of which he shall be given not less than 10 days' notice, to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers and to hear and determine the case. 
    If such officer shall fail or refuse to appear and answer such charge the same shall be cause for removal. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 9. - Vacancy-How Filled. 
    Whenever a vacancy occurs in any elective or administrative office of the City, the Council shall, within 60 days by resolution appoint a qualified person to serve the unexpired term in such office. 
Sec. 10. - What shall constitute an Election. 
    A plurality of votes for elective officers shall constitute an election. 
    When two or more persons shall receive an equal number, and the highest number of votes for any office, the election shall be determined by the casting of lots, under the supervision of the City Council, at such time and place and in such manner as the City Council shall direct. Officers appointed or elected by the City Council shall receive a majority vote of all its members to constitute an election. 
Sec. 11. - Who are Entitled to Vote. 
    All persons entitled to vote for state and county officers shall be entitled to vote for any officer to be elected under this charter, and to vote on any subject which may properly come before the voters. 
Sec. 12. - Elections. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all general laws of the State of Minnesota relating to elections and all preliminaries thereto shall as far as applicable, apply to and govern all elections under this charter whether general or special, and are hereby adopted as a part of this charter, the same as if specifically here reenacted; provided that the "Primary Election Law" for nominating candidates for City Officers shall not apply to this City. 
    The returns for all city elections shall be made to the City Administrator, and the City Council shall within three days after said election, either at a regular or special meeting, canvass the returns and declare the result thereof, and order certificates of election to be issued by the City Administrator to the persons elected. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 13. - Elective Officers and Term of Office. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor, elected for a term of four (4) years; and four (4) Councilors, elected for terms of four (4) years. During the first election the Councilor at Large will serve a four (4) year term and the Councilors for each ward shall serve two (2) year terms. Thereafter all terms will be for four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. of 11-2-04, § 2) 
Sec. 14. - Special Elections. 
    Special elections may be called by the City Council and the same shall be called, held and conducted in such manner as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 15. - Vacancies in Office. 
    Every City Office shall become vacant on the happening of either of the events set forth in M.S.A. § 351.02, before the termination of his term of office. 
Sec. 16. - Resignation. 
    Any person having entered upon the duties of his office may resign the same with the consent of City Council. 
Sec. 17. - City Contracts.-Officers Not Be Interested. 
    No officer of said City shall, during his term of office, be or become in any manner interested in any contract in behalf of the City or any department thereof, with himself or with any firm of which he is a member, or with any association or corporation of which he may be an officer, and any such contract shall be absolutely void, and such officer shall forfeit such office so held by him and thereafter disqualified from holding any office in said City. 
Sec. 18. - Penalty for Failure to Observe Duties Imposed. 
    Any officer or employee of the City who shall willfully violate any provisions of the charter in regard to any duty imposed on him as such officer or employee, or commit any fraud upon the City, or convert any of the property or funds of said City to his own use or to the use of any other person, or who shall willfully or corruptly permit any other person to do so, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall on conviction thereof be punished therefor as provided by the General Laws of the State in case of misdemeanors, and shall forfeit any office held by him in said City and be thereafter forever disqualified from holding any office of trust or profit in said City. 
Sec. 19. - Salaries of Officers. 
    The salaries of all officers and employees of the City shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council and entered on the minutes of the meeting of the Council. 
    All salaries shall be paid bi-weekly out of the treasury of the City. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 20. - Annual Reports of Officers. 
    Every appointed officer, and all Boards provided for in this charter, shall, annually, at the close of the fiscal year, make and transmit to the council an annual report, properly verified by affidavit, of the business of such office or department for the current fiscal year, together with a true and full inventory of all money, property and other effects of the City in the possession of such officer or Board or under its control. 
    Such officer or Board shall also make such other and further reports as shall from time to time be required by the City Council. 
    All such reports shall be filed with the City Administrator, and shall at all times be open to inspection by any taxpayer of the City. 
    Every appointed officer and board member, provided for in this chapter, shall, at the expiration of his term of office, turn over to his successor in office or to the City, all books, papers, files, records, money and other property whatsoever, pertaining to his office, which may be in his possession or under his control. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 21. - Ballots. 
    At each election of officers under this charter there shall be a ballot known as the "Official Ballot of International Falls," which shall be printed and distributed as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 22. - Filing for Office. 
    No earlier than ten (10) weeks or later than eight (8) weeks before the regular City election, any person eligible, and desirous of having his name placed upon such ballot as a candidate for any office, shall file his affidavit with the City Administrator stating his residence, that he is a qualified voter of the City, the office for which he desires to be a candidate, and shall pay to the City Administrator, a filing fee of $10.00. 
    At least two weeks before the first date to file affidavits of candidacy, the City Administrator must publish a notice stating the first and last days to file and the closing time for filing on the last day of filing. At least ten days posted notice must also be given. 
    Immediately after the last day for filing, and at least ten days before such election, the City Administrator shall cause to be printed a sufficient number of ballots, varied as may be necessary for the several wards. 
    On such ballots shall appear the names of no persons except those who have duly filed and paid the fee as herein provided for. 
    Whenever two or more persons are candidates for the same office, the names of all candidates for such office shall be so alternated on the ballots used in each election district that they shall appear thereon substantially an equal number of times at the top, at the bottom and each intermediate place, if any, of the list or group to which they belong. 
    All officers charged with the printing and distribution of such ballots shall cause the printer's forms to be so transposed and the blocks of ballots to be so made up as to carry out the intent thereof. 
    No name of a political party or organization shall be printed on any portion on said ballot. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 23. - Distribution. 
    An Election Judge at each polling place shall hand to each voter at the time he enters the voting booth one of said official ballots. 
    The ballots herein mentioned shall be in addition to any ballots that may be otherwise provided for by state law. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 24. - Applicable Election Laws. 
    The General Laws of the State of Minnesota known as the "Primary Election Law" shall not apply to this City in the election of City Officers but the General Election Laws of the State of Minnesota as applicable to Cities of the Fourth Class shall apply to and govern all elections under this charter. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 25. - The Initiative. 
    Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the City Council for adoption, by a petition signed by qualified electors of said City equal in number to the percentages hereinafter required. 
    The signatures to such petition need not be all appended to one paper, but each signer shall add to his signature, his address the name of the Ward in which he resides. 
    One of the signers of each paper shall make oath before an officer competent to administer oaths, that the statements therein made are true, and that each signature to such paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be thereunto subscribed. Within ten days from the filing of such petition the City Administrator shall examine the same and from the poll lists of the last City election ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors, and if necessary, the council shall allow him extra help for that purpose, and shall attach to such petition his certificate showing the result of such examination. 
    If, by the City Administrator's certificate, the petition is shown to be insufficient in regard to the number of signers thereon, it may be amended within ten days from the date of such certificate. 
    The City Administrator, shall, within ten days after the filing with him of such amended petition, make like examination of such amended petition and if his certificate shall show the same to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing the same, without prejudice, however, to the filing of a new petition to the same effect. 
    If the petition, or the amended petition, shall be found sufficient, the City Administrator shall submit the same to the City Council at its next regular meeting. 
    If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by electors equal in number to fifteen percent of the entire vote cast for all candidates for Mayor at the last preceding general City election at which a Mayor was elected, and contains a request that said ordinance be submitted to a vote of the electors of said City, if not passed by the Council, then the Council shall either: 
(a)  Pass said ordinance without alteration within twenty days after the attachment of the City Administrator's certificate as to sufficiency to the accompanying petition (subject to a referendum vote under the provisions of Section 26 of this chapter); and if such ordinance shall be passed by the council, then, within fourteen days after determination that said ordinance shall have failed of final adoption, the Council shall proceed to call a special election at which said ordinance, without alterations shall be submitted to a vote of the people, or: 
(b)  Forthwith, after the City Administrator shall attach to the petition accompanying such ordinance his certificate of sufficiency, the council shall proceed to call a special election at which said ordinance, without alteration, shall be submitted to a vote of the people. 
    If the petition be signed by electors equal in number to at least five percent, but less than fifteen percent, of the entire vote cast for all candidates for Mayor at the last preceding election at which a Mayor was elected, then such ordinance, without alteration, shall be submitted by the Council to a vote of the electors at the next general City election that shall occur at any time after thirty days from the date of the City Administrator's certificate of sufficiency attached to the petition accompanying such ordinance. 
    (Provided, that in all cases, a copy of such proposed ordinance shall be attached to and accompany such petition, and Provided, such proposed ordinance shall not be inconsistent with the Constitution of the State of Minnesota, nor the laws thereof, nor with any provision of this charter.) 
    The ballots used when voting upon said proposed ordinance shall contain the words "For the Ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance) and "Against the Ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance). 
    If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, said ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of said City; 
    And any ordinance proposed by petition, or which shall be adopted by a vote of the people cannot be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people. 
    Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election, in accordance with the provisions of this section, provided that there shall not be held under this section of this charter, more than one special election in a period of six months. 
    The Council may submit a proposition for the repeal of any such ordinance, or for amendments thereto, to be voted upon at any succeeding regular election, and should such proposition, so submitted, receive a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election, such ordinance shall be repealed or amended accordingly. 
    Whenever any ordinance or proposition is required by this charter to be submitted to the voters of the City at any election, the City Administrator shall cause the ordinance or proposition to be printed, in the officially designated paper published in said City. Such printing and publication shall be not less than 5 nor more than 20 days before the submission of such ordinance or proposition to be voted upon. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 26. - The Referendum. 
    Except when otherwise provided by the general laws of the state or by the provisions of this charter respecting street improvements, no ordinance other than one for the immediate preservation of the public health, peace or safety which contains a statement of its urgency and is passed by a two-thirds vote of the council shall go into effect before thirty days from the time of its final passage and its approval by the Mayor; provided, however, that no grant of any franchise and no ordinance vacating any street or alley shall be considered an emergency measure. If during said thirty days a petition prohibiting against this passage of such ordinance, signed by electors of the City equal in number to at least seven percent of the entire vote cast for all candidates for Mayor at the last preceding city election at which a Mayor was elected, be presented to the council, said ordinance shall thereupon be suspended from going into operation, and it shall be the duty of the council to reconsider such ordinance. If the same is not entirely repealed, the council shall, as required in this Charter, submit the ordinance to the vote of the electors of the City, either at the next general city election or at a special election to be called for that purpose. Such ordinance shall not go into effect, or become operative, unless a majority of the electors voting on the same shall vote in favor thereof. 
    Said petition shall be in all respects in accordance with the provisions of said Charter, except as to the percentage of signers, and be examined and certified by the City Administrator in all respects as therein provided. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 27. - The Recall. 
    The holder of any elective office may be removed at any time by the electors qualified to vote for a successor of such incumbent. 
    The procedure to effect the removal of an elective officer shall be as follows: A petition signed by electors entitled to vote for a successor of the incumbent sought to be removed, equal in number to at least twenty-five percent of the entire vote cast for all candidates for the office, the incumbent of which is sought to be removed, at the last preceding general city election demanding the election of a successor of the person sought to be removed, shall be filed with the City Administrator and which petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds for which such removal is sought. 
    The signatures to such petition need not all be appended to one paper, but each signer shall add to his residence the name of the Ward in which he resides. 
    One of the signers to each of such papers shall make oath before some officer authorized to administer oaths, that the statements therein made are true, and that each signature to such paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be thereunto subscribed. Within ten days from the filing of such petition the City Administrator shall examine and from the poll lists of the last preceding general city election ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of electors, and he shall attach to said petition his certificate showing the result of such examination. 
    If, by the City Administrator's certificate, the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within ten days from the date of such certificate. The City Administrator shall, within ten days after such amendment, make like examination of the amended petition, and if his certificate shall show the same to be insufficient it shall be returned to the person filing the same, without prejudice, however, to the filing of a new petition to the same effect. 
    If the petition, or amended petition shall be found sufficient, the City Administrator shall submit the same to the City Council at its next regular meeting. 
    If the petition shall be found to be sufficient the City Council shall order, and fix a date for holding the said election, not less than thirty days nor more than forty days from the date of the City Administrator's certificate to the council that a sufficient petition is filed. 
    Such election shall be held and conducted under the same rules and regulations, and the same notice thereof shall be given as in other city elections. The successor of any officer so removed shall hold office during the unexpired term of his predecessor. 
    Any person sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself, and, unless he requests otherwise in writing, the City Administrator shall place his name on the official ballot without nomination. 
    In any such removal election, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
    If, at such election, some other persons than the incumbent receives the highest number of votes, the incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from office upon qualification of his successor. 
    In case the party who receives the highest number of votes shall fail to qualify within ten days after receiving notice of his election the office shall be deemed vacant. 
    If the incumbent receives the highest number of votes he shall continue in office. 
    Provided that no special election shall be held under this section within ninety days of a general city election. 
    That any elector of said City may carry on and maintain any appropriate action, in his own name, to enforce any of the provisions of sections 25, 26, and 27, of this chapter, or to enforce the performance of his duties by any officer of the City under said sections. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Chapter III - THE MAYOR 

Sec. 28. - Powers. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred upon him/her by this charter, the ordinances, resolutions and motion of the City and laws of the State. The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council and shall have equal vote with other members of the council on any matter coming before that body. The Mayor shall have no veto power. The council shall choose from its members a president pro tem who shall serve as president in the mayor's absence and as acting mayor in the case of the mayor's disability or absence from the city. His/Her acts while so acting as mayor, shall have the same force and validity as if performed by the mayor. 
    The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil processes, and by the governor for purposes of martial law. 
    The Mayor shall take care that the laws of the state, the provisions of this charter, and the ordinances of the City, are duly observed and enforced within the City, and that all other officers discharge their respective duties, and to that end may maintain an action of mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding against any delinquent officer. 
    The Mayor shall appoint with approval by a majority vote of the City Council the Police Chief and Fire Chief, subject to the Civil Service Commission provisions, and the members of any committee or board established by this Charter or the Council. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 29. - Mayor to Sign Contracts. 
    The Mayor shall sign all bonds and obligations on behalf of the City, and all warrants and orders drawn on the City Treasury, unless otherwise provided by law. 
    The Mayor shall, also sign all contracts on the part of the City, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 30. - Mayor Shall Communicate Service of Process. 
    The Mayor shall, upon service of notice, summons or process upon him/her in any action or proceeding against the City, forthwith inform the City Attorney and the City Council thereof. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Chapter IV - THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 31. - To Receive and Keep Moneys Belonging to the City. 
    The City Administrator shall receive and safely keep all moneys belonging or accruing to the City, including license money and fines, and shall keep accurate and detailed accounts thereof, and he/she shall be entitled to and shall demand and receive of the Treasurer of Koochiching County, at the times specified by law, all moneys due the City for taxes, assessments, and interest and penalties thereon, on accounts of levies and assessments made by the City for any local improvement. He/She shall be the custodian of all bonds, certificates of indebtedness or other securities held by the City. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 32. - To Credit Moneys to Various Funds. 
    The City Administrator shall, upon the receipt of any moneys, forthwith credit the same to the separate funds to which the same respectively belong or for which they are levied, and shall deposit the same daily, in the name of the City, to the order of the City Administrator, in the various depositories which shall have been designated by the City Council, but shall not deposit with any such depository an amount in excess of the market value of the collateral furnished by such depository and approved by the City Council. 
    And all interest that may accrue upon any such moneys shall be credited to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 33. - City Depositories. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for city funds as provided by State Law. 
Sec. 34. - When to Pay Out Money. 
    The City Administrator shall pay no money out of the City Treasury except in the following cases: First, in the payment of the principal and interest of bonds or of certificates of indebtedness. 
    Second, upon an order drawn and countersigned which has been first duly authorized and allowed, and which shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn, and the fund out of which and the person to whom it is payable. Upon the payment and receipt by him of any such order the City Administrator shall cancel and file the same and it shall not be again issued. 
    And he/she shall keep separate orders drawn upon each particular fund. 
    Third, in the duly authorized payment of the employees of any department of the City on payrolls, in which case he/she shall make such payment to each employee, taking his receipt therefor. 
    Fourth, in the payment out of the money appropriated for the contingent expenses of the Mayor upon warrant-checks drawn upon such appropriations, signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Administrator, not exceeding the amount appropriated by the City Council for such purposes in any fiscal year. 
    Fifth, in the payment out of money appropriated for petty cash expenditures in accordance with the procedures established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 35. - City Administrator to Make Monthly Statements. 
    The City Administrator shall, at a meeting during each month, make statements to the City Council of the amount received and distributed on account of each fund controlled by the City Council, and a statement of the amount of money in the various funds deposited with each depository and in his hands. At the same time he/she shall report to the City Council the total amount of City funds and where placed or deposited. 
    He/She shall, whenever notified to do so by the City Council, withdraw all funds from any depository designated as hereinbefore provided, and notify the City Council of such withdrawal, and shall thenceforth deposit no more therein until authorized to do so by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14, 4th series, effective July 31, 2004, repealed § 36, which pertained to bond of city administrator and derived from Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01. See Section 47 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 37. - Election, Qualification and Duties. 
    The City Administrator shall keep the corporate seal and all the papers and records of the City and keep a record of the proceedings of the City, Council, at whose meetings it shall be his duty to be present, and of all boards of which he/she is a member. The City Administrator shall have power to take acknowledgments, administer oaths and affirmations, and copies of all papers filed in his office and transcripts of any records in his office certified to by him under the corporate seal shall be evidence in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced by the City Administrator at the trail. He/She shall perform all other services by law required of City Administrators of cities and townships in this state, and when services are required of him by public law for which compensation is provided, such services shall be regarded as services for the City. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 38. - Warrant Accounts. 
    He/She shall draw all warrant-checks as provided in Section 60 of Chapter V and he/she shall keep accounts of combination warrant-checks drawn on the City Administrator in separate books, and shall note thereon the cancellation thereof whenever the same shall be cancelled, and shall keep such other books and records as shall be necessary for the preservation of the accounts of the transactions and business of the City, and all books, lists and records heretofore kept, or which shall be kept in the City Administrator's office, and copies thereof by him certified shall be competent evidence of all matters shown by them. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 39. - Keep Accounts. 
    He/She shall keep accounts with and all receiving or disbursing officers of said city; in such accounts he/she shall charge such officers with all amounts received by them from all sources of revenue and with all City property in their hands or control, as such officers, and credit them with all amounts disbursed, or property disposed of on proper authority, and with all money or property turned over to the City or to their successors in office. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 40. - Countersigned Bonds, Etc. 
    He/She shall countersign all bonds, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness of the City; and no such bond, order, certificate or other evidence of indebtedness shall be valid until so countersigned. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 41. - To Examine Accounts of Other Officers. 
    He/She shall examine the reports, books, papers, and vouchers of other receiving and disbursing officers, and perform such other duties pertaining to his office as the City Council may prescribe and it shall be the duty of the City Administrator to make a report of the financial conditions of the City to the City Council at any time the same may be required by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 42. - To Report Financial Condition to the City Council. 
    He/She shall at the end of each fiscal year report to the City Council the financial condition of the City. He/She shall within two weeks after the filing of the official annual audit of the city finances, make out and cause to be published in the official paper of the City, a summary showing the financial condition of the City, the amount of moneys received for the year, and from what source, and also the amount disbursed and for what purpose. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 43. - To Countersigned All Contracts. 
    He/She shall countersigned all contracts made in behalf of said City, and no such contract shall be valid for any purpose until so countersigned, and he/she shall be the custodian of all such contracts, which shall be open to the inspection of all parties interested. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 44. - Supervision of Official Publications. 
    The City Administrator shall have the supervision of all printing and official publications ordered by the City Council. He/She shall cause to be published in the official paper the approved minutes of all proceedings of the City Council as early as practicable within ten days following said meeting in which minutes were approved. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 45. - Assistants. 
    The City Administrator shall have power to appoint a City Administrator's designee subject to the approval of the City Council, who shall hold his office during the pleasure of the City Administrator, and shall have authority under direction of the City Administrator to perform all the duties of the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be responsible for the acts of his designee and the City Administrator is hereby authorized to require his said designee to give a faithful performance bond in an amount to be fixed by the City Council to the said City Administrator conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office, which bond shall be paid by the City. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 46. - Additional Services. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to perform such services, additional to those above prescribed, as may be incidental to his office, or required elsewhere in this charter, or by city ordinance, or by direction of the City Council, and to discharge such other duties in connection with the finances of the City as are, or may be, required of him by this charter, by the City Council, or by the general laws of the State applicable to this City. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 47. - Bond. 
    The City Administrator, before entering upon the duties of his office shall give a faithful performance bond to the city in an amount to be fixed by the City Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. Such bond shall be subject to the approval of the City Council, and the premium on said bond shall be paid out of the City Treasury. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Chapter V - CITY FINANCE 

Sec. 48. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall end each year on the 31st of December. 
Sec. 49. - Property Subject to Taxation. 
    All property in the City of International Falls, taxable under the laws of the State, shall be subject to taxation for the support of the City government and the payment of its debts and liabilities, and the same shall be assessed as provided for by law and in this charter. 
    There shall be maintained in the City Treasury the respective funds hereinafter in this chapter provided, and the City Council, by a majority vote of the authorized membership thereof, may levy an annual tax upon all taxable property in said City for the support of such funds and purposes. 
Sec. 50. - General Funds. 
    There shall be maintained in the City Treasury a fund to be designated as the General Fund, into which shall be paid all moneys not specifically designated as belonging to any other particular fund, and from which fund the City Council may replenish any other fund. 
Sec. 51. - Permanent Improvement Fund. 
    There shall be created, when not already existing and maintained in the City Treasury, a fund to be designated as the Permanent Improvement Fund, into which shall be paid all the moneys received from the sale of any property, except such property seized and forfeited by the police, or permanent improvements of the City not otherwise provided, and such amount from time to time as may be realized from the sale of any bonds or certificates or indebtedness, issued on account of such fund, and all amounts collected on special assessments advanced in the first instance out of such fund, all excess of all assessments for water mains and sewers. 
    It shall further be maintained by an annual tax levy to be made by the City Council for such payment as may be necessary. 
    And out of such fund shall be paid the cost of acquiring all real property and appurtenances, and the construction and improvement of all buildings and permanent improvements which shall not be otherwise provided for out of other funds, and also the cost of all local improvements, unless the City Council maintains a permanent improvement revolving fund. And the City Council shall maintain such fund sufficient to meet the expenses of all such improvements as the same become payable as in this charter provided. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 52. - Permanent Improvement Revolving Fund. 
    There shall be created, if necessary, and maintained in the City Treasury, if the City Council so direct by ordinance, a fund to be designated as the "Permanent Improvement Revolving Fund" into which shall be paid all accounts realized from the sale of certificates of indebtedness issued on account of such fund, and the principal sum of all special assessments and benefits assessed and levied on account of any local improvements, as well as taxes levied on account of such fund, and there shall be paid out of such fund that portion of all local improvements for which special assessments are levied, and such amount of excess assessments as may in any instance be refunded and for no other purpose whatever. 
    And the City shall maintain such fund sufficient to meet the expenses of all such improvements as the same become payable as in this charter provided. 
    And the City Council may from time to time by ordinance by a two thirds ( 2/3 ) vote issue, negotiate and sell certificates of indebtedness for the creating or maintaining of such fund, and such certificates shall not be sold for less than par and accrued interest, and shall be made payment from said fund and at such times as the City Council may determine; Provided, however that the amount of certificates so issued shall not exceed at any one time one (1) per cent of the total value of taxable property of such City, according to the last preceding assessment for purposes of taxation. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 53. - Public Utility. 
    A Public Utility Fund may be established for the acquisition, support, maintenance, and operation of any public utility owned or operated by the City, including the payment of the interest on any bonds or other indebtedness which may be a lien upon such utility. There shall be paid into this fund all monies derived from the sale of bonds issued on account of any such utility, and from the operation of such utility, and from the sale of any property acquired for or used in connection with any such utility. 
    There shall be paid out of this fund the cost of the purchase, construction, extension, operation, maintenance and repair of such utility, including the interest upon all bonds or other indebtedness which may be a lien upon such utility. Any surplus in said fund may be used for the purchase of any bonds or certificates of indebtedness issued against said utility, and for the payment of such bonds or other indebtedness upon their maturity. Separate accounts shall be kept for each such utility operated separately. Should there by any accumulation of money in this fund beyond the needs thereof, the City Council may, by resolution, direct such accumulation or any part thereof, to be paid and transferred to the general fund of the City. 
Sec. 54. - Petty Cash Fund. 
    There may be established by the City Council a petty cash fund to be used in accordance with state law. Said fund is to be administered by the City Administrator pursuant to procedural guidelines established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 55. - Bond and Interest Fund. 
    There shall be maintained in the City Treasury, a fund to be designated as the Bond and Interest Fund, which shall be maintained by an annual levy upon all the taxable property of the City of an amount which, in addition to any balance remaining in such fund, shall be sufficient to pay the interest and principal on maturing bond which becomes due during the next fiscal year, upon all the bonds or debts of the City. 
    There shall be maintained in the City Treasury such other funds, and the City Administrator shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by law or ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14, 4th series, effective July 31, 2004, repealed § 56, which pertained to board of tax levy. 
Sec. 57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14, 4th series, effective July 31, 2004, repealed § 57, which pertained to report of estimates and derived from Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01. 
Sec. 58. - Annual Tax Levy. 
    The City Council shall, on or before the 10th day of October of each year, levy an annual tax upon all property in such City, taxable under the laws of this state, for the purpose of defraying and paying all the expenses, obligations and liabilities existing or authorizing by this charter, and the levy so made as aforesaid, shall be reported by the City Administrator forthwith to the County Auditor of Koochiching County, and shall be entered upon the tax duplicate of said County and collected annually in like manner as County and State taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 59. - Limit of Debt or Liability. 
    Neither the City Council nor any officer thereof shall, except as in this charter provided, have authority to issue any bonds or create any debt or liability against said City in excess of the amount of revenue actually levied and applicable to the payment of such liability. 
Sec. 60. - Money-How Paid Out-Combination Warrant Check. 
    All moneys belonging to the City, except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall be under control of the City Council and shall be paid out only on a combination warrant-check signed by the Mayor and City Administrator, duly authorized by virtue of a resolution of the City Council, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole number of the City Council. 
    Provided, that all sums of money due or to become due upon monthly payrolls, or as salaries for compensation of city officers and employees regularly elected or appointed and receiving a fixed salary or compensation, and all sums due or to become due for interest on bonds and other fixed charges, may be allowed and ordered paid on mere motion duly carried by an affirmative vote of a majority of all the members present. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to draw all warrant-checks and he shall designate on each warrant-check and on the claim or account to be paid the fund upon which drawn and out of which the same shall be paid; and each warrant-check shall be payable only out of such fund belonging to the City as is named in the resolution providing for its payment, if the same is authorized by resolution. 
    Each combination warrant-check shall be payable to the order of the person in whose favor it is drawn and may be transferred by endorsement. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 24, 4th series, effective September 29, 2006, repealed § 61, which pertained to taxpayer's and claimant's appeal and derived from Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01. 
Sec. 62. - Annual Audit. 
    As soon as practical after the end of each fiscal year the City Council shall cause an audit of the city books to be made either by a public examiner or by a certified competent public accountant. 
Chapter VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 63. - Legislative Power Vested in City Council. 
    The legislative power and authority of the City shall be vested in the City Council, composed of the mayor and four councilors of such City as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 64. - Organization. 
    The City Council at its first meeting after election shall organize and proceed to organize as provided in this Charter, and elect such other officers as may be necessary for the transaction of its business. Such election shall be by voice vote duly recorded as to yeas, nayes and abstentions, and a majority affirmative vote of all members shall be necessary to elect. 
Sec. 65. - Rules and Special Meetings. 
    The City Council shall prescribe rules for its own guidance and the time for its regular meetings. The Mayor or a majority of the council may call special meetings of the Council giving at least twelve (12) hours notice by the City Administrator to each member of the Council. Such notice of the time, place, and purpose shall be posted at the City Hall for a like period and notice shall be given to the news media as designated by the City Council. Notice shall be delivered personally to each member or shall be left at said members usual place of residence. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting the same shall have been specified in the call therefore. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 66. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, but less than a majority may adjourn from time to time, and a minority as well as a majority may compel the attendance of absent members. 
Sec. 67. - Canvassing Votes. 
    The City Council shall have the power to, and it shall, canvass the returns of votes cast at all City elections and declare the results thereof, and shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members. 
Sec. 68. - Ordinances and Resolutions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all legislation shall be by ordinance. In amending any ordinance all previous amendments thereof shall be consolidated in a rewording of the section amended, and each section or subsection amended shall be stated in full and shall be preceded by the words "so as to read as follows." 
    A repealing ordinance shall state in full the title of the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 69. - Procedure on Ordinances. 
    Every proposed ordinance, excepting emergency ordinances, shall be presented in writing. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The format of all ordinances shall be: "The City Council of the City of International Falls, do ordain as follows...". No ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced and at least seven days shall elapse between its introduction and final passage. 
Sec. 70. - Emergency Ordinances. 
    An emergency ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare in which the emergency is defined and declared in a preamble and the ordinance is adopted by a vote of two-thirds of the Council. 
Sec. 71. - Passage of Ordinances and Resolutions. 
    Every ordinance, except as in the charter otherwise provided, shall be passed by a majority vote of the members of the City Council, taken by yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon its journal. Every ordinance shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City before it takes effect. No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a subsequent meeting unless all members of the city council are present. 
    All ordinances shall be recorded, by the City Administrator, in books to be provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 9, 5th series, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 72. - Contracts Awarded-Warrant Checks Drawn. 
    In all matters, except those provided for in Section 88 of this chapter and any other cases mentioned in this charter in which action is required to be by ordinance, the City Council may act by resolution in writing, or in cases in which it is not otherwise provided in this charter the City Council may act by mere motion to be entered on the minutes; provided, however, that every appropriation in excess of that amount required for sealed bids or more to be paid to any one person, firm or corporation (exclusive of salaries and compensation of officers and employees of said City, and bond interest and other fixed charges, or sums heretofore authorized or contracted to be paid, which sums, including the payroll of City officers or employees whose salaries or compensation have been fixed by law or resolution, may be passed and warrants ordered hereunder, by motion as provided in Section 61 of Chapter V of this charter). The letting of any job of work, or the authorizing of any contract or purchase, involving an expenditure from the City Administrator of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) or more, and any provision for the sale of any real estate of the city, or of any of its personal property of the value of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) or more, and every determination to take private property for public use, and every determination to issue bonds of the city or in any way to contract indebtedness exceeding eight hundred dollars ($800.00) (except as herein otherwise provided) shall be by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 73. - Majority Vote Required. 
    Every ordinance appropriating money or creating any liability (or for the issuance of certificates of indebtedness in anticipation of tax or assessment levies), awarding or approving any contract for the payment of money, ordering any condemnation of private property, or the making of any local improvements, shall require a majority vote of all the members of the City Council, except as provided in Section 60, Chapter V. 
Sec. 74. - Issuance of Bonds, Etc. 
    Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the City Council. Provided, however, that before such bonds shall be issued the question shall be submitted for ratification to the electors of the City at the next regular City election, or at a special election called for the purpose, the form of ballot to be used at which shall be prescribed by the City Council. If 51% of all the electors voting upon such question shall vote in favor of the issuance of such bonds, then said ordinance shall take effect and be in force, otherwise the same shall become null and void. 
    Provided, however, that upon the petition of twenty-five per cent of all the electors voting at the last preceding election the City Council shall submit the question of issuing bonds for any purpose, to a vote of the people as above provided. 
    Provided, however, that a majority vote of the members of the City Council shall be sufficient to pass any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds for the purpose of paying maturing bonds of the city without submission to the electors. 
    Provided, further, that the amount of all such bonds, except as hereinafter provided, shall be controlled by the limitations herein made on the power to issue bonds, and the City Council shall not in any manner, either with or without the vote of the people, authorize the issuance of any bonds or create indebtedness of the City in excess of the said limit herein prescribed, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 24 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 75. - Councilors Not to Solicit Appointment. 
    No member of the City Council shall demand, request or solicit any board, officer, or employee, connected with the City, to appoint any person to a position in said City, except that councilors in open council meetings may make such request or solicitation. Upon proof of a violation of this provision the office of such member shall become and be declared vacant by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 76. - Witnesses Before a City Council. 
    The City Council and any of its Committees authorized by it to do so, shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidences at any of its meetings, or before such committee, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas or attachments in any case of inquiry of investigation to be signed by its Mayor, or the Chair of such Committee, as the case may be, which shall be served and executed by any officer or person authorized by law to serve subpoenas and other processes. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 77. - Punishment for Refusal to Testify. 
    If any witness shall refuse to testify to the facts within that persons knowledge, or to produce any books or papers in that persons possession, or under his control, the City Council shall have the power to fine or commit that person for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 78. - Witnesses Not to Be Excused. 
    No witness shall be excused from testifying concerning that persons knowledge of the matter under investigation in any such proceeding or inquiry before the City Council or any Committee thereof, or before any officer of the City having power to conduct the investigation; but such testimony shall not be used against that person in any criminal prosecution except for perjury. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 79. - City Council to Control Finances-Limit on Bond Issues. 
    The City Council shall control the finances of the City and shall have power to appropriate money for City purposes only, except as hereinafter provided; to provide for the payment of its debts and expenses; to borrow money on its credit for City purposes and to issue bonds therefore, as hereinbefore provided; to issue bonds in place of, or to supply means for paying maturing bonds or to consolidate or fund same. 
    Provided, that the total indebtedness of the City, except as hereinafter provided, shall not thereby be made to exceed twenty (20) percent of the total value of the market value of total property of the City according to the last preceding assessment for the purpose of taxation. 
    Provided, however, that the certificates of indebtedness or bonds issued for the creation and maintenance of the permanent improvement revolving fund shall not be considered as a part of the bonded indebtedness of the City, for the purposes of this section. 
    Provided, further, that the certificates of indebtedness issued for the purpose of anticipating the collection of general taxes for the year in which they may be issued, shall not be considered as a portion of the bonded indebtedness of the City for the purposes of this section. 
    Provided, further, that the certificates of indebtedness or bonds issued for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, regulating, maintaining, extending, enlarging or improving any public utility, owned, maintained and operated by the City, or for the purpose of acquiring any real or other property needed in connection with such public utility, or any refundment of such certificates or bonds, shall not be considered as a portion of the indebtedness of the City for the purposes of this section. 
    Provided, further, that the City Council may set aside annually such portion of the gross income from any public utility of the City, as they shall determine, to create a sinking fund for the payment of any public utility bonds as they become due. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 80. - Condemnation. 
    The City Council shall have the power to acquire by condemnation, dedication, or otherwise for any municipal purpose, lands within or without the City, for and to lay out, open, widen, and extend streets, alleys, avenues, bridge approaches, parks and public grounds, and to establish the grade and width of such streets, alleys and avenues, and to change the same; and to acquire by condemnation or otherwise easements for slopes, cuts and fills; by condemnation or otherwise to extend or widen any street, alley, or highway, over or across or to construct any sewer under or through, any railroad track, right of way or land of any railroad or other corporation, and to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, the right to take, use or divert water from any lake, stream, or water course for water supply of said City, and to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, the right to take or use lands for airways or airports. The City shall not be limited to the acquisition of property for the purposes herein expressed, but may acquire property or easements by condemnation or otherwise for any municipal purpose, in the manner provided by M.S.A. Ch. 117 or its amendment, and shall be paid out of the general funds in the City Treasury. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 81. - Improvement of Streets. 
    The City Council shall have the power to extend, widen, straighten, grade, drain, pave, repave, macadamize or otherwise improve any street, alley, or public ground, and to lay or order laid sidewalks, curb and gutter thereon, also to establish a building line for any structure, avenue or street, and to prevent the erection of buildings in front of such line. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 82. - Maintaining and Altering Water Courses and Lakes. 
    The City Council shall have the power to build and maintain bridges and viaducts, to deepen, widen, dock and cover, wall, alter or change the channel of any water course within the City, and by condemnation or otherwise to acquire the land and rights necessary therefore, and may remove any obstructions or unsightly structures from any pond or water course in the City and to prevent the dumping of any garbage therein. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 83. - Approval of Plats. 
    The City Council shall have the sole power to accept and approve plats of additions within or adjoining the City, and to prescribe the width and location of streets and alleys required in such plats of property. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 84. - Light, Water and Transportation. 
    The City Council shall have the power to provide for the lighting of streets, avenues and public grounds and buildings, and to purchase, acquire or establish gas, electric and other lighting plants, and to furnish gas, heat and electricity to persons within or without the City limits on such terms as it may provide; to purchase, procure or establish water works and to provide water for the use and convenience of the inhabitants of the City or others, and to prescribe and fix the charges for the same and the manner in which the same shall be paid; and to provide for systems of public transportation within the City, and to regulate the operation thereof. The City Council shall also have the power to make contracts with individuals, firms or corporations for the use of street lighting and other purposes. Such contracts for water and electricity and gas to be made for such time as the City Council may deem for the best interests of the City. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 85. - Power to Maintain Buildings. 
    The City Council shall have power by a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the Council as a whole, to erect, provide for, improve, and repair a city hall, fire halls, police stations, armories, jail workhouse, hospitals, public cemeteries, libraries, public grounds, quarantine hospitals, and sewer stations and other appurtenances, accessories, apparatus, and equipment in connection therewith as may be necessary for the transaction of business of the City, either within or without its limits, for its government, or the operation of its department; and to acquire by purchase, gift or condemnation lands for sites for said buildings or to be used in connection therewith; and to acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, any real property for municipal purposes, and by resolution passed by a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the Council as a whole, to sell or authorize the sale of any of the same. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 86. - Depositing Funds and Auditing Accounts. 
    The City Council shall designate the depositories of the funds of the City Treasury, and by resolution approve all bonds given for the safekeeping thereof, and it shall examine and audit the accounts of all City officers. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 87. - Specific Powers. 
    The City Council, except as in this charter otherwise provided, shall have the general management and control of the finances and all property of the City, and shall have full power and authority to make, amend or repeal all such ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem expedient for the government and good order of the City, for the protection of the public and public health, comfort and safety, for the suppression of vice, intemperance, prevention of crime, and the general welfare of the City. It shall have power and authority to declare and impose penalties and punishments for violation of ordinance and resolutions, and to enforce the same against any person who may violate the same; and all such ordinances and resolutions, not inconsistent with the constitution and laws of this State, nor of the United States, are hereby declared to have full force of law. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 88. - Other Powers. 
    The City Council shall prescribe by ordinance all regulations proper and necessary to carry into effect any and all powers granted by this charter, and may provide by such ordinances for the punishment of the violation of any of the same by subjecting the offender to pay a fine not to exceed the fine penalty provisions for a misdemeanor as provided in state law, and pay the cost of such prosecution as in violation of a law of the State, or to be confined with fine and costs as sentenced by the Court in any place of confinement maintained by the City, or in case there is no such place, then to be confined in the county jail of Koochiching County, not to exceed the term of ninety (90) days, and may be cumulative or for an indefinite term, not to exceed the term of ninety (90) days subject to suspension or termination by reason of or during good behavior of the person so imprisoned. When a fine and costs have been imposed the offender, upon failure to pay the same may be likewise imprisoned until such fine and costs are paid not exceeding however, ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-32-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 89. - Appointment of Officers. 
    The appointment of any officer by the City Council shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members, taken by voice vote duly recorded by the City Administrator as to yeas, nayes, and abstentions. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 90. - Purchases and Letting of Contracts. 
    The City Council shall have power to let contracts for the erection, improvement and repair of any of the public works or buildings of the City, and for the performance of any work required to be done, and material to be furnished in carrying into execution its powers and operations of its departments. 
    The City Administrator shall be the chief purchasing agent of the city. All city purchases and contract shall be made according to State law. Contracts shall be made in compliance with uniform contracting law. The Council may by ordinance adopt further regulations for the making of bids and letting of contracts. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 91. - Contracts to Lowest Bidders. 
    The City Council shall let all such contracts to the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, who will enter into the contract and give security for the performance thereof and shall let no contracts to any party in default to the City in the performance or by reason of any other contract. The City Council shall sell all property, bonds and other evidence of indebtedness only to the highest bidder for cash therefore and shall not sell nor negotiate any such bond or evidence of indebtedness below its par value, the same being its face value and accrued interest. It shall designate as City depositories only such duly incorporated banks or trust companies in this State as shall furnish security required by law, and shall be satisfactory to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 92. - Bond of Contractors. 
    The City Council may require of every party entering into a contact with the City or any of its departments or accepting any license, immunity, privilege or franchise from or under the City pursuant to any power or authority herein vested, a bond to be approved by the City Council for the full and faithful performance of such contracts or the just and lawful exercise of the powers and privileges conferred, which bonds shall be sufficient in amount to indemnify the City against any loss or damage that may be sustained by a breach of contract, or any wrong committed in the exercise of such power or privilege. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 93. - Advertising for Proposals. 
    Every advertisement for proposal shall be made by publication in the official newspaper of the City, at least twice, of a notice containing a general description of the contract to be let or the property to be purchased or sold, or bond or other indebtedness to be negotiated, or funds to be deposited, or franchise to be granted, and shall invite sealed proposals therefore, which proposals shall be filed with the City Administrator at such time as shall be designated in said advertisement, not less than one (1) week, after the last publication. All proposals shall be opened and read by the City Administrator in the presence of the City Council before any of the same are acted on or accepted. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 94. - Designation of Official Papers. 
    The City Council shall biennially, at its organizational meeting or as soon thereafter as practicable, designate some newspaper printed in the English language, which is and shall have been printed, published and of general circulation in the City, for one (1) year prior to its designation as the official paper of the City, and shall let the contract for publishing the ordinances and proceedings of the council, and other public notices required by law to such newspaper, as other contracts are required to be let. The compensation paid for printing shall never exceed the amount allowed by law for legal advertising. Whenever in the City no newspaper is published any paper printed in the English language and published in Koochiching County may be designated as the official paper. 
    Provided that if each and all proposals shall fix a price in excess of the maximum, as herein provided, or if no proposal shall be received, then in either event the City Council may adopt such other methods for publication of ordinances, proceedings and other matters as it may determine, the compensation in no event to exceed the amount herein provided. 
Sec. 95. - Power to Enter Private Property. 
    The City Council may authorize the entry into any lands or tenements for the purpose of carrying into effect its inspection laws and may enter upon any land to lay any branch sewer or water main, or drain any marsh, or make any changes or erections in, upon or about any water course. 
(Ord. No. 24 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 96. - Vacation of Streets. 
    The City Council of said City shall have the sole and exclusive power to vacate or discontinue public grounds, streets, alleys and highways within said City. 
    No such vacation or discontinuance shall be granted or ordered by the City Council, except upon the petition of one or more residents and freeholders of said City; such petition shall set forth the facts and reasons for such vacation accompanied by a plat of such public grounds, streets, alleys, or highways proposed to be vacated, and it shall be verified by the oath of the petitioners. 
    The City Council, shall, thereupon, if they deem it expedient, that the matter be proceeded with, order the petition to be filed of record with the City Administrator, who shall give notice by publication in the official paper of the City for four (4) weeks, at least once a week, to the effect that such petition has been filed as aforesaid, and stating in brief its object and that said petition will be heard and considered by the City Council; or a committee appointed by them, on a certain day therein specified, not less than ten (10) days from the expiration of said publication. 
    The City Council or such committee as may be appointed by them, for the purpose, at the time and place appointed shall investigate and consider the said matter and shall hear the testimony and evidence on the part of the parties interested. 
    If, after having heard the testimony, and evidence, the City Council shall determine in favor of such vacation, it shall then appoint three disinterested freeholders of said City, no two of whom shall reside in the same ward, as commissioners to view the premises and to ascertain and award the amount of damages and compensation to be paid to the owner of property which may be injured by such vacation, and to assess the benefits which may accrue to the lands and property which may be benefited by such vacation, and in proportion to the benefits to be received. 
    Two of such commissioners shall constitute a quorum and be competent to perform any duty required of such commissioners. 
    They shall give notice by two publications in the office paper of said City that such survey and plat is on file in the office of the City Administrator for the examination of all persons interested, and that they will, on a day designated in such notice, which shall be at least ten days after the first publication of said notice, meet at a place designated in said notice on or near proposed improvement and view that portion of the street proposed to be vacated, and ascertain and award therefore the damages and compensation, and assess thereon the benefits actually accruing to such property as may be benefited by reason of such vacation; and that they will then and there hear such evidence and proof as interested parties may offer. 
    And such commissioners shall meet and view the premises pursuant to such notice and may adjourn from time to time, and after having viewed the premises, may for the hearing of evidence and preparation of their award assessment, adjourn, or go to any other convenient place in said City, and may have the aid and advice of the City Engineer and of any other office of the City. 
    After viewing the premises and hearing the evidence offered, such commissioners shall prepare and make a true and impartial appraisement and award of the compensation and damages to be paid to each person whose property may be injured by reason of such contemplated vacation. 
    In each case they shall award only the excess of the compensation and damages over and above such benefits. 
    The said commissioners shall then report to the City Council an assessment list containing the appraisement of such compensation and damages, or such charges thereon as shall not exceed the actual benefits to the property so assessed, which list shall contain a brief description of each tract or parcel of property so assessed, the name or names of the owners thereof, if known, the amount assessed, and of the excess of such compensation and damages as aforesaid which they shall return unassessed. 
    Such report shall lie over until the next regular meeting of the council, which shall occur at least one week from the reception thereof, at which time or at any other meeting the City Council may act on such report and hear any complaint touching such award or assessment, or it may refer the matter to a committee of the Council to hear such complaint and report thereon. 
    The Council may confirm such award and assessment, or either, or annul the same or send the same back to the same commission for further consideration, and the commissioners may, in such case, again, upon giving a like notice as herein provided, meet at a time and place to be designated in said notice, which shall be at least two (2) weeks after the publication of such notice, meet and hear any further evidence that may be adduced by interested parties and may adjourn from time to time, and may correct any mistakes in such award and assessment and alter and revise the same as they may deem just, and again report the same to the City Council, who may thereupon confirm or annul the same. 
    Whenever the City Council shall confirm any such award and assessment, such confirmation shall make such award and assessment final and conclusive upon all parties interested, except as herein provided, and the City Council shall proceed at the same or at any subsequent meeting to levy such assessment upon the several parcels of land described in the assessment list presented by the commissioners in accordance with the assessment so confirmed and cause to be made and adopted an assessment roll of the same, which may be in such form as the Council may adopt. 
    When damages are awarded to any person or persons, as provided in this section, in excess of benefits, the City Council shall order the same to be paid out of the city treasury on warrants to be drawn and attested by the City Administrator and signed by the Mayor; said warrants to be issued to the person or persons entitled thereto at the expiration of the time for appeal as hereinafter provided. 
    The City Council upon the confirmation of such award and assessment, and upon payment into the city treasury of such assessment, may, by an order passed by a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the Council as a whole, declare such public grounds, streets, alleys or highways vacated, and a transcript of such order, duly certified by the City Administrator, shall be filed for record and duly recorded in the office of the register of deeds for the County of Koochiching. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 97. - Appeal from Vacation. 
    Any person aggrieved by any such vacation or discontinuance, or by any such assessment of damages or benefits therefore as hereinbefore provided, shall have the right at any time within ten (10) days after the publication of the order vacating such street, alley or highway, to appeal to the district court of the County of Koochiching and from such confirmation of such assessment or from such order declaring such vacation. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Administrator, as soon as any such appeal is taken, to transmit to the proper court a certified copy of the record of all proceedings in the case. 
    Such appeal shall be entered and brought on for trial and be governed by the same rules in all respects as appeals from justice of the peace in civil actions, except that no pleadings shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 98. - Prohibiting Relief from Assessment, Etc. 
    The City Council shall not have the power to relieve any citizen from the payment of any lawful tax, assessment, fine or license, bond or security, nor to exempt that person from any burden imposed upon him by law or ordinance or to ordain the payment of any demand not authorized and audited according to law. The City Council shall not have power to ordain or authorize any compromise of any disputed demand arising under contracts, or any allowance therefore or therein, except as provided in the contract therefore. The City Council shall not have authority nor power to authorize or ordain the payment of any damages or claim for alleged injuries to persons or property except by resolution, adopted by a vote of three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the Council as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 99. - Compilation of Laws and Ordinance. 
    The City Council may from time to time provide for the compilation and publication, in book, pamphlet or electronic media, of this charter, the ordinances and regulations of the City, rules of the City Council, police rules, regulations adopted by the board of health, and such resolutions of the City Council, as it may designate; and may provide for the distribution by sale or otherwise of copies of such compilation and publication; and such book, pamphlet or electronic media so issued, purporting on the title page to have been published by authority of the City Council and to contain the ordinances of the City or other matter in this section above mentioned, shall be prima facie evidence of their contents in all courts of this state; and in absence of evidence to the contrary, all ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions found therein shall be presumed to have been duly legally passed, promulgated or adopted. Copies duly certified by the City Administrator of this City, of this charter, ordinances or rules, regulations or resolutions in writing or other papers in his official custody, or any records kept by him in his official capacity shall also be received as prima facie evidence of their contents in all courts of this state. The District Court of the County of Koochiching, shall take judicial notice of this charter and all ordinances duly passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 100. - Care of Streets. 
    The City Council shall have and maintain active care, supervision and control of all public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and grounds, as in this charter provided, and all other public improvements and public property within the limits of the City, and shall cause all streets which have been opened and graded under the authority of the City or with its assent, to be kept open and in repair and free from nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 101. - Not Liable for Injuries Caused by Railway Cars. 
    The City shall be exempt from all liability or damages caused by railroads either to person or property, when said railroads or engine or cars are passing along, across, under, over or upon any street, lane, alley or any public way within the limits of the City. 
Chapter VII - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 102. - Organization. 
    The Police department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other officers and employees as may from time to time be authorized by the City Council. The Chief of Police shall be supervised by the City Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 103. - Police Civil Service Commission. 
    A Police Civil Service Commission having been duly adopted by resolution of the City Charter for International Falls, on the 21st day of June, 1937, said Police Civil Service Commission not having been abolished in the manner provided by law, the powers and duties of the said Civil Service Commission in respect to the Police Department of the City shall be those enumerated in Chapter 419 Laws of the State of Minnesota, as amended. 
    In event the foregoing commission is abolished, in a manner provided by law, then such Chief of Police and all other officers and employees as may be authorized by the Council shall be appointed and may be removed by the Council of the City. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Chapter VIII - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 104. - Chief of the Fire Department. 
    There shall be a fire department in the City of International Falls. The head of said department shall be known as the "Fire Chief supervised by the City Administrator." 
(Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 105. - Fire Department Personnel. 
    The Fire Chief, Assistant Chief of the Fire Department, and all other personnel of said fire department are subject to employment, promotion, discharge, or suspension by the Firefigher's Civil Service Commission, all in accordance with M.S.A., Ch. 420. 
    The Firefigher's Civil Service Commission having been duly adopted by resolution of the City Council of International Falls on the 26th day of July, 1937, said Firefighter's Civil Service Commission not having been abolished in the manner provided by law, the powers and duties of the said Civil Service Commission, in respect to the fire department of the City, shall be those enumerated in Chapter 420, Laws of the State of Minnesota, as amended. 
    In the event the foregoing commission is abolished in a manner provided by law, then such Fire Chief and all other officers and personnel of the fire department and employees as may be authorized by the Council, shall be appointed and may be removed by the City Council, subject only to the limitations imposed by the Civil Service Law. 
(Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 106. - Powers and Duties of the Chief. 
    The Fire Chief, under the direction of the City Council, shall have the general superintendency of the fire department and the custody of all engines and engine house hooks, ladders, hose and other property used for the purposes of said department. The Fire Chief shall see that the same are kept in order, and that all rules and regulations and all ordinances and provisions of this Charter, relative to the Fire Department and to superintend the preservation of all property endangered by fire, and shall have control and direction, in case of fire, of all persons, organizations or associations engaged in preserving such property. 
    It shall be that persons duty to recommend additions and replacements of obsolete and inadequate equipment and to recommend towards its disposal. 
(Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 107. - Rules and Regulations. 
    The Fire Chief, with the approval of the City Council, is authorized and required to make all needful rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of the State, the provisions of this charter, or the ordinances of the City, for the government and control of the fire department, and for the prevention and extinguishment of fires. All rules and regulations made in pursuance thereof shall be in writing signed by the aforesaid officers, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator, and shall be binding upon all persons connected with said department. 
(Ord. No. 15, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Chapter IX - BOARD OF EQUALIZATION 

Sec. 108. - Board of Equalization. 
    The Board of Equalization shall consist of a City Administrator, Mayor and four (4) Councilors, who shall be sworn according to law as such board, and shall meet at the City Council chamber to review, and amend and equalize the property valuations, pursuant to the general laws of the State. The City Administrator shall keep the minutes of all Board proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01; Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. of 11-2-04, § 3) 
Sec. 109. - Powers of the Board. 
    Such board shall be vested with all the powers provided by State Law. 
Sec. 110. - Grievances. 
    Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any assessment may appear before such board personally or by counsel and present his grievance for consideration, and the said board shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, and examine any person as to any taxable property in said City. 
Chapter X - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 111. - Appointment. 
    At the time of the organization of the City Council after each regular municipal election thereof, or as soon thereafter as may be, the City Council may appoint a City Attorney, who shall be a person learned in the law and duly admitted to practice in courts of record in this State, and who shall serve for the term of two years and until his/her successor is appointed and qualified, unless removed for cause as in this charter provided. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 112. - Duties. 
    The City Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the City and shall perform all the services incident to the office, and shall appear in and conduct all civil suits, prosecutions and proceedings in which the City shall be directly or indirectly interested, except as otherwise provided in this charter, and, when necessary, take charge of and conduct all prosecutions for violation of the City ordinances, and perform all such other duties as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 113. - Opinions. 
    The City Attorney shall, when so required, furnish opinions, in writing or otherwise as requested, upon any subject submitted to him/her by the City Council or any of the committees or boards thereof. The City Attorney shall advise the City Council and all city officers in respect to their official duties. No board, department or officer of the City shall have or employ any other attorney in connection with their official business. 
    The City Council in case of necessity may upon three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote of the Council as a whole employ additional legal counsel to assist in trial of specific cases. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 114. - Appeals. 
    The City Attorney, unless otherwise ordered by the City Council, shall have the right to decide whether or not, in any case in which the City is a party in any court, to take an appeal from any order, judgment or determination of the court. The City Attorney shall notify the City Council of the result of all actions in which the City is a party, or in which it is interested. When from absence, sickness or other cause, the city attorney shall be unable to attend to any of his/her official duties the City Attorney may appoint someone to act in his/her place for the time being, but at his/her own expense. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Chapter XI - CITY ENGINEER-DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 115. - Appointment. 
    There shall be established a department of public works, buildings and structures, which shall be in charge of a civil engineer to be known as "City Engineer", who shall be retained or hired by the City Council. Said City Engineer through the heads of the departments described in this chapter shall have charge and control of the streets, alleys, highways, and parks of the City, all work done thereon and construction thereof, as well as the construction, maintenance and operation of all the public lighting, sewer and water systems of the City. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 116. - Heads of Departments. 
    The City Council may hire a Street Commissioner, Water Commissioner, and such other officers as the City Council may deem necessary. Persons hired to such offices or any combination thereof, shall be the heads of the departments to which they are assigned, but shall be responsible to the City Engineer, and shall perform such duties as he/she may assign to them. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 117. - Surveys, etc. 
    All surveys, profiles, plans and estimates made by the Department of Public Works shall be carefully preserved in a fireproof vault in the office of the City Administrator, and shall be public records of the City. 
Chapter XII - BOARD OF HEALTH 

Sec. 118. - Appointments.-Qualifications. 
    The Board of Health shall consist of three members, one of whom shall be a physician, duly licensed to practice medicine within the State of Minnesota, of good standing in his/her profession and who shall have been in active practice for at least three years. He/she shall be styled, "Health Officer." 
    Each member of said board shall be appointed for the term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 119. - General Powers, Duties. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the members of said board shall have and exercise all the authority and power and shall perform all the duties granted to or imposed upon local boards of health by the general laws of the State of Minnesota; and all such laws of said state governing such local boards shall, so far as applicable, apply and be in force in this City. 
Sec. 120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 24, 4th series, effective September 29, 2006, repealed § 120, which pertained to special powers and duties. 
Sec. 121. - Professional Advice. 
    The health officer shall give to the Mayor or other city authorities all such professional advice and information as they may require, with a view to the preservation of public health; and whenever he shall hear of the existence of any malignant, contagious or pestilential disease, he shall investigate the same and adopt measures to arrest its progress. 
Sec. 122. - To Make a Circuit of Observation. 
    It shall be the duty of the health officer to make a circuit of observation of every part of the City and environs, from time to time, and in all cases wherein he may discover the existence of any agent, the presence of which will prove dangerous to the health of the City, and there is no ordinance competent for the correction of the evil, he shall immediately report the same to the City Council, accompanied by his written opinion of the necessity of extraordinary or particular action. 
Sec. 123. - Books for Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the health officer to provide, at the expense of the City, the necessary books for keeping a record of all transaction of the Health Department, and such other statistical information necessary for such official work of said department. 
Chapter XIII - PUBLIC LIBRARY 

Sec. 124. - Generally. 
    It is hereby declared to be the responsibility of the City of International Falls to promote the development of the Public Library and to provide for its support as provided by State Law. 
Chapter XIV - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 125. - Sewage disposal plants and storm sewers. 
    All storm sewers, sewers, streets, and other improvements may be assessed in accordance with State Law. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04; Ord. No. 17, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Chapter XV - MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 126. - Civil Action to be Brought in Name of City. 
    All civil actions to recover any penalty or forfeiture under this charter or under any ordinance or regulations passed in pursuant thereof, or for any other authorized purpose, and all prosecutions for the violation of any penal provisions in this charter or of any ordinance or regulation adopted in pursuance of this charter, shall be brought in the corporation name of the City. 
Sec. 127. - Judgments-How Discharged. 
    No judgment in favor of the City in either a civil or criminal action shall be remitted or discharged, except by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of the Council as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 128. - Mayor and City Administrator to Sign all Documents. 
    All deeds, leases or other conveyances, of other written transfers of property made, and all written contracts entered into by the City, and all bonds and other evidences of debt issued by the City, shall, on behalf of the City, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 129. - Process to be Served on Mayor. 
    Service of process and writs in any action or other judicial proceedings against the City, may be made upon the Mayor, and upon such service being made the Mayor shall immediately inform the City Council thereof, and shall take such other steps in relation to the action or proceedings in which such process or writs were issued, as may be required by ordinance in such case provided, or by resolution of the City Council. 
Sec. 130. - Failure to Hold Election. 
    Any failure to hold any election in the City at the time or in the manner in this charter prescribed or any failure on the part of the City Council or of any City Officer or Officer to perform any duty prescribed by this charter at the time when or in the manner in which it should be performed shall not operate to dissolve or suspend the City as a municipal or corporate rights, powers or privileges, but such election may be held or such duty may be performed at a subsequent time with full force and effect. 
Sec. 131. - Approval of Plats. 
    Whenever any plat of any parcel of land within the limits of the City, showing divisions and subdivisions of such parcel into lots, blocks and streets, shall be submitted to the City Council for approval pursuant to the provisions of M.S.A. Ch. 505, with intention to dedicate such streets to public use, such plat shall be accompanied with a delineation of a sufficient part of other platted portions of the City to indicate how the streets marked on such plat correspond and connect with streets already in use in the City; and the Council may require such alterations to be made in the streets as shown on the plat so presented as in its opinion are necessary to preserve uniformity and regularity in the public streets of the City, and may withhold approval of the plat presented until such alterations shall be made; and should any lot or block outlined in such plat be sold or offered for sale as such lot or block before such alterations are made or before approval of the plat by the Council, the person selling or offering the same for sale shall be liable to the penalty prescribed by Laws of Minnesota. 
Sec. 132. - City Engineer to File Plat, etc. 
    When any public street, road or alley, or part thereof, or any public park grounds shall be laid out and opened in the City pursuant to the provisions of this charter, or shall be dedicated to public use by deed, the City Engineer shall make and file an accurate plat thereof in the office of the County Recorder of Koochiching County, and the same shall be there recorded. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 133. - Obstructions in Street or Alley. 
    If any person or company shall place and leave any unauthorized obstruction, or make unauthorized excavation in any street, road or alley in the city, or leave such obstruction or excavation unguarded when authorized, such person or company shall be liable to any person who may be personally injured or whose property may be injured or destroyed without his fault by means of such obstruction or excavation; and in case any damage shall be recovered in any action against the City for injuries caused by such obstruction or excavation; the City shall have the right to recover the amount of such damages in turn from the personnel or company placing such obstruction or making such excavation; provided that upon the commencement of such action against the City, notice thereof shall be immediately given in writing to such person or company so liable, with a statement that the City will look to such person or company to pay the amount of any judgment against the City which may be recovered in such action; and an opportunity given to such person or company to defend such action; and such person or company may upon his or its own application, or upon the application of the City, be made a party defendant to such action, in which case, if judgment be recovered against the defendant, execution thereon shall be first issued against such person or company only, and the City shall not be required to pay such judgment until such execution shall be returned unsatisfied. 
Sec. 134. - Uniform System of Bookkeeping. 
    The City Council may by ordinance adopt and establish a uniform system of bookkeeping for all departments of the City Government pertaining to the finances of the City, and prescribe the form to be used therefore, and when so established it shall be used in, and adopted by, all department and boards of the City Government; and the annual estimates of the City Administrator required by Section 49 of Chapter 5 of this charter on the subject of finances shall be made to conform thereto. 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 135. - Laws to Remain in Force. 
    All provisions of law not in force and which are also contained in this charter shall be regarded as being continued in force, and all provisions of law not in force which are changed, modified or amended shall be regarded as continued in force as so changed, modified or amended. 
Sec. 136. - Procedure Governed by General Law. 
    All matters of procedures, including election procedure, not provided for in this charter or in the particular laws referred to and specifically excepted from repeal by this charter and thus made a part of this charter, shall be governed by the General Laws of the State of Minnesota applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 24, 4th series, eff. 9-29-06) 
Sec. 137. - Fourth of July. 
    That the City Council is hereby authorized to appropriate an annual sum to be set by resolution for the purpose of celebrating the Fourth of July. 
Sec. 138. - Oath of Office. 
    Every elected or appointed officer of the city shall before entering upon the duties of his/her office take and subscribe to an oath of office and file the same with the City Administrator in substantially the following form: 
    "I, _______, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Minnesota, and faithfully and to the best of my ability discharge the duties of _______, in and for the City of International Falls during my continuance in office." 
(Ord. No. 28, 3rd series, eff. 2-17-01) 
Sec. 139. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14, 4th series, effective July 31, 2004, repealed § 139, which pertained to transitory provision. 
Sec. 140. - Succession of Rights of Liabilities. 
    The City of International Falls is vested with all the rights and immunities formerly vested in the City of International Falls and South International Falls, and is subject to all liabilities existing against the Cities at that time (any tax levy, assessment, condemnation, or other municipal action in progress when this charter takes effect shall be continued and completed under the laws under which such proceedings were begun) and all ordinances, resolutions, and regulations in force shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 14, 4th series, eff. 7-31-04) 
Sec. 141. - Word Construction. 
    Whenever used in this Charter, the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular unless the context otherwise requires, and the masculine shall include the feminine, and the feminine the masculine. 
Sec. 142. - [Dedication of City Beach to the Public.] 
    City Beach, the parcel which is legally described as follows: 
Lot 26, Auditor's Plat 3 and Lots 45 and 46, Plat of Brennan's Beach all in Section 30, Township 71 North, Range 23 West 
is hereby dedicated to the public in perpetuity under the trusteeship of the City of International Falls. This dedication shall not be assigned nor modified. 
(Ord. No. 2, 5th series, § 1, eff. 11-8-07) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the Home Rule Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Effective Date Section 
this Charter 1.19 10- 9-73 71 1.20 10-09-73 128 1.21 12-26-73 3 1.22 09-23-74 142 1.24 05-09-77 6 3.07 12-31-69 Chs. II, X and XII 20, 2nd series 07-26-82 13 57, 2nd series 04-03-89 74 79 125 7 1, 3rd series 12-25-91 3 28, 3rd Series  2-17-01 2 6 7 12 13 20 22 25 26 27 31 32 34 35 36 37 38 41 44 46 47 54 57 58 60 61 65 71 72 89 90 93 96 97 99 108 128 134 138 14, 4th series  6-28-04  7-31-04 2 3 5 6 7 13 19 20 22 23 24 25 26 27 28       Rpld 36 45 47 51 52 55       Rpld 56       Rpld 57 58 72 76 78 80 81 84 85 87 88 89 99 100 102 103 108 115 125 132       Rpld 139 140 15, 4th series  6-28-04  7-31-04 28 102 103 104 105 106 107 11- 2-04 7 13 108 17, 4th series  6-28-04  7-31-04 125 24, 4th series  8- 1-06  9-29-06 7 8 28-30 31 34, 35 37-44 51 61 63 74 75 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 88 91 92 95 96 98 104-107 106 111-114 115 116 118       Rpld 120 127 136 2, 5th series  8-10-07 11- 8-07       Added 142 9, 5th series  2-11-13 71  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ENTIRE CITY CODE INCLUDING PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 

Sec. 1-1. - Application. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all the chapters, sections, subdivisions, paragraphs and provisions in the City Code, and the City Code shall apply to all persons and property within the City of International Falls, Minnesota, and within such adjacent area as may be stated in specific provisions. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of every chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph and provision of this City Code, shall have the following meanings and inclusions: 
    Administrator means the person duly appointed and acting in such capacity. 
    City means the City of International Falls, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly authorized representative. 
    Conviction means either of the following accepted and recorded by the court: 
(1)  A plea of guilty; or 
(2)  A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of guilty by the court. 
    Council and city council means the City Council of the City of International Falls, Minnesota. 
    Crime means conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the actor may be sentenced to imprisonment or fine. 
    Ex officio member means a person who is not counted for the purpose of determining a quorum, and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and obligation (within his discretion) to speak to any question coming before the board, commission or other deliberative body of which he is such member. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb line or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
    May is permissive. 
    Misdemeanor means the crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both, may be imposed. 
    Ordinance means an ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of International Falls, Minnesota. 
    Person includes all firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and natural persons. 
    Petty misdemeanor means an offense, which does not constitute a crime, and for which a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.00 may be imposed. 
    Police officer and peace officer means every officer, including special police, authorized to direct or regulate traffic, keep the peace, and appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement. 
    Premises means any lot, piece or parcel of land within a continuous boundary whether publicly or privately owned, occupied or possessed. 
    Private property means all property not included within the definition of public property or public place. 
    Public property and public place means any place, property or premises dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by the city as a lessee, or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an easement, including, but not limited to, streets, parks, parking lots so owned or occupied, or any other place, property or premises open to the public use, or to which the public is invited. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Shall is mandatory. 
    Street means the entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies. 
    Violate includes failure to comply with. 
    Written and in writing means any mode of representing words and letters in the English language. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 21, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82; Code of 1991) 
Sec. 1-3. - Violation a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this City Code when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, or as for a petty misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions herein, as set forth in the specific chapter in which the section, subdivision, paragraph or provision violated appears. Upon conviction for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged if it is a misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor as an included offense necessarily proved if the misdemeanor charge were proved. 
Sec. 1-4. - Otherwise unlawful. 
    The City Code does not authorize an act or omission otherwise prohibited by law. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability. 
    Every chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of the City Code shall be, and is hereby declared, severable from every other such chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision and if any part or portion of any of them shall be held invalid, it shall not affect or invalidate any other chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision. 
Sec. 1-6. - Payment into city treasury of fines and penalties. 
    All fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any ordinance, charter, rule or regulation of the city shall be paid into the city treasury by the court or officer thereof receiving such monies. Payment shall be made in the manner, at the time, and in the proportion provided by law. 
Sec. 1-7. - Meanings. 
    As used in this City Code, words of the male gender shall include the female and neuter, and the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. 
Sec. 1-8. - Citation. 
    This codification of the ordinances of the City of International Falls shall henceforth be known as the City Code and cited thus: "City Code, § _______." 
Sec. 1-9. - Penalties for each offense. 
    When a penalty or forfeiture is provided for the violation of a chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this City Code, such penalty or forfeiture shall be construed to be for each such violation. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 1-10. - Administrative offense enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Purpose of administrative offense procedures. Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this Section are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of certain ordinance provisions. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures in which event the city may bring criminal charges in accordance with the law. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance. In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city will seek to collect the costs of the administrative offense procedures as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation. 
(b)  Certain Minnesota Statutes adopted. Minnesota Statute Sections 152.027 subd. 3, Small Amount of Marijuana in a Motor Vehicle; 152.027 subd. 4, Small Amount of Marijuana; and 152.092, Drug Paraphernalia, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of these sections shall be marked City of International Falls - Official Copy and kept on file in the office of the city administrator and the same number at the law enforcement center to be open for inspection and use by the public. These statutes as part of this Code are enforced as administrative offenses. 
(c)  Administrative offense defined. An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of this Code and is subject to administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties passed by a resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Notice. Any officer of the International Falls Police Department or any other person employed by the city, and having authority to enforce this Code, shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator, or in case of a vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. Said notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty. 
(e)  Payment. Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within 15 days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request that the matter be referred to the Koochiching County District Court in writing, as is provided for hereafter. The penalty may be paid in person or by mail and the payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation. 
(f)  Referral to Koochiching County District Court. Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this chapter may, within 15 days of issuance of the notice, request that the matter be referred to the Koochiching County District Court to be processed through the usual rules of criminal court. 
(g)  Failure to pay. In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes. 
(h)  Disposition of penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the city treasurer and may be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(i)  Offenses and penalties. Offenses, which may be charged as administrative offenses and the penalties for such offenses, may be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. Copies of such resolutions shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator. 
(j)  Subsequent offenses. In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense within a 12-month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by 25 percent above the previous administrative penalty except as otherwise stated in the fine schedule or by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 20, 4th series, eff. 3-31-05) 
Secs. 1-11-1-99. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 2-1. - Authority and purpose. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by Charter, this chapter of the City Code is enacted so as to set down for enforcement the government and good order of the city by and through the council. 
Sec. 2-2. - Council procedure at regular meetings. 
    The city council shall from time to time establish procedures that outline the order of business at regular meetings and the procedures for placing and removing various items from the regular meeting agenda. Said procedures shall be adopted by resolution approved by a simple majority of the full city council. 
(Ord. No. 13, 5th series, §§ 2, 3, 11-22-14) 
Sec. 2-3. - Right to administrative appeal. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the city administrator or any other city official, or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the council upon serving a written request therefor upon the mayor and city administrator at least five days prior to any regular council meeting. Such request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At such hearing the appellant may present any evidence he deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The mayor, or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on his own motion or the motion of the appellant or a member of the council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening. 
Sec. 2-4. - Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings. 
    The council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before the council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine questions therein presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective 30 days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings. 
Sec. 2-5. - Disbursement of funds and allowance of accounts. 
    All disbursements shall be made by order signed by the mayor and the city administrator, or his designee, duly authorized by the council, and every such order shall specify the purpose for which the disbursement is made, and indicate that it is to be paid out of the proper fund. But no such order shall be paid until there is money to the credit of the fund out of which it is to be paid sufficient to pay the same together with all then outstanding encumbrances upon such fund. All accounts, claims or demands shall be audited and allowed by resolution of a majority of the whole council before payment. Where an account, claim or demand against the city for any property or services can be itemized in the ordinary course of business the council shall not audit or allow the claim until the person claiming payment, or his agent, reduces it to writing, in items and signs a declaration in the form provided by statute to the effect that such account, claim, or demand is just and correct and that no part of it has been paid. Provided, that prior authorization shall not be required in classes or categories of disbursements previously authorized by the council for payment by check or order-check bearing the wording which operates as such declaration, as provided by statute. Provided, further, that this section shall not apply to an annual salary for wages of any employee whose salary or wages have been fixed on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis by the council. 
Sec. 2-6. - City administrator's petty cash fund. 
    A fund known as the city administrator's petty cash fund is established for the purpose of payment of such items as freight, postage and other similar items in cash. The fund shall be maintained by the city administrator and all disbursements shall be made by order signed by the mayor and the city administrator without prior authorization of the council, provided, however, that a verified account of such disbursements shall be presented to the council for approval at the next regular meeting. The council may transfer money to the petty cash fund from the general fund as it may, from time to time, deem necessary. 
Sec. 2-7. - Facsimile signatures. 
    The mayor and city administrator are hereby authorized to request a depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when such instrument bears a facsimile of his signature, and to charge the same to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were his manually written signature. Such authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time and effort. 
Sec. 2-8. - Interim emergency succession. 
(a)  Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring the declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to insure the continuity of duly elected and lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices. 
(b)  Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the mayor, council and city administrator shall be forthwith notified by any one of said persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the event that safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a chair and secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively. 
(2)  They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done, or the imminence thereof. 
(3)  They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency. 
(4)  By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions on the council, (including the office of mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who are unable to be present. 
(5)  Such interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again available and returns to his position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first. 
(c)  Duties of the interim emergency council. The interim emergency council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices, and appoint other key government officials to serve during the emergency. 
Sec. 2-9. - Salaries of mayor and councilor. 
(a)  The monthly salary of the mayor shall be $350.00. 
(b)  The monthly salary of each councilor shall be $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 24, 3rd series, eff. 1-1-99) 
Sec. 2-10. - Mayor and councilors contingent funds. 
(a)  The contingent fund for the mayor shall be $700.00 per year and $500.00 per year for each councilor. 
(b)  All further increases or decreases in the amount of contingent funds for mayor and councilors shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
Sec. 2-11. - Worker's compensation. 
    All officers of the city elected or appointed for a regular term of office or to complete the unexpired portion of any such regular term shall be included in the definition of "employee" as defined in Minnesota Statutes relating to coverage for purposes of worker's compensation entitlement. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 2-12-2-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-20. - Legal department. 
    A legal department is hereby established. The council shall appoint a city attorney, who shall be head of the legal department, together with such assistants as may be necessary who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city attorney shall perform such duties as are required of him by law or referred to him by the council. It shall be the official duty of the city attorney to act as "revisor of ordinances". If there is no regularly appointed and acting assistant city attorney and it becomes necessary due to absence, sickness or other cause for the city attorney to not act, the city attorney may appoint someone to act in his place at his own expense. 
Sec. 2-21. - Building official. 
    A building official, if hired, shall work under the supervision of the city administrator. It shall be the duty and power of the building inspector to carry out the provisions of the State Building Code and the ordinances of the city relating to construction. The building inspector shall submit a periodic report to the council covering the work of his department for intervals required by the council. 
(Ord. No. 6, 4th series, eff. 3-10-03) 
Sec. 2-22. - Ambulance service. 
(a)  Establishment. An ambulance service, under the supervision of the mayor and operated by personnel of the fire department, is hereby established for the purpose of providing transportation for the sick and injured. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The council shall establish written rules and regulations for the use and operation of such service, and shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of fees and charges for the use of such service, together with compensation of the ambulance driver and such assistants as may be necessary. 
(c)  Ambulance fund. All receipts from the operation of the ambulance service shall be placed in the ambulance fund by the city administrator, and used for the operation and maintenance of the Service, including repairs and replacement of equipment. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 2-23-2-29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-30. - Boards and commissions generally. 
    All board and commission appointments authorized by ordinance or resolution shall be made by the mayor and confirmed by the council at the first regular meeting in January after each election year. The term of each appointee shall be established and stated at the time of his appointment, and terms of present board and commission members may be re-established and changed so as to give effect to this section. Provided, however, that all appointees to boards and commissions shall hold office until their successor is appointed and qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment shall be only for the unexpired term. No appointed board or commission member shall be an employee of the city except those who are members by virtue of their office. All appointed board and commission members shall serve without remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their duties when such expenses have been authorized by the council before they were incurred. The chair and secretary shall be chosen from and by the board or commission membership annually to serve for one year, provided that no chair shall be elected who has not completed at least one year as a member of the board or commission. Any board or commission member may be removed by the council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and his position filled as any other vacancy. Each board and commission shall hold its regular meetings at a time established and approved by the council. All members shall be residents of the city, except that one member of each board or commission may be a resident of Koochiching County and nonresident of the city, if the council deems such arrangement more representative. The mayor and city administrator shall be ex officio members of all boards and commissions; provided, that if they are unable to attend a meeting or act in the capacity of such membership, they may be represented by an assistant or some person duly authorized by them. Except as otherwise provided, this section shall apply to all boards and commissions. 
Sec. 2-31. - Board of health. 
    The board of health, as provided by Charter, shall be composed of the health officer, the chief of the police department and the chief of the fire department. The health officer shall be appointed annually by the council and shall be a person duly licensed to practice medicine in the State of Minnesota. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 2-32. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Creation and membership. A zoning board of appeals consisting of five members of which at least one member shall be a concurrent member of the planning commission (selected by majority vote of the planning commission) shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council to serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years; the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term of five years. The zoning board shall appoint a chair from among the members of the zoning board of appeals. The chair, or in his absence, the acting chair, may direct testimony and compel the attendance of witnesses. The council shall have the power to remove any member of said board for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon the zoning board of appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. 
(b)  Meetings. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chair or at the request of the majority of the members of said board and shall be open to the public. The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. All testimony at any hearing of the zoning board of appeals shall be administered by the chair or in his absence, the acting chair. The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure not inconsistent with the statutes of the State of Minnesota or with the zoning provisions of the City Code. Written notice must be mailed at least ten days before a hearing on a variance to each owner of property situated wholly or partly within 200 feet of the affected property requesting the variance. 
(c)  Findings and conclusions. Every decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be accompanied by findings of fact and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans and specifications for any proposed variance, which such plans and specifications shall remain a part of the permanent records of the zoning board of appeals. The findings of fact shall specify the reason or reasons for the zoning board of appeals' decision, which shall be final subject to appeal recourse to the council which may affirm, modify or reverse any finding, and to judicial review in cases where the decision of the board and the council are contested by the applicant. The terms of any relief granted shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board of appeals shall be filed immediately with the council and shall be a public record. 
(d)  Quorum. No hearings shall be conducted by the zoning board of appeals without a quorum consisting of the majority of all members, being present. The concurring vote of three members shall be necessary to any appeal action decided by the zoning board of appeals, and a concurring vote of four members for any action approving a variance to the provisions of the zoning chapter. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 17, 2nd series, eff. 11-28-81) 
Sec. 2-33. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Creation and membership. A planning commission consisting of nine members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council, to serve respectively for the following terms: three for one year, three for two years, three for three years; the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term of three years. The planning commission shall appoint a chair from among the members of the planning commission. The council shall have the power to remove any member of said commission for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. 
(b)  Meetings. All meetings of the planning commission shall be held at the call of the chair or at the request of a majority of the members of said commission. All hearings conducted by the planning commission shall be open to the public. The planning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case and the reasons for recommending or denying shall be specified. Every requirement, decision, or determination of the planning commission shall be filed immediately with the council and shall be a public record. The planning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure not inconsistent with the statutes of the State of Minnesota or with the Zoning Chapter of the City Code. 
(c)  Quorum. No hearing shall be conducted by the planning commission without a quorum, consisting of the majority of all the members, being present. The concurring vote of the majority of the members voting shall be necessary to any action by the planning commission. 
(d)  Jurisdiction and duties. The planning commission shall have the following jurisdiction and duties: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the council a comprehensive plan for development of the city. The plan shall include reasonable requirements for streets, public grounds, and other public facilities and for the use of land within the corporate limits. 
(2)  To recommend to the council changes to the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  To prepare and recommend to the council plans for specific improvements pursuant to the comprehensive plan and to aid the council in the development and completion of such projects. 
(4)  To hear, review and offer recommendations to the council on applications for conditional uses, and planned unit development under the Zoning Chapter. 
(5)  To initiate procedures for changes and amendments (district rezonings and text) to the Zoning Chapter and to hold the required public hearing, and review and recommend appropriate action to the council in the manner specified in the Zoning Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79) 
Secs. 2-34-2-49. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-50. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
    The council may by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth the rights, duties and responsibilities of employees. Such rules may from time to time be amended. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 2-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4, 5th Series, § 1, adopted July 7, 2008, repealed § 2-51, which pertained to residency requirements for city employees. For a more detailed analysis of the repeal, see also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 2-52. - Residency requirements for certain city employees where job-related necessity. 
    Due to the particular duties, responsibilities, and liabilities of certain jobs of employees specific reasonable residency requirements are hereby established: 
    All street, water, and sewer department personnel and the city attorney shall reside within a 15 minute response area of their respective work headquarters in the City of International Falls, Minnesota. All firefighters and ambulance attendants shall reside within an eight minute response area. Ambulance attendants serving in a temporary (casual) work capacity shall be allowed to work scheduled shifts and be exempt from the residency requirement. 
a.  Response area: Is that amount of time that it takes for the employee's or appointee's supervisor to travel in accordance with the speed limit and traffic laws from the residence to the work headquarters. 
b.  Work headquarters: Is the place where each employee or appointee normally appears for work at the beginning of each workday, or the fire station in the municipal building for firefighters and ambulance attendants. 
(Ord. No. 4, 5th series, § 2, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 19, 5th series, §§ 2, 3, 12-10-16; Ord. No. 27, 5th series, § 1, 9-22-18) 
Secs. 2-53-2-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-60. - Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, unclaimed property and excess property. 
(a)  Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  The term "abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle as defined in M.S.A. Ch. 169, that has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the person in control of such property, or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial possible further use consistent with its function unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to the city. A classic car or pioneer car shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance with the City Code, shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this section. 
b.  The term "vital component parts" means those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels. 
(2)  Custody. The city shall take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle. 
(3)  Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate current valid in Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction, and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation, or title provision of this subsection. 
(4)  Notice. 
a.  When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section, the city shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if such information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under subsection (a)(6) of this subsection, and shall state that failure of the owner or lien holder to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction pursuant to subsection (a)(6) of this subsection. 
b.  The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy. 
(5)  Right to reclaim. 
a.  The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by this subsection. 
b.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of the lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this subsection (a)(5) "garage keeper" is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles. 
(6)  Public sale. 
a.  An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not reclaimed under subsection (a)(5) of this section shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale, following one published notice published at least seven days prior to such auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check. 
b.  From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this subsection. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(7)  Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in accordance with this subsection. 
(8)  Contracts and disposal. 
a.  The city may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal. 
b.  Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the agency shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the agency's plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the agency. Where a contract has been approved, the agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the contract which have not been reimbursed. 
c.  If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein provided. 
(b)  Disposal of unclaimed property. 
(1)  Definition. The term "abandoned property" means tangible or intangible property that has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been declared such by a resolution of the council. 
(2)  Preliminary notice. If the city administrator knows the identity and whereabouts of the owner, he shall serve written notice upon him at least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are known by the city administrator notice shall also be served upon him. Such notice shall describe the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the council after the expiration of 30 days from the date of such notice. 
(3)  Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned property, the city administrator shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a brief description of such property. The text of such notice shall also state the time, place and manner of sale of all such property, except cash and negotiables. Such notice shall be published once at least three weeks prior to sale. Sale shall be made to the highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the council in its resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice. 
(4)  Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former owner, if he makes claim within eight months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefor, less a pro-rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest. Such payment shall be also made from the general fund. 
(c)  Disposal of excess property. 
(1)  Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The city administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the council that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the council, said property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the city administrator authorized to dispose of said property in the manner stated herein. 
(2)  Surplus property with a total estimated value of less than $100.00. The city administrator may sell surplus property with a total value of less than $100.00 through negotiated sale. 
(3)  Surplus property with a total estimated value between $100.00 and $500.00. The city administrator shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from $100.00 to $500.00. Notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale either by publication once in the official newspaper, or by posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall at the city administrator's option. Such sale shall be by auction. 
(4)  Surplus property with a total estimated value over $500.00. The city administrator shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value over $500.00. Notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper. Such sale shall be to the person submitting the highest sealed bid. 
(5)  Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of surplus property under this section shall be placed in the general fund. 
(d)  Persons who may not purchase-Exception. 
(1)  No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a member of the council, or an advisor serving the city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of property under this section. Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least one week's published or posted notice of sale is given. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this section if such purchase is prohibited by the terms of this section. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 2-61-2-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-70. - Franchises. 
(a)  Definition. The term "franchise" as used in this section shall be construed to mean any special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon, or under any of the streets or public places of the city, whether such privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the State of Minnesota, or shall hereafter be granted by the city or by the State of Minnesota. 
(b)  Franchise ordinances. The council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with the public's right in such places, or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city or its inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas, or any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places. 
(c)  Power of regulation reserved. The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person, of any franchise however acquired, and whether such franchise has been heretofore granted by it or by the State of Minnesota. 
(d)  Conditions in every franchise. All conditions specified in this section shall be a part of every franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise: 
(1)  That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the terms of this section and will comply with all pertinent provisions of any City Charter and City Code, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(2)  That the grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that such fares, rates, and charges shall at all times be just, fair and reasonable for the services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed, unless regulated by an agency of the State of Minnesota, in the manner following: 
a.  A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management, normally yield above all operating expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested. 
b.  If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by direct negotiation with the council. 
c.  If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the council may, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative, the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the two of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three of them shall constitute a board of arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon as possible and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties. 
(3)  That the council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public. 
(4)  That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its value. 
(5)  That no sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder. 
(6)  That every grant in said franchise contained of permission for the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the streets or other public places of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the council shall have the power to require such alterations therein, or relocation or re-routing thereof, as the council may at any time deem necessary for the safety, health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever purpose used. 
(7)  Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute. 
(8)  That the franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the city fees to raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of utility operation, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in the city. 
(e)  Further provisions of franchises. The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension thereof such other and further conditions and restrictions as the council may deem proper to protect the city's interests, nor shall anything contained in this section limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing franchises. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 2-71. - Data practice. 
(a)  The council hereby appoints the city administrator as the responsible authority for the purposes of meeting all requirements of the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act, M.S.A. §§ 15.1611-15.1698, as amended. (Note: An individual must be appointed rather than designating this duty to an office. If a different person is appointed later as the responsible authority, this portion of this section must be amended to indicate the name of the new responsible authority). 
(b)  The responsible authority may designate a city employee or employees to assist in the administration and enforcement of the duties of the responsible authority and to be in charge of individual files or systems containing government data and to receive and comply with requests for government data. If a responsible authority appoints a designee or designees, this appointment must be in writing, and the council shall be provided with a copy of the appointment. If designees are appointed, the responsible authority shall instruct the designees in the requirements of administering and enforcing the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act. (Note: This is permitted under M.S.A. § 15.1621, Subd. 2.) 
(c)  The duties of the responsible authority and designees are as follows: 
(1)  The responsible authority shall keep records containing government data in such an arrangement and condition as to make them easily accessible for convenient use by the public. Photographic, photostatic, microphotographic, or microfilmed records shall be considered as accessible for convenient use regardless of the size of these records. 
(2)  The responsible authority shall establish procedures to insure that requests for government data are received and complied with in an appropriate and prompt manner. 
(3)  The responsible authority or designee shall, upon request by any person, permit that person to inspect and copy government data during the normal business hours of the city and at places provided by the responsible authority, and if the person requests, that person shall be informed of the data's meaning. The responsible authority or designee shall provide copies of government data upon request. The responsible authority or designee shall require the requesting person to pay the actual cost of making, certifying and compiling the papers. If the responsible authority or designee is not able to provide copies at the time a request is made, the responsible authority or designee shall supply copies as soon as reasonably possible. If the responsible authority or designee determines that the requested government data is classified so as to deny the requesting person access, the responsible authority or designee shall so inform the requesting person orally at the time of the request, and in writing as soon thereafter as possible, and shall cite the statute, temporary classification, or Federal law upon which the determination is made. 
(4)  The responsible authority shall prepare a public document containing his name, title and address, and a description of each type of record, file, or process relating to private or confidential data on individuals retained by the city. Forms used to collect private and confidential data shall be included in this document. The responsible authority shall update the public document annually and make any changes necessary to maintain the accuracy of the document. 
(5)  The responsible authority shall establish procedures to assure that all data on individuals is accurate, complete, and current for the purposes for which it was collected; and establish appropriate security safeguards for all records containing data on individuals. 
(6)  The responsible authority or designee shall prepare summary data from private or confidential data on individuals upon the request of any person, provided that the request is in writing and the cost of preparing the summary data is borne by the requesting person. The responsible authority may delegate the power to prepare summary data to the administrative officer responsible for any central repository of summary data; or to a person outside of the city if the person, in writing, sets forth his purpose and agrees not to disclose, and the responsible authority reasonably determines that the access will not compromise private or confidential data on individuals. 
(7)  The responsible authority shall prepare a public argument setting forth the rights of the data subject pursuant to the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act and the specific procedures in effect in the city for access by the data subjects to public or private data on individuals. 
(8)  The responsible authority or designee shall allow another responsible authority or designee access to data classified as not public only when the access is authorized or required by statute or federal law. The responsible authority or designee when supplying government data under this provision may require the requesting responsible authority to pay the actual cost of supplying the data. 
(9)  The responsible authority shall, when appropriate, apply to the commissioner of administration for permission to classify temporarily data on types of data on individuals as private or confidential, or data not on individuals as non-public, on a temporary basis until a proposed statute can be acted upon by the Legislature. 
(10)  Upon request to the responsible authority, designee, any individual must be informed whether he is the subject of stored data on individuals, and whether it is classified as public, private or confidential. Upon further request, the individual who is the subject of stored private data on individuals shall be shown the data without any charge to him, and if he desires, shall be informed of the content and meaning of that data. The responsible authority or designee shall provide copies of the private data upon request by the individual subject of the data, and the cost of providing copies shall be borne by the individual. The responsible authority or designee shall comply immediately, if possible, with any request made by an individual under this paragraph, or within five days of the date of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, if immediate compliance is not possible. If the responsible authority or designee cannot comply with the request within that time, he shall so inform the individual, and may have an additional five days within which to comply with the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. 
(11)  If an individual contests the accuracy or completeness of public or private data concerning himself, and notifies in writing the responsible authority describing the nature of the disagreement, the responsible authority shall within 30 days either correct the data found to be inaccurate or incomplete and attempt to notify past recipients of inaccurate or incomplete data, including recipients named by the individual; or notify the individual that the responsible authority believes the data to be correct. Data which is in dispute shall be disclosed only if the individual's statement of disagreement is included with the disclosed data. 
(d)  This section implementing the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act shall remain in force and effect until ratified by the council. 
(Ord. No. 4, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-80) 
Secs. 2-72-2-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 3 - MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES RULES AND REGULATIONS, RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Company, grantee, and franchisee shall refer to any public utility system to which a franchise has been granted by the city. 
    Consumer and customer shall refer to any user of a utility. 
    Municipal utility shall refer to any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way of limitation, water and sewerage service. 
    Service shall refer to providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer. 
    Utility shall refer to all utility services, whether the same be public city-owned facilities or furnished by public utility companies. 
Sec. 3-2. - Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities. 
    All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for service, permit fees, connection and meter reading fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees including penalties for nonpayment if any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the council and adopted by resolution. Such resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the city administrator and shall be uniformly enforced. 
Sec. 3-3. - Fixing rates and charges for public utilities. 
    All rates and charges for public utility franchisees, not regulated by an agency of the state, shall be fixed and determined by the council and adopted by ordinance. Upon adoption such rates and charges shall become provisions of this chapter. Public utility company rates and charges may be fixed and determined by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section, as follows: 
(1)  No rate or charge involving an increase thereof shall become effective until approved by the council. To request such increase the franchisee shall prepare its written petition setting forth the then current and proposed rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increases (which may not be within 90 days of filing the petition), and the reason or reasons necessitating the proposed increase or increases. Such petition shall be filed with the council by serving the same on the city administrator in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(2)  Within 30 days of such filing the council shall adopt a resolution and serve the same upon the resident superintendent of the franchisee in like manner as the petition may be served either approving the proposed increases or ordering a hearing thereon to be held within 60 days thereof. If no such action is taken by the council, such increase or increases shall take effect on the date stated in the franchisee's petition as though approved by the council. 
(3)  Prior to the hearing date, the franchisee shall, without delay, comply with the city's reasonable requests for examination and copying of all books, records, documents and other information, relating to the subject matter of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail or refuse such requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing date. 
(4)  Notice of hearing shall be in the form and manner stated in the resolution. At the hearing all persons wishing to be heard thereon shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a decision shall be made by the council within 15 days after the hearing and served upon the franchisee. 
Sec. 3-4. - Contractual contents. 
    Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 3-5. - Rules and regulations relating to municipal utilities. 
(a)  Billing. All municipal utilities shall be billed monthly or quarterly. 
(b)  Application, connection and sale of service. Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the city, and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the city to make the same. All municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable rate applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with such rates. 
    The City of International Falls shall no longer bill utility charges to the tenant of an occupied rental premises. All utility billings for municipal utility water and sanitary sewer expenses shall be billed to the property owner. Utility billings for existing customers will continue in the tenants' name until the tenant moves or at such time as one of the below events occur. At the time of such event(s), then the responsibility for utility billing will be transferred to the property owner whom shall be responsible for all payments due. 
    If one of the following events occurs after December 20, 2018, then the utility billing for that property will be billed directly to the property owner: 
(1)  Current tenant moves, 
(2)  The utility billing has been on the shut-off listing and delinquent for more than 60 days, 
(3)  Water/Sewer service has been disconnected for nonpayment, or 
(4)  The city has certified the past due utility billings to the county auditor for nonpayment. 
(c)  Discontinuance of service. All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that: 
(1)  The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of the city code relative thereto, or any connection therewith, or, 
(2)  Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial obligation imposed on the present owner or occupant of the premises served, is unpaid after due notice thereof, or, 
(3)  There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any application for service or delivery or charges therefor. 
(d)  Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto, shall be and remain in the city and no person shall own any part or portion thereof. Provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private property are not intended to be included in municipal ownership. 
(e)  Right of entry. The city has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all times reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of connecting and disconnecting service. 
(f)  Meter accuracy. All water utilities service shall be supplied through a meter which shall accurately measure the amount thereof supplied to any consumer. The consumer shall supply a safe and proper place for the installation of such meters. Meters shall be tested for accuracy by the city upon the request of any consumer who believes his meter to be inaccurate. If, upon test, it appears that such meter overruns to the extent of three percent or more, the city shall pay the cost of such tests and shall make a refund for overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy but for not longer than six months, on the basis of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the tests. If, upon test, it appears that such meter is slow to the extent of three percent or more, the consumer shall pay for undercharges since the last known date of accuracy but for not longer than six months on the basis of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test. If, when such meter is tested upon the demand of the consumer, it is found to be accurate or slow or less than three percent fast, the consumer shall pay the reasonable cost of such testing. 
(g)  Unlawful acts. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening into, use, or alter in any way any municipal utility system without first having applied for and received written permission to do so from the city. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from the city. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any person to "jumper" or by any means or device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge. 
(h)  Municipal utility services and charges a lien. 
(1)  Payment for service and charges provided for herein shall be the primary responsibility of the owner of the premises served. The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this subsection. 
(2)  Each such charge is hereby made a lien upon the premises served. All such charges which are on September 30th of each year more than 30 days past due, shall be certified by the city administrator to the county auditor between the 1st and 10th day of October of each year, and the city administrator in so certifying such charges to the county auditor shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served, and the name of the owner thereof. The amount so certified shall be extended by the auditor on the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner as other taxes, and collected by the county treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 3.41, 2nd series, eff. 11-22-80; Ord. No. 22, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82; Ord. No. 29, 5th series, §§ I, II, eff. 12-20-18) 
Secs. 3-6-3-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-20. - Rules and regulations relating to sewerage service. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Code shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also referred to as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33. U.S.C. 1251, et. seq. 
    ASTM: American Society For Testing Materials. 
    Authority: The North Koochiching Area Sanitary Sewer Board for the North Koochiching Area Sanitary Sewer District or its representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 Centigrade in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    Board: The North Koochiching Sanitary Sewer Board of International Falls, Koochiching County, Minnesota. 
    Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning immediately outside the building wall. 
    Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service connection. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter as determined by standard laboratory procedures, and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    City: The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of International Falls, Minnesota as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time. The term "city" when used herein may also be used to refer to the city council and its authorized representative. 
    Compatible pollutant: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, ph, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES/SDS permit if the treatment facilities are designed to treat such pollutants to a degree which complies with effluent concentration limits imposed by the permit. 
    Control manhole: A structure specially constructed for the purpose of measuring flow and sampling of wastes. 
    Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Fecal coliform: Any number or organisms common to the intestinal tract of man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution. 
    Floatable oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater. 
    Garbage: Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food. 
    Incompatible pollutant: Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible pollutant (sec. 10) including non-biodegradable dissolved solids. 
    Industrial waste: Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial or manufacturing processes, trade business, or from the development, recovery, and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or domestic strength wastes. 
    Industry: Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of publicly owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E, and I. 
    Infiltration: Water entering the sewage system (including building drains and pipes) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, and connections, and manhole walls. 
    Infiltration/inflow (I/I): The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow. 
    Inflow: Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. 
    Interference: The inhibition or disruption of the District's wastewater disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES and/or SDS Permit. The term includes of sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405 of the Act or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent State criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the district. 
    MPCA: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
    National categorical pretreatment standards: Federal regulations establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not susceptible to treatment by such treatment facilities or would interfere with the operation of such treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307 (b) of the Act. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit: A permit used by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Sections 402 and 405 of the Act. 
    Natural outlet: Including storm sewers and combined sewers, which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water. 
    Noncontact cooling water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Normal domestic strength waste: Wastewater that is primarily introduced by residential users. 
    Person: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in terms of grams per liter of solution. 
    Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works. (see section 24). 
    Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension. 
    Sewage: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is wastewater. 
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
  Collection sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections. 
  Combined sewer: A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer. 
  Force main: A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure. 
  Interceptor sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility. 
  Private sewer: A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a public authority. 
  Public sewer: A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public authority. 
  Sanitary sewer: A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally. 
  Storm sewer or storm drain: A drain or sewer intended to carry storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, sub-surface water, street wash water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source. 
    Shall is mandatory. May is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user: Any industrial user of the wastewater treatment facility which has a discharge flow: 
(1)  In excess of 25,000 gallons per average work day; or 
(2)  Has exceeded five percent of the total flow received at the treatment facility; or 
(3)  Whose waste contains a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act; or 
(4)  Whose discharge has a significant effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or emissions generated by the treatment system. 
    Slug: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation, and shall adversely affect the collection and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    State disposal system (SDS) permit: Any permit (including any terms, conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S.A. § 115.07 for a disposal system as defined by M.S.A. § 115.01, Subd. 8. 
    Superintendent: The city engineer or a designee, agent or representative thereof. 
    Suspended solids (SS) or total suspended solids (TSS): The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" latest edition, and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Toxic pollutant: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organisms will cause adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307 (a) of the Act. 
    Unpolluted water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. (see "noncontact cooling water", Sec. 27) 
    User: Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal system. 
    Wastewater: The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present. 
    Wastewater treatment works or treatment works: An arrangement of any device, facilities, structures, equipment, or processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
    Watercourse: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
    WPCF: The Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(b)  Control by the city engineer. 
(1)  The city engineer shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and service connections owned by the city, and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this Code to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained. 
(c)  Use of public sewers required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any other area under jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Code and the city's NPDES/SDS permit. 
(3)  Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to construct to maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  Private wastewater disposal. 
(1)  Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of article III, section 4, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city. The application for such a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary to the city. 
(3)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative. The city or its representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 16 working hours of receipt of notice. 
(4)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of 6 MCAR 4.8040, entitled, "Individual Sewage Treatment System Standard." No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(5)  At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with the Code, and within 60 days any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to permit drainage, and the tank pit filled with a suitable material. 
(6)  The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(7)  No statement contained in the article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or the Department of Health of the State of Minnesota. 
(e)  Building sewers and connections. 
(1)  Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities including, but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5, and suspended solids, as determined by the superintendent. 
(2)  No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, many any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(3)  Application for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the location, name of owner, street number of the building to be connected, and how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the building or property for which the service connection permit has been given. 
(4)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity. 
(5)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(6)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such connection aforementioned. 
(7)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent or his representative, to meet all requirements of this Code. 
(8)  The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in the amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, shall apply. 
(9)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is to low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(10)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system. 
(11)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior to installation. 
(12)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and inspection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or authorized representative thereof. 
(13)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(14)  No person shall make a service connection with any public sewer unless regularly licensed under this chapter to perform such work, and no permit shall be granted to any person except such regularly licensed person. 
(15)  Any person desiring to make a service connection with satisfactory evidence that the applicant or employer is trained or skilled in the business and qualified to receive a license. All applications shall be referred to the superintendent for recommendation to the city. If approved by the city, such license shall be issued by the person so authorized upon the filing of a bond as hereinafter provided. 
(16)  No license shall be issued to any person until a $10,000 bond to the city approved by the council is filed with the city conditioned that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless the city from all suits, accidents, and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in the street, alley, or public ground, made by the licensee of by those in the licensee's employment for any purpose whatever, and that the licensee will replace and restore the street and alley over such opening to the condition existing prior to installation, adequately guard with barricades and lights and will maintain the same to the satisfaction of the superintendent, and shall conform in all respects to the rules and regulations of the city relative thereto, and pay all fines that may be imposed on the licensee by law. 
(17)  The license fee for making service connections is $15.00. All licensees shall expire on December 31 of the license year unless the license is suspended or revoked by the city for cause. Upon failure to apply for a license renewal prior to the expiration date thereof, the license fee for the ensuing year shall be $25.00. 
(18)  The council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this article for any of the following causes: 
a.  Giving false information in connection with the application for a license. 
b.  Incompetence of the licensee. 
c.  Willful violation of any provisions of this article or any rule or regulation pertaining to making of service connections. 
(f)  Use of public services. 
(1)  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted water such as stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage, or noncontract cooling water to any sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the city and the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA. 
(3)  No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
a.  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or to be injurious in any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides. 
b.  Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
c.  Any wastewater having a ph of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater disposal system. 
d.  Any wastewater including toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act. 
(4)  The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentration or quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works, treatment process or equipment, will not have adverse effect on the receiving stream and/or soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than limitations established in the regulation below if, in his opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the city's NPDES and/or SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows: 
a.  Any wastewater have a temperature greater than 150 F. (65.5 C.) or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding 104 F (40 C.), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting in interference therein. 
b.  Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 F and 150 F (0 C. and 65.6 C.); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of mineral origin of greater than 100mg/l, whether emulsified or not. 
c.  Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein. 
d.  Any garbage not properly shredded as defined herein. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the premises or when served by caterers. 
e.  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
f.  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
g.  Noncontact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground water. 
h.  Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers Earth, lime slurries, and lime residue) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in such quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system. 
i.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
j.  Any waters or wastes containing but not limited to, arsenic, cadmium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, chromium, zinc and other objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the treatment works exceed the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
k.  Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of any regulatory body or state or federal regulatory body. 
l.  Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by specific written agreement subject to the provisions of section 16 of this article. 
(5)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 4 of this article, and/or which in the judgement of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes or equipment; receiving waters and/or soil, vegetation and ground water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
a.  Reject the wastes, 
b.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, pursuant to section 307 (b) of the Act and all addendums thereof, 
c.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or 
d.  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges. 
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design, installation, and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall be made at the owners' expense, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA. 
(6)  No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in sections 3 and 4 of this article, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any state requirements. 
(7)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalization facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner(s). 
(8)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section 4 (b), any flammable wastes as specified in section 3 (a), sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspecting. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which is subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not performed by the owner's personnel, must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm. 
(9)  Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control manhole, with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such structure shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(10)  The owner of any property serviced by a building a sewer carrying industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide laboratory measurements, tests, or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate compliance with this Code and any special condition for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with Federal, State and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analysis to the city at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an independent laboratory. 
(11)  All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Code shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent. 
(12)  Where required by the city the owner of any property serviced by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Code. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the superintendent for review and approval prior to construction of the facility. Review and approval of such and operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Code. Users shall notify the superintendent immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of wastewater in violation of this Code to enable countermeasures to be taken by the superintendent to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works. Such notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any State and Federal Law. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(13)  No person, having charge of any building or other premises which drains into the public sewer, shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city the owner shall install a suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter same, and perform such other work as the superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the owner's refusal or neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair or alter same after the period of 30 days, the superintendent may cause such work to be completed at the expense of the owner or representative thereof. 
(14)  Whenever any service connections become clogged, obstructed, broken or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause such work to be done as the superintendent may direct. Each day after 30 days that a person neglects or fails to do so act shall constitute a separate violation of this section and the superintendent may than cause the work to be done, and recover from such owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the name of the city. 
(15)  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times, a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system. 
(16)  In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by such person and may collect such assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city. 
(17)  No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern, providing that National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and the city's NPDES and/or State Disposal System Permit limitations are not violated. 
(g)  (1)  No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of a misdemeanor. 
(h)  User rate schedule for charges. 
(1)  Each user of sewer service shall pay the charge(s) applicable to the type of service, and in accordance with the provisions set forth in the user rate ordinance #41, 2nd Series. 
(i)  Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(1)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the District, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the city's treatment system in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial process which have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential. However, the industry must establish that the revelation of the information in question to the public might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(3)  While performing necessary work on private properties, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Article VI of this Code. 
(4)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(j)  Cost of installation and maintenance. 
(1)  The cost of installation of the sewer service from the public sewer to the premises as well as repairs to the same, shall be borne entirely by the owner of the premises. The words "public sewer" for the purpose of this subsection means the main sewer pipe that connects from manhole to manhole. 
(k)  Metered water supply not discharged. 
(1)  If a portion of the water furnished to any premises is not directly or indirectly discharged into the sewerage system, the quantity of such water shall be deducted in computing the sewerage service charge or rental, provided a separate meter shall be installed and operated to register the quantity so not discharged into the sewerage system. Provided also, that where it is not practicable to meter the portion of the water not discharged into sewerage system, such adjustment may be made as shall be fair and equitable in order to determine the amount of such service charge or rental; but until such adjustment shall remain in full force and effect. 
(l)  Unmetered water supply. 
(1)  If any premises discharge normal sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, obtain part of all of the water used thereon from sources other than the city, and the water so obtained is not measured by a meter of equivalent specifications to the meters used by the city, then in such case the city shall permit the discharge of normal sewage or industrial waste into its sanitary sewerage system only when the owner of such premises or some other interested party shall at his own expense supply a water meter of equivalent specifications to those installed by the city in connection with the city water system. Each water meter shall be installed to measure all water received on such premises and the above charges and rates shall be applied to the quantity of water received as measured by such meter. If, because of the nature of the source of the water supply, the city deems it impracticable to thus meter the water on any premises, the council may, by resolution, establish a flat charge per month in accordance with the estimated use of water on such premises. 
(m)  Construction requirements. 
(1)  Every private sewer connection, for new construction, in a basement shall have a sewer check valve installed. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 40, 2nd series, eff. 1-3-86) 
Sec. 3-21. - Sewage rates. 
(a)  Rates. All sewer users as defined by section 3-20 of the City Code shall pay according to the following rates: 
  $4.00 minimum charge for first 2,000 gallons or less. 
  $1.30 per 1,000 gallons, for each additional 1,000 gallons. 
(b)  Amendment of rates. The above described rates can be changed by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 41, 2nd series, eff. 4-4-85) 
Secs. 3-22-3-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-40. - Rules and regulations relating to water service. 
(a)  Deficiency of water and shutting off water. The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to insure a supply for fire fighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary. 
(b)  Repair of leaks. It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the main stop into the house or other building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water service has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded with immediately. 
(c)  Abandoned services penalties. All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises, served by this service, shall pay the cost of the excavation. The city shall perform the actual disconnection and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street right-of-way shall become the property of the city. When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase the old water service, a new permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be made as if this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or to save expense in properly removing such pipe from the main. Also, such improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city and the cost incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing such work to be performed. 
(d)  Service pipes. Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than eight feet below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building shall be the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops to the inside of the building; or if not taken into a building then to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building, ahead of the meter and well protected from freezing. Joints on copper tubing shall be flared and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size connection with the water mains shall be one inch in diameter. 
(e)  Private water supplies. No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source of water supply and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when the new connection is made. When a building is connected to "city water" the private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow. 
(f)  Restricted hours for sprinkling. Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the city, it may limit the times and hours during which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or either or any of them. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in violation of such determination after public announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions thereof. 
(g)  Private fire hose connections. Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own installation expense and at such rates as the council may adopt by resolution as herein provided. 
(h)  Opening hydrants. It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department or other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purposes, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use. 
(i)  Unmetered service. Unmetered service may be provided for construction, flooding skating rinks, and any other purpose. Such service shall be at a duly adopted rate. Where it is difficult or impossible to accurately measure the amount of water taken, unmetered service may be provided and the unmetered rate applied; provided, however, that by acceptance thereof the consumer agrees to have the city estimate the water used. In so estimating the city shall consider the use to which the water is put and the length of time of unmetered service. 
(j)  Code requirement. All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed strictly in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code. Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith, or failure to have or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an additional ground for termination of water service to any consumer. 
(k)  Connection fees. Service shall be furnished only after proper application has been made and connection fees paid in full. 
(l)  Remote-type water meters. In all new construction using one-inch size water meter, or smaller, or when, for any reason, a water meter is removed and replaced, a remote-type water meter shall be installed at the expense of the owner. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 3-41-3-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 4 - CONSTRUCTION LICENSING, PERMITS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-1. - Building code adopted. 
    The Minnesota State Building Code (SBC) is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of said Code shall be marked CITY OF INTERNATIONAL FALLS - OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the city administrator and open to inspection and use by the public. 
Sec. 4-2. - (Repealed by Ord. No. 23, 2nd series, adopted 9-13-82.) 
Sec. 4-3. - Permit fees. 
    Fees for permits under this chapter, which may include a surcharge, shall be determined by the council and fixed by its resolution, a copy of which shall be in the office of the city administrator and uniformly enforced. 
Sec. 4-4. - Special requirements for moving buildings. 
(a)  Scope. This section, and any other applicable provision of the City Code, applies whether the building or other structure proposed to be moved starts from a point of origin within or without the city, and has as its destination a point within or without the city, or whether the movement is merely through the city with both a point of origin and destination without the city. Provided, that this section shall not apply if movement is not over a public street or other public property. 
(b)  Application. In addition to the other required information to be furnished in the application for a building permit, the applicant shall provide the approximate size and weight of the structure or building proposed to be moved, together with the places from and to which it is proposed to move the same, and proposed route to be followed, proposed dates and times of moving, and the name and address of the proposed mover. 
(c)  Permit. The permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing, movement and parking. 
(d)  Fees and charges for moving buildings. In addition to all other fees and charges payable for permits to move buildings, the applicant shall pay to the city in advance and prior to issuance of a permit, all estimated labor and material costs to be incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, police, utility changes, and street repairs. Any costs not included in the original estimate shall be paid by the permit holder after the work has been completed. 
(e)  Unlawful act. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any permittee under this section to fail to strictly comply with the terms of the permit. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to move a building without a permit required by the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 23, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82) 
Sec. 4-5. - Building number identification. 
(a)  Application. All owners or occupants of residential, commercial, and industrial structures within the city shall display their assigned address numbers on the outside of their primary structures, near the front door, for emergency purposes. The address number must be located on a primary structure surface facing the public road, clearly visible from the road. Address numbers shall be no smaller than three inches tall, and colors should be in strong contrast to the background color or made of reflective material. No self-adhesive number appliques shall be used. 
    In those cases where the front of the principle building is obscured from view from the street by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery, or other visual obstructions, the numbers shall be displayed on the mailbox in numerals no smaller than 11/2 inches tall. Colors should be in strong contrast to the background color or made of reflective material. 
    In those cases where the front of the principle building is obscured from view from the street and the residence does not have a mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed from a permanent mounting on the property. The mounting must be clearly visible from the street and displayed prominently in numerals no smaller than three inches tall. The colors of the numerals should be in strong contrast to the background color or made of reflective material. The mounting shall be within 50 feet of the road and ten feet of the driveway if one exists. The bottom of the address sign shall be placed at a height that is no less than three feet above the surface. 
    For new structures or updated addresses, assigned address numbers shall be posted within one month of new address notification. 
(b)  Maintenance. The occupant of the primary structure shall be responsible for keeping its address numbers in good condition and clear of snow, dirt, debris, or other obstructions. 
(c)  Enforcement and penalties. The owner and occupant of any property who does not identify a building as provided in this section shall be notified, in writing, by the housing inspector to identify the building within ten days after service of the notice upon him or her. Such notice may be served personally or by mail, the same by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, and if the premises are occupied, to the premises. The housing inspector may grant additional time where bona fide efforts to identify the building are in progress. Failure to comply with such notice within the time allowed shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in Code section 4-99. 
(Res. of 8-13-01) 
Secs. 4-6-4-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-20. - Housing code. 
(a)  General provisions. The following general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Legislative finding. It is hereby found that there exist and may in the future exist, premises, dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, or parts thereof, which by reason of their structure, equipment, sanitation, maintenance, use, or occupancy affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health, (including the physical, mental, and social well-being of persons and families), safety, and general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions, and to achieve and maintain such levels of residential environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety, and general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum housing standards are required. 
(2)  Purposes. It is hereby declared that the purpose of this section is to protect, preserve, and promote the physical and mental health and social well-being of the people, to prevent and control incidence of communicable diseases, to regulate privately and publicly owned dwellings for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health, and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all dwellings now in existence or hereafter constructed. It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this section is to insure that the quality of housing is adequate for protection of public health, safety and general welfare, including: establishment of minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, and thermal conditions, for safety from fire and accidents, for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy, and for an adequate level of maintenance; determination of the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; and provision for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Accessory structure: A detached structure located on or partially on any premise which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Appropriate authority: That person within the governmental structure of the corporate unit charged with the administration of the appropriate code. 
    Approved: Approved by the city or state authority having such administrative authority. 
    Ashes: The residue from the burning of combustible materials. 
    Chimney: A vertical masonry shaft of reinforced concrete, or other approved noncombustible, heat resisting material enclosing one or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gas fuel. 
    Central heating system: A single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit. 
    Dormitory: A room in any dwelling used for sleeping purposes by four or more unrelated persons. 
    Dwelling: Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
    Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the city or state authority having such administrative authority. 
    Family: One adult person plus one or more persons who are legally related to said person and residing in the same dwelling unit with said person. 
    Flush water closet: A toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water sealed trap above the floor level. Such toilet bowls shall have a smooth, easily cleanable surface. 
    Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving, and nonconsumption of food. 
    Guest: Any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 90 days. 
    Habitable: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers, or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated parts of structure below ground level or in attics. 
    Health officer: The legally designated health authority or his authorized representative. (If the legally designated health authority has a title other than "health officer" the title of this authority should be substituted for "health officer" in this subsection and all other subsections of this section.) 
    Heated water: Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120 degrees F. 
    Household: A family and/or one or more unrelated persons, who shares the same dwelling and uses some or all of its cooking and eating facilities, including servants and not more than two boarders. 
    Infestation: The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Kitchen: Any room containing any or all of the following equipment; or area of a room within three feet of such equipment: sink and/or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food, cabinets and/or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation. 
    Multiple dwelling: Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units and/or rooming units. 
    Occupant: Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or actually having possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except that in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant. 
    Operator: Any person who has charge, care, control, or management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Ordinary summer conditions: A temperature ten degrees below the highest recorded temperature in the locality for the prior ten-year period. 
    Ordinary winter conditions: A temperature of 15 degrees F. above the lowest recorded temperature in the locality for the prior ten-year period. 
    Owner: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or, 
(2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this section and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Permissible occupancy: The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Plumbing: All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
    Privacy: The ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons. 
    Premises: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Refuse: All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
    Rooming house: Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory rooms. 
    Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes. 
    Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either: 
(1)  Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings, and wood; or 
(2)  Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery. 
    Safety: The condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
    Space heater: A self-contained, heating appliance of either the circulating type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only one room. 
    Supplied: Paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing: Any tent, trailer, mobile home, or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(c)  Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to occupy or let to another person any dwelling or dwelling unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the State of Minnesota and the city. 
(2)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(3)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises there of that he occupies and controls. 
(4)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(5)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents, in a clean, sanitary and safe manner, and if a container is used for storage pending collection, it shall be rodent proof, insect proof, and water-tight. 
(6)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of single- or two-family dwellings it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers. 
(7)  The owner of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and hanging all screens and double or storm doors and window whenever the same are required under the provisions of this section or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where there is a written agreement between the owner and occupant. In the absence of such an agreement, maintenance or replacement of screens, storm doors and windows, once installed in any one season become the responsibility of the occupant. 
(8)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, and/or rodents, on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonable insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(9)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean, sanitary and operable condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(10)  In every dwelling unit and/or rooming unit when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the occupant, a temperature of at least 68 degrees F. shall be maintained in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments at a distance of 18 inches above the floor level. 
(d)  Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities. It is unlawful for any person to occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following: 
a.  A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the appropriate authority. 
b.  Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not under ordinary summer conditions require refrigeration for safekeeping; and a counter or table for food preparation; said cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall be adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be of sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food. 
c.  A stove, or similar device, for cooking food and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 50 degrees F., but more than 32 degrees F., under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided, that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate connections for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided. 
(2)  Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the water closet to be operated properly and shall be connected to a sewer system which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(3)  Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flushwater closet, or, if located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the appropriate authority. 
(4)  Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the appropriate authority. 
(5)  Every dwelling unit shall have one or more approved means of egress, with minimum head room of six feet six inches, leading to safe and open space at ground level and every dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling shall have immediate access to two or more approved means of egress with minimum head room of six feet six inches, leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and the city. 
(6)  Structurally sound hand rails shall be provided on any steps containing five risers or more. If steps are not enclosed, hand rails and balusters spaced no more than six inches apart shall be provided. Porches and/or balconies located more than three feet higher than the adjacent area shall have structurally sound protective hand rails (30-36 inches high) and, if unenclosed, balusters spaced no less than six inches apart. 
(7)  Each dwelling shall have a suitable facility for the safe storage of drugs and household poisons. 
(e)  Minimum standards for light and ventilation. It is unlawful for any person to occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing outdoors provided that if connected to a room or area used seasonally (e.g. porch) then adequate daylight must be possible through this inter-connection. The minimum total window or skylight area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be at least ten percent of the floor area of such room but if light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. 
(2)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly outdoors which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room provided that if connected to a room or area used seasonally then adequate ventilation must be possible through this interconnection. The total of openable window or skylight area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least ten percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight type window size, as required in subsection (e)(1) of this section, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the appropriate authority. 
(3)  Every bathroom and water closet compartment, and nonhabitable room used for food preparation, shall comply with the light and ventilation requirement for habitable rooms contained in subsections (e)(1) and (2) of this section, except that no window or skylight shall be required in such rooms if they are equipped with a ventilation system in working condition, which is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(4)  Where there is usable electric service available from power lines which are not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the provisions of the City Code, rules and regulations of the city. The capacity of such services and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows: 
a.  Every habitable room shall have an electric service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of providing at least three watts per square foot of total floor area. 
b.  Every habitable room, and nonhabitable room used for food preparation, shall have at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet for each 60 square feet or fraction thereof of total floor area, and in no case less than two such outlets. 
c.  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, and kitchen or kitchenette, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. 
d.  Convenient switches or equivalent devices for adequately lighting each room or passageway shall be located so as to permit the area ahead to be lighted. 
(5)  Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all times, so as to provide in all parts thereof at least six foot candles of light at the tread or floor level. Every public hall and stairway in structures containing not more than two dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of fulltime lighting. 
(f)  Minimum thermal standards. It is unlawful for any person to occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, and are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68 degrees F. at a distance of 18 inches above floor level under ordinary winter conditions. 
(2)  No owner or occupant shall install, operate or use an unvented space heater employing a flame. 
(g)  General requirements relating to the safe and sanitary maintenance of parts of dwellings and dwelling units. It is unlawful for any person to occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window shall be reasonably weather-tight, water-tight, and damp-free, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Floors, interior walls and ceilings shall be sound and in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment using nontoxic materials where readily accessible to children. Walls shall be capable of affording privacy for the occupants. Every premises shall be graded, drained, free of standing water, and maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe condition. 
(2)  Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or similar devices, shall be kept rodent-proof and reasonably water-tight and weather-tight, and shall be kept in working condition and good repair. 
a.  During that portion of the year when there is a need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outside space shall have supplied properly fitting screens having at least 16 mesh and self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens. 
b.  Every window located at or near ground level used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening located at or near ground level which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with adequate screen or such other devices as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(3)  Every dwelling, multiple dwellings, rooming house or accessory structure and the premises on which located shall be maintained so as to prevent and eliminate rodent harborage. 
(4)  All fences provided by the owner or agent on the premises and/or all fences erected or caused to be erected by an occupant shall be constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood, masonry, or other inert material. Such fences shall be maintained in good condition, uniform in height throughout, and any wood materials shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other preservative. Such fences shall be maintained in good repair. The permissible height and other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the city and State of Minnesota. Wherever any egress from the dwelling opens into the fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the premises to any public way adjacent thereto. 
(5)  Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent, or tenant occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, be designed to prevent rodent harborage, and be maintained in good repair and free of vermin by the owner, agent, or occupant, or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of such structures shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay resistant materials or the use of paint or other preservatives. 
(6)  Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and treads. 
(7)  Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition. 
(8)  Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(9)  Every plumbing fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue, and smoke pipe, and every other facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is present in a dwelling or dwelling unit, or which is required under this section, shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the city and State of Minnesota. 
(10)  No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the appropriate authority. 
(11)  All construction and materials, ways and means of egress, and installation and use of equipment shall conform to applicable State and city laws dealing with fire protection. 
(h)  Maximum density, minimum space, use and location requirements. It is unlawful for any person to occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, unless there is compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The maximum density of occupancy of any dwelling unit by persons shall not exceed either: 
a.  For first occupant 150 square feet of floor space and at least 100 square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. 
b.  A total number of occupants equal to two times the number of its habitable rooms. 
(2)  Not more than one family, plus two occupants unrelated to the family, except for guests or domestic employees, shall occupy a dwelling unit unless a permit for a rooming house has been granted by the appropriate authority. 
(3)  The ceiling height of any habitable room shall be at least seven feet; except that in any habitable room under a sloping ceiling at least one-half of the floor area shall have a ceiling height of at least six feet eight inches, and the floor area of that part of such a room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy. 
(4)  No space located partially or totally below grade shall be used as a habitable room of a dwelling unit unless approved by the health officer in writing and unless: 
a.  The floor and those portions of the walls below grade are of water-proof and damp-proof construction. 
b.  The minimum window area is equal to at least that required in subsection (e)(1) of this section; and such window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area, or if windows are located wholly or partly below grade, there be constructed a properly drained window well whose open area is equal to or greater than the area of the masonry opening for the window, the bottom of the window well is below the top of the impervious masonry construction under this window, and the minimum horizontal distance at a right angle from any point of the window well is equal to or greater than the vertical depth of the window well as measured from the bottom of the masonry opening for the window; except where there is supplied adequate artificial illumination. 
c.  The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under subsection (e)(2) of this section, except where some other approved devices affording adequate ventilation and humidity control are supplied. 
d.  There are no pipes, ducts or other obstructions less than six feet, eight inches above the floor level which interfere with the normal use of the room or area. 
(5)  In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 60 square feet of floor space for the first occupant, and at least 40 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof. 
(6)  No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. 
(7)  Every dwelling unit shall have at least four square feet of floor-to-ceiling height closet space for the personal effects of each permissible occupant; if it is lacking, in whole or in part, an amount of space equal in square footage to the deficiency shall be subtracted from the area of habitable room space used in determining permissible occupancy. 
(i)  Rooming house, dormitory rooms, rooming units. It is unlawful for any person to operate a rooming house, or to occupy or let to another for occupancy any dormitory room and/or rooming unit in any rooming house, which is not in compliance with the provisions of this section except the provisions of subsections (c), (d), and (h)(1), (2), (5) and (7) of this section. No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any rooming unit or dormitory room unless it is clean and sanitary, and complies with all applicable requirements, including the following: 
(1)  No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming house permit issued by the appropriate authority in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the appropriate authority upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this section and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the house at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the appropriate authority within seven days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any rooming house. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming house. Every rooming house permit shall expire at the end of one year following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended, or revoked as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each six persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of the said facilities, provided: 
a.  That in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets. 
b.  That all such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
c.  That every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with heated and unheated water under pressure at all times. 
d.  That no such facilities shall be located in a basement. 
(3)  The following provisions shall apply in all rooming houses: 
a.  Cooking in dormitory rooms and rooming units is prohibited. 
b.  Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house are prohibited, except as approved by the health officer in writing. 
c.  Access doors to rooming unit shall have operating locks to insure privacy. 
(4)  Unless exempted by the health officer in writing, the operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once a week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant, and the operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(5)  Every room in a rooming house used for living or sleeping purposes shall comply with all the requirements of this section pertaining to a habitable room. 
a.  Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 72 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 68 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof; every such room shall also contain at least four square feet of floor-to-ceiling height closet space per occupant thereof, or if it is lacking, in whole or in part, an amount of space equal in square footage to the deficiency shall be subtracted from the area of habitable room space used in determining permissible occupancy except that in a dormitory room said closet or closet space may be provided in another portion of the rooming house. 
(6)  Every rooming unit shall have immediate access to two or more safe, unobstructed means of egress, with minimum head room of six feet six inches, leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the law of this state and the city. 
(7)  Structurally sound hand rails shall be provided on any steps containing five risers or more. If steps are not enclosed hand rails and balusters spaced no more than six inches apart shall be provided. Porches and/or balconies located more than three feet higher than the adjacent areas shall have structurally sound protective hand rails (30-36 inches) high and if unenclosed balusters spaced no more than six inches apart shall also be provided. 
(j)  Adoption of plans of inspection by the appropriate agency. The housing inspector is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt plans for the inspection of dwelling units subject to the provisions of this section, including: 
(1)  A plan for the periodic inspection of multiple dwellings and rooming houses subject to the provisions of the City Code, governing the licensing of the operation of such dwellings; 
(2)  A plan for the systematic inspection of dwelling units contained in such contiguous areas within the city as may from time to time be designated by the housing inspector. 
(k)  Inspections: powers and duties of the appropriate authority. 
(1)  The housing inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections pursuant to one or more of the plans for inspection authorized by subsection (j) of this section; or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this section or of applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto has been committed; or when the housing inspector has valid reason to believe that a violation of this section or any rules and regulations pursuant thereto has been committed. 
(2)  The housing inspector is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between the hours of 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 5:00 o'clock p.m. all dwellings, dwelling units, and rooming houses, rooming units, and dormitory rooms subject to the provisions of this section for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(3)  The housing inspector is hereby authorized to inspect the premises surrounding dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, rooming houses, and dormitory rooms subject to this section for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(4)  The housing inspector and the owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house or dormitory room subject to this section may agree to an inspection by appointment at a time other than the hours provided by this section. 
(5)  The owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house or dormitory room upon presentation by the housing inspector of proper identification, a copy of any relevant plan of inspection pursuant to which entry is sought, and a schedule of the specific areas and facilities to be inspected shall give the housing inspector entry and free access to every part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or dormitory room or to the premises surrounding any of these. Before making inspections within a contiguous area pursuant to a plan authorized in subsection (j) hereof, the housing inspector shall first consult with organizations representative of property owners and other residents of such contiguous area, if any such organizations exist. 
(6)  The housing inspector shall keep confidential all evidence not related to the purposes of this section and any rules and regulations pursuant thereto which he may discover in the course of the inspection. Such evidence shall be considered privileged, and shall not be admissible in any judicial proceeding, without the consent of the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the dwelling unit or rooming unit so inspected. 
(7)  If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or a multiple dwelling or rooming house subject to the provisions of section 6.44 of the City Code, refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this section is sought, the housing inspector may seek in a court of competent jurisdiction an order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference. 
(l)  Rules and regulations. The housing inspector is hereby authorized to make, adopt, revise and amend such rules and regulations as he deems necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of this section. 
(m)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Whenever the housing inspector determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the requirements set forth in this section, or in applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failures, and advising the owner, occupant or other person in charge that such failures must be corrected. This notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Set forth the alleged violations of this section or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto; 
c.  Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the violations are alleged to exist or to have been committed; 
d.  Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any violation alleged; 
e.  Be served upon the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit personally, or by registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known place of residence of the owner, occupant or other person in charge. If one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a notice in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice, or by causing such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation for a period of 30 consecutive days; 
f.  Be served upon a resident agent for the receipt of such service of notice; or 
g.  Be served upon the housing inspector where he has been designated agent for such service. 
(2)  At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, the housing inspector shall reinspect the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice. 
(3)  If upon reinspection the violations alleged are determined by the housing inspector not to have been corrected, he shall issue a second notice of violation which shall constitute an order requiring that the then existing failures to meet the requirements of this section or of applicable existing rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, shall be corrected within a reasonable time allowed, but not to exceed 60 days after the date of such reinspection, if the person served with such notice does not request a reconsideration or petition for a hearing on the matter in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(4)  The housing inspector shall cause a copy of the second notice to be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the violations are alleged to exist, and shall serve it in the manner provided in this subsection. 
(5)  The housing inspector, after the expiration of time granted the person served with such notice to seek reconsideration or a hearing in the manner hereinafter provided by this section, or after a final decision adverse to such person served has been rendered by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction to which an appeal has been taken, shall cause the second notice to be recorded with the county recorder. 
(6)  All subsequent transferees of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit in connection with which a second notice has been so recorded shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence of the violations alleged, and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this section and by applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was their transferor. 
(n)  Repairs; demolition; revolving fund. 
(1)  Repairs. 
a.  Whenever an owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit fails, neglects or refuses to make repairs called for by a second order or notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (m) of this section, the housing inspector may undertake such repairs, when in his judgment a failure to make them will endanger the public health, safety or welfare, and the cost of such repairs will not exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure to be repaired. 
b.  Notice of the intention to make such repairs shall be served upon the owner or other person in charge pursuant to subsection (m) of this section; or upon the housing inspector as designated agent for service; or upon the resident agent of the owner, as designated agent for service. 
c.  Every owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who has received notice of the intention of the housing inspector to make repairs shall give entry and free access to the agent of the housing inspector for the purpose of making such repairs. Any owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who refuses, impedes, interferes with, hinders or obstructs entry by such agent pursuant to a notice of intention to make repairs shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00 for each such failure to comply with this subsection. 
d.  When repairs are made at the direction of the housing inspector cost of such repairs shall constitute a debt in favor of the city against the owner of the repaired structure. In the event such owner fails, neglects or refuses to pay the city the amount of this debt, it shall be recoverable in a civil action, against the owner or his successor, brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city which shall possess all rights of a private creditor. 
(2)  Demolition. 
a.  Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be declared unfit for human habitation when, in the judgment of the housing inspector it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested as to create a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants or of the public, and where the structure is determined by the housing inspector not to warrant repair under subsection (n)(1)a. of this subsection. 
b.  Any vacant building shall be declared unfit for human habitation, when its existence, in the judgment of the housing inspector is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
c.  The owner of any structure which has been determined unfit for human habitation, whether such structure is occupied or vacant, shall be given notice of this determination in the manner provided for service of notice in subsection (m) of this section, and shall be given a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, to remove such structure. 
d.  The owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit contained in any structure which has been determined unfit for human habitation and which has been vacated shall not cause or permit such vacated dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit to be reoccupied pending removal of the structure. 
e.  Any owner aggrieved by the notice to demolish may within 30 days seek a reconsideration of the matter in the manner hereinafter provided, and may seek a formal hearing in the manner provided in subsection (p) of this section. 
f.  When the owner fails, neglects or refuses to remove the unfit structure within the requisite time, the housing inspector may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a demolition order. The court may grant such order when no reconsideration or hearing on the matter is pending. The cost of such demolition shall create a debt in favor of the city against such owner, and shall be recoverable in a civil action brought by the city which shall possess all the rights of a private creditor. 
g.  All demolition, whether carried out by the owner or by the housing inspector shall include the filling in of the excavation remaining on the property on which the demolished structure was located, in such manner as to eliminate all potential danger to the public health, safety or welfare arising from such excavation. 
(3)  Revolving fund. 
a.  There is hereby created a revolving fund for the purpose of supporting the cost of repairs or demolition made by the housing inspector pursuant to subsection (n) of this section. Into this fund shall be paid: 
1.  All civil penalties collected for violations of this section. 
2.  All license fees collected pursuant to section 6-44 of chapter 6. 
3.  All judgments collected in actions to recover costs of repair and demolition, pursuant to subsections (n)(1)d. and (n)(2)f. of this section. 
4.  Such other revenues as the city may from time to time authorize to be paid into this fund. 
5.  All donations and grants designed to promote the purposes of this section, from public or private sources. The housing inspector is hereby declared to be the authorized agency of the city to apply for and receive all grants, loans and gifts of funds to promote the purposes of this section. 
(o)  Collection and dissemination of information. The housing inspector is hereby authorized to collect and disseminate information concerning techniques of maintenance, repair, and sanitation in housing, and concerning the requirements of this section and applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
(p)  Applications for reconsideration; conferences; hearings; appeals. 
(1)  Application for reconsideration. 
a.  Any person aggrieved by a notice of the housing inspector issued in connection with any alleged violation of this section or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or demolition pursuant to subsection (n) of this section, may apply for a reconsideration of such notice or order within 21 days after it has been issued. 
b.  The housing inspector shall set a time and place for an informal conference on the matter within ten days of the receipt of such application, and shall advise the applicant of such time and place in writing. 
c.  At the informal conference, the applicant shall be permitted to present his grounds for believing that the order should be revoked or modified to one or more representatives of the housing inspector. 
d.  Within ten days following the close of the informal conference, the housing inspector shall advise the applicant whether or not he will modify or set aside the notice or order issued by the housing inspector. 
(2)  Hearings. 
a.  Any person aggrieved by a notice of the housing inspector issued in connection with any alleged violation of the provisions of this section or of any applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or demolition pursuant to subsection (n) of this section, may file with the council a petition setting forth his reasons for contesting the notice or order. 
b.  Such petition shall be filed within 21 days after the notice or order is served on petitioner in the manner prescribed by subsection (m) of this section. 
c.  Upon receipt of a valid petition, the council shall either grant or deny the hearing requested, and shall advise petitioner of its decision in writing within ten days of the day on which his petition was received. 
d.  When the council determines to hold a hearing, it shall serve petitioner with notice of its decision in the manner provided for service of notice in subsection (m) of this section. Such notice shall be served within ten days of the receipt of the petition. 
e.  At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice or order should be modified or withdrawn, or why the period of time permitted for compliance should be extended. 
f.  The council shall have the power to affirm, modify or revoke the notice or order, and may grant an extension of time for the performance of any act required of not more than three additional months, where the council finds that there is practical difficulty or undue hardship connected with the performance of any act required by the provisions of this section or by applicable rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, and that such extension is in harmony with the general purpose of this section to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
g.  The council may grant variances from the provisions of this section or from applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto when the council finds that there is practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship connected with the performance of any act required by this section and applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto; that strict adherence to such provisions would be arbitrary in the case at hand; that extension would not provide an appropriate remedy in the case at hand, and that such variance is in harmony with the general purpose of this section to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the council may obtain judicial review by filing in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the announcement of such decision a petition praying that the decision be set aside in whole or in part. A copy of each petition so filed shall be forthwith transmitted to the council which shall file in court a record of the proceedings upon which it based its decision. Upon the filing of such record, the court shall affirm, modify, or vacate the decision complained of in whole or in part. The findings of the council with respect to questions of fact shall be sustained if supported by substantial evidence on the record, considered as a whole. 
(q)  Emergencies. 
(1)  Whenever, in the judgment of the housing inspector an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he may, without notice, conference or hearing issue an order directing the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the structure to which the provisions of this section or applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto apply to take such action as is necessary to correct or abate the emergency; or if circumstances warrant, may himself act to abate or correct it. 
(2)  The owner, occupant or other person in charge of such structure shall be granted a conference on the matter upon his request, as soon as practicable, but such conference shall in no case stay the abatement of correction of such emergency. 
(r)  Opt out of regulations for temporary family health care dwellings. 
(1)  Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of International Falls opts out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 17, 5th series, eff. 8-10-16) 
Sec. 4-21. - Loans for Downtown, Main Street, Commercial District. 
(a)  Eligible participants. Applicants must own a small or medium sized commercial building in the boundaries of the Downtown, Main Street, Commercial District whose boundaries are: 
North Boundary: Second Street 
South Boundary: Alley of Blocks 22, 19, 14 and 11 as extended 
East Boundary: Second Avenue 
West Boundary: Sixth Avenue 
A commercial building is a building whose first floor is used for restaurants, liquor establishments, stores or offices and other C-1A permitted and conditional uses other than R-2A permitted and conditional uses. A small or medium sized commercial building is less than 14,200 square feet on the first floor and can have three stories or less. 
(b)  Eligible projects. 
(1)  Design. All facade improvement projects will be reviewed and approved by the International Falls Main Street Design Board prior to application for funds with the bank of the applicant's choice. Eligible projects must meet the criteria of the Main Street Design Guidelines and include tuck-pointing, painting, or cleaning exterior wall(s), window replacement for improved energy conservation or aesthetic quality, and improved or new signage, awnings, or canopies. All other projects are subject to the approval of the International Falls Main Street Design Board. 
(2)  Credit. Property owners must have good and marketable title to the property to be improved. Real estate taxes and mortgages on the property must be current. A credit report and personal financial statement for individuals or partners, and three trade references must be provided, and approved by the city's economic development designee. 
(3)  Costs. Eligible costs for financing with the loan funds include professional services, materials, and contractor expenses. Loan funds are available for improvements only; refinancing is not eligible under this loan program. 
(c)  Terms. 
(1) Minimum loan amount $5,000.00 (2) Maximum loan amount 20,000.00 (3) Amortization One year per $1,000.00 borrowed, subject to a ten-year maximum. (4) Payee City of International Falls as administered by. (5) Interest rate two percent or as set forth by subsequent council resolution. (6) Collateral Mortgage and security agreement covering fixtures on property to be improved and supported by assessor's estimated market value, a title opinion, and insurance policy listing International Falls as loss payee. Building insurance must be carried for an amount at least equal to the mortgage on the property. The existing mortgage balances plus the new loan funds cannot exceed 80% of tax assessed property value or appraised value. (7) Due on sale clause Loan is payable upon sale of the property. (8) Completion of project deadline All eligible projects must be completed within one year of the start of the project. (9) Closing costs To be paid in cash at the time of the closing.  
(d)  Return of principal and interest. All principal and interest received by International Falls Main Street in each calendar year shall be refunded to the city by February of the following year. All principal and interest and loans are the property of the City of International Falls. 
(e)  Reporting. The status of each loan shall be provided to the City of International Falls Economic Developer's office explaining the status of each loan, including any delinquencies, the expenses incurred each calendar year, and the monies held by Main Street. 
(f)  Administration consistent with law. Main Street will administer this program consistent with M.S.A. § 469.184 and subsequent amendments of such law. 
(g)  Loan position. Main Street, after approval by the city council, is hereby authorized to make a loan with sole or co-financing from any financial institution so long as any mortgage results with similar positions based on principal advanced. A loan may be made without co-financing from a financial institution. 
(h)  Financial institution to be held harmless. Any financial institution that acts as an agent for Main Street or the City of International Falls pursuant to this chapter shall be held harmless from any negligence since the financial institution is assisting in the administration, execution, and closing of the loans in this program without remuneration and for the good of the community. 
(Ord. No. 23, 3rd series, eff. 9-9-98) 
Secs. 4-22-4-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 5 - LIQUOR, WINE AND BEER LICENSING AND REGULATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20, 5th series, §§ 1-30, effective July 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 5, §§ 5-1-5-99, and enacted a new Ch. 5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 5-1. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
    The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the city council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-2. - City may be more restrictive than state law. 
    The council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-3. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions contained in Minn. Stat. § 340A.101 as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter: 
    Liquor. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words "intoxicating" or a "3.2 percent malt" includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor. 
    Restaurant. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a restaurant as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state as required by Minn. Stat. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet the definition of either a "small establishment," "medium establishment" or "large establishment" as defined in Minn. Stat. § 157.16, subd. 3(d), as it may be amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this chapter unless it meets the definitions of a "small establishment", "medium establishment" or "large establishment". 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-4. - Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited. 
(a)  The city council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material. 
(c)  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or any other license issued under this chapter or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of section 5-30(b). 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-5. - Reserved for future use. 
Sec. 5-6. - Raffles, silent auctions and fund raising events for charitable purposes of wine, beer or intoxicating liquors. 
    No person shall conduct a silent auction, raffle of other fund raising event pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 340A.707 with prizes or awards of wine, beer or intoxicating liquors without notifying the city administrator of the event at least ten days prior to the occurrence of the event. The event holder shall provide the city with the following information: the person or organization holding the event, the day, time and location of the event, type of fund raising event (silent auction, raffle or otherwise), type and amount of wine, beer, intoxicating liquor to be awarded as prizes, and the charitable purposes to which the event proceeds will be donated. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-7. - Number of licenses which may be issued. 
    The number of licenses which may be granted under this chapter is limited to the number of licenses allowed by state law. The council is not required to issue the full number of licenses that it has available. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-8. - Term and expiration of licenses. 
    Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits issued by the commissioner of public safety, and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-9. - Kinds of liquor licenses. 
    The following licenses can be issued: 
(a)  3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks. 
(b)  3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license. 
(c)  Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization. 
(d)  Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license which was first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license established by the council under section 5-10 shall not exceed $240.00 or a greater amount which may be permitted by Minn. Stat. § 340A.408, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the following establishments as defined by Minn. Stat. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, theaters and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the commissioner of public safety. The fee for club licenses established by the council under section 5-10 of this chapter shall not exceed the amounts provided for in Minn. Stat. § 340A.408, subd. 2(b) as it may be amended from time to time. The council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 340A.404, subd. 4(b) as it may be amended from time to time. The council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 340A.404, subd. 4(a) as it may be amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the premises. 
(f)  Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by Minn. Stat. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in section 5-3 of this chapter, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be established by the council under the provisions of section 5-10 of this chapter, shall not exceed $200.00, or the maximum amount provided by Minn. Stat. § 340A.504, subd. 3(c) as it may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city has a population less than 10,000. 
(h)  Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, which may be issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years; a political committee registered under state law; or a state university. No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12 days' worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year. 
(i)  On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time and meet the criteria of Minn. Stat. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in section 5-3; to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in Minn. Stat. § 340A.4011, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time and to theaters that meet the criteria of Minn. Stat. § 340A.404, subd. 1(b) as it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the council under the provisions of section 5-10 of this chapter, shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2 percent (strong beer) without an additional license. 
(j)  One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the commissioner of public safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization. 
(k)  Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the commissioner of public safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the council on a person who has been issued a consumption and display permit under the provisions of section 5-10 of this chapter shall not exceed $300.00, or the maximum amount permitted by Minn. Stat. § 340A.414, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year. 
(l)  Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
(m)  Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the commission of public safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee, imposed by section 5-10. 
(n)  Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, may be issued to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet the criteria established at Minn. Stat. § 340A.24, as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a license for off-sale under section 5-9(o) below, the brew pub's total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels. 
(o)  Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee under section 5-9(n) above and otherwise meets the criteria established at Minn. Stat. § 340A.24, as it may be amended from time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner required by Minn. Stat. § 340A.285 as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer licensed under this section possesses a license under section 5-9(n) above, the brewer's total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels. 
Brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses may also be issued, with approval of the commissioner, to a holder of a brewer's license under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) and meeting the criteria established by Minn. Stat. § 340A.28 as may be amended from time to time. The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 500 barrels annually. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the jurisdiction in which the brewer is located, and the malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. Packaging of malt liquor for off-sale under this license must comply with Minn. Stat. § 340A.285. 
(p)  Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, to brewers who manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the brewer. 
(q)  A brewer taproom license, may be issued to the holder of a brewer's license under M.S. § 340A.301 subd. 6(c), (i) or (j) as it may amended from time to time. A brewer's taproom license authorizes on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery location owned by the brewer. A brewer may have only one taproom license and may not have an ownership interest in a brewer licensed under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301 subd. 6(d) as it may be amended from time to time. A brewer taproom license may not be issued to a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine annually. Within ten days of issuing a brewer taproom license the city administrator will inform the commissioner of public safety of the licensee's name, address, trade name and the effective date and expiration date of the license. The city administrator will inform the commissioner of public safety of a license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation during the license period. 
(r)  A cocktail room license may be issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license. A microdistillery cocktail room license authorizes on-sale of distilled liquor produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one distillery location owned by the distiller. The holder of a microdistillery cocktail room license may also hold a license to operate a restaurant at the distillery. No more than one cocktail room license may be issued to any distiller and a microdistillery cocktail room license may not be issued to any person having an ownership interest in a distillery licensed under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301 subd. 6 (a). No single entity may hold both a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license and a microdistillery cocktail room and taproom license may not be co-located. Within ten days of the issuance of a microdistillery cocktail room license, the city shall inform the commissioner of public safety of the licensee's name and address and trade name, and the effective date and expiration date of the license. The city shall also inform the commissioner of public safety of a microdistillery cocktail room license transfer, cancellation, suspension, or revocation during the license period. 
(s)  A microdistiller off-sale license may be issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license. A microdistiller off-sale license authorizes off-sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of product manufactured on-site provided the product is also available for distribution to wholesalers. 
(t)  A microdistiller temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be issued to the holder of a state microdistillery license. A microdistillery temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license authorizes on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the microdistillery. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-10. - License fees; pro rata. 
(a)  No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit established by Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license. 
(b)  The council may establish from time to time in the ordinance establishing fees and charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least 60 days before the hearing. 
(c)  The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. 
(d)  All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(e)  A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by Minn. Stat. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(f)  Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in their annual license fee by the amount specified in Minn. Stat. § 340A.408 if at the time of initial application or renewal they: 
(1)  Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to the sale alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors; 
(2)  Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons appearing to be 30 years old or less; 
(3)  Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check; 
(4)  Failure to abide by the provisions of this paragraph may result in suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to section 5-23 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-11. - Council discretion to grant or deny a license. 
    The council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-12. - Application for license. 
(a)  Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the applicant's character, with references as the council may require, the type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other information as the council may require from time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of public safety and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an application. 
(b)  Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in Minn. Stat. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with regard to liability under Minn. Stat. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the commissioner of public safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to Minn. Stat. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-13. - Description of premises. 
    The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-14. - Applications for renewal. 
    At least 60 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-15. - Transfer of license. 
    No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-16. - Investigation. 
(a)  Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial application for a license, or on an application for transfer of a license and when, in the sound discretion of the council that it is in the public interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city may conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the commissioner of public safety for the investigation. If requested by the council, the applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500.00 which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than $500.00, the unused balance shall be returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the commissioner of public safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license. 
(b)  Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the commissioner of public safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be $500.00, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000.00, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the commissioner of public safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-17. - Hearing and issuance. 
    The council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-18. - Restrictions on issuance. 
(a)  Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application. 
(b)  Not more than two licenses shall be directly or indirectly issued within the city to any one person. 
(c)  No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. 
(d)  No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law. 
(e)  No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church building to the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-19. - Conditions of license. 
    The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition is met. 
(a)  Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be provided by an organization approved by the council. proof of training shall be provided by the licensee. 
(b)  Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law equally with the employee. 
(c)  Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee, or any other person designated by the council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant. 
(d)  No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited. 
(e)  Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license. 
(f)  Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor licensee who has received a fee reduction pursuant to section 5-10(f) of this chapter to abide with the provisions of section 5-10(f). 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-20. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by Minn. Stat. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the city council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than state law allows. 
(b)  No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than 20 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. 
(c)  No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 20 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. 
(d)  No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur. 
(e)  Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license. 
(f)  No sale of intoxicating liquor may be made by an off-sale licensee: 
(1)  On Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday; 
(3)  On Thanksgiving Day; 
(4)  On Christmas Day, December 25; or 
(5)  After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24. 
(g)  No delivery of alcohol to an off-sale licensee may be made by a wholesaler or accepted by an off-sale licensee on a Sunday. No order solicitation or merchandising may be made by a wholesaler on a Sunday. 
(h)  The council may further limit the days or hours of on and off sales of alcoholic beverages, provided that further restricted on-sale hours for intoxicating liquor must apply equally to on-sale hours of 3.2 percent malt liquor. A city may not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages during hours when the sale is prohibited by this section. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-21. - Minors on premises. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or to attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold unless accompanied by a parent or responsible person of legal age. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-22. - Restrictions on purchase and consumption. 
    No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the commissioner of public safety under the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Sec. 5-23. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The council may either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, Minn. Stat. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The council may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the office of hearing examiners for a hearing officer. 
(b)  The following are the recommended periods of suspension or revocation which may be imposed by the council for violations of the provisions of this chapter or Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time: 
(1)  For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor, or violation of section 5-4, the license may be revoked. 
(2)  The license may be suspended by the council after a finding under subsection (a) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as follows: 
a.  For the first violation within any three-year period, at least one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed. 
b.  For a second violation within any three-year period, at least three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed. 
c.  For the third violation within any three-year period, at least seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed. 
d.  For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license shall be revoked. 
(3)  The council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended. 
(c)  Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state law without further action of the council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the clerk, a hearing before the council shall be granted within ten days. Any suspension under this division (B) shall continue until the council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met. 
(d)  The provisions of section 5-30 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Secs. 5-24-5-29. - Reserved for future use. 
Sec. 5-30. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law. 
(b)  The council may impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000.00 for each violation of Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order for the council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, Minn. Stat. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the council may hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the recommended schedule of presumptive civil penalties which may be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the license is revoked: 
(1)  For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.00. 
(2)  For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.00. 
(3)  For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period, $2,000.00. 
(c)  The term "violation" as used in section 5-23 includes any and all violations of the provisions in this section, or of Minn. Stat. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 20, 5th series, eff. 7-1-17) 
Chapter 6 - OTHER BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
    Applicant. Any person making an application for a license under this chapter. 
    Application. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the applicant as his request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business. 
    Bond. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and specifically approved by the city Attorney. 
    Business. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
    License. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him to carry on and transact a business. 
    License fee. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business. 
    Licensee. An applicant who, pursuant to his application, holds a valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on a business. 
    Sale, sell and sold. All forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to persons. 
Sec. 6-2. - Applications. 
    All applications shall be made as follows: 
(1)  All applications shall be made at the office of the city administrator upon forms that have been formulated by the city for such purposes. 
(2)  All initial applications shall be accompanied by a payment of a single $5.00 fee to cover the cost of investigation as herein provided. 
(3)  All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Applicant's name and citizenship. 
b.  Applicant's present address and length of time he has lived at that address. 
c.  Applicant's occupation and length of time so engaged. 
d.  Applicant's addresses and occupations for the three years next preceding the date of application. 
e.  Names and addresses of applicant's employers, if any, for the three years next preceding the date of application. 
f.  Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense. 
g.  Type of license and location of premises for which application is made. 
h.  At least four character references if applicant has not resided in the city for two years next preceding the date of application. 
i.  Such other information as the council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the business for which license application is made. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission to state any information called for on such application form, shall, upon discovery of such falsehood work an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part hereof. 
(5)  The city administrator shall, upon receipt of each application completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as he deems necessary. For such investigation the city administrator may enlist the aid of the chief of police. The council shall not consider an application before such investigation has been completed. 
Sec. 6-3. - Action on application for license. 
(a)  Granting. The council may grant any application for the period of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be consistent with this chapter. 
(b)  Issuing. If an application is approved, the city administrator shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee, and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise specified herein as to particular businesses. Unless otherwise specified herein, license fees shall be pro-rated on the basis of one-twelfth for each calendar month or part thereof remaining in the then current license year. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described. In order to effectuate the change in license year, the city administrator is hereby authorized to credit the applicant for any unearned portion of a license fee, or charge a pro-rated amount only. 
(c)  Transfer. A license shall be transferable between persons upon consent of the council and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this subsection. 
(d)  Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation. 
(e)  Refusal and revocation. The council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application, or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the council shall give notice to the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for such hearing. 
(f)  Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the city administrator, without action of the council, upon licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $2.00 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked DUPLICATE. 
Sec. 6-4. - Fixing license fees. 
    All license fees provided for in this chapter, shall be fixed and determined by the council, and, unless otherwise specifically stated herein, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such license fees may, from time to time, be amended by the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the city administrator, and open to inspection during regular business hours. 
Sec. 6-5. - Carrying or posting. 
    All transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors shall at all times when so engaged, carry their license on their person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed activity. Provided, however, that in the case of machine or other device licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring such sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen. 
Sec. 6-6. - Penalty for property owners. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this chapter. 
Sec. 6-7. - Responsibility of licensee. 
    The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit is issued shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee himself. 
Sec. 6-8. - Conviction of crime-Denial of license. 
    A license may be denied to an applicant by the council solely or in part due to a prior conviction of a crime by an applicant only upon a finding that such conviction directly relates to the occupation for which the license is sought, and then only after considering evidence of rehabilitation and such other evidence as may be presented, all in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. Provided, however, that an applicant must show his present fitness to perform the occupation for which the license is sought. 
Sec. 6-9. - Conditional licenses. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the council may, upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified. 
Sec. 6-10. - Renewal of licenses. 
    Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and shall contain such information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be waived by the council for good and sufficient cause. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 6-11. - License denial and fixing rates-Hearing. 
(a)  Right to deny. The council reserves to itself the right to deny any application for a license to operate any business licensed or regulated under this chapter where such business involves service to the public, rates charged for service, use of public streets or other public property by the applicant or the public, or the public health, safety and convenience. The council may also consider the location of such business before making such determination. Provided, however, that before making such determination, the council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to such notice to interested parties and the public as it may deem necessary or proper in action calling for such hearing. 
(b)  Rates. Where, under specific provisions of this chapter, the council has reserved to itself the right to fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a licensed or regulated business, such rates shall be uniform for each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business shall claim or demand payment in excess thereof. 
(c)  Hearing. Any applicant or licensee under this chapter who challenges denial of a license or rates fixed or approved by the council shall have a right to a hearing before the council upon written request therefor. Notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given to such persons and by such means as the council may determine in calling the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 25, 2nd series; eff. 9-29-82) 
Secs. 6-12-6-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-20. - Mechanical amusement devices. 
(a)  Definition. The term "mechanical amusement device" means any device excepting coin-controlled music devices, and also excepting pool and billiard tables, bowling alleys and shooting lanes but including miniatures thereof, played by manipulating special equipment and propelling balls or other projectiles across a board or field into respective positions whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special number or numbers or a high or low total score or any other method used to indicate a winner which may be played by the public generally at a price paid either directly or indirectly for such privilege, whether a prize is offered for the game or not. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a mechanical amusement device for use by the public without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Unlawful use and devices. It is unlawful for any person to: (1) sell or maintain a machine or device which is for gambling or contains an automatic pay-off device; (2) give any prize, award, merchandise, gift, or thing of value to any person on account of operation of such device; (3) sell or maintain, or permit to be operated in his place of business, any mechanical amusement device equipped with an automatic pay-off device; (4) equip any mechanical amusement device with an automatic pay-off device; or, (5) permit persons under the age of 18 years to play or operate any mechanical amusement device. 
Sec. 6-21. - Billiards, pool and bowling. 
(a)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pool, billiard, snooker or other game table, or any bowling alley (bowling lane) available for public use without first having obtained a license from the city. 
(b)  Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any: 
(1)  Pool, billiard, snooker or other game table licensee to be open between 1:00 o'clock a.m. and 8:00 o'clock a.m. of any weekday, or between 1:00 o'clock a.m. and 12:00 o'clock noon on any Sunday, and permit use of such licensed facilities. 
(2)  Any person under the age of 19 years to play pool, billiards, snooker or other such table game where non-intoxicating malt liquor or intoxicating liquor is sold or consumed, unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(3)  For any licensee to cause or permit any person under the age of 19 years to play pool, billiards, snooker or other similar table game where non-intoxicating malt liquor or intoxicating liquor is sold or consumed unless such minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(4)  For any licensee to permit any form of gambling thereon. 
(5)  For any licensee to permit any person to become disorderly or to use profane, obscene or indecent language. 
(6)  For any licensee, not having an on-sale liquor license, to sell or possess, or knowingly allow any person on the licensed premises to sell or possess, intoxicating liquor. 
Sec. 6-22. - Shows. 
(a)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. This section shall not apply to premises licensed under Chapter 5 of the City Code. 
(b)  Exceptions. No license shall be required in the following instances: 
(1)  Performances presented in the local schools and colleges, under the sponsorship of such schools and colleges, and primarily for the students thereof only. 
(2)  Performance of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or colleges using student talent only. 
(3)  Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide local church and nonprofit organizations, provided that such organization shall be incorporated. 
(c)  Obscenity prohibited. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
a.  Nudity: Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered. 
b.  Obscene performance: A performance which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct. 
c.  Obscenities: Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or excretory meaning. 
d.  Performance: Any play, motion picture film, dance, or other exhibition pictured, animated, or live, performed before an audience. 
e.  Sado-masochistic abuse: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
f.  Sexual conduct: Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
g.  Sexual excitement: The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary consideration or other valuable commodity or service, to knowingly or recklessly (1) exhibit an obscene performance, or, (2) directly or indirectly sell an admission ticket or other means to gain entrance to an obscene performance, or, (3) directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises whereon there is exhibited an obscene performance. 
(3)  In any prosecution under this subsection it is an affirmative defense and for the defendant to prove (1) that the defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public library, or was acting in the course of his employment as an employee of such organization or of a retail outlet affiliated with and serving the educational purpose of such organization, or, (2) that the defendant was charged with exhibiting, selling an admission ticket, or permitting admission to a performance, those portions of which might otherwise be contraband forming merely an incidental part of an otherwise non-offending whole, and serving some legitimate purpose therein other than titillation, or, (3) that the defendant is a licensed movie theater, or an employee of a licensed movie theater, that the act complained of refers to a show presented by such licensee, and that revenues from shows prohibited hereunder constitute less than 25 percent of gross revenues in any calendar year. 
Sec. 6-23. - Sales of obscene material. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
(1)  Sales: To sell or rent to the public for a consideration. 
(2)  Obscene material: Any printed matter, visual presentation or sound recording representing terms defined in subsection 6-22(c)(1)a. through c., inclusive, and e. through g., inclusive. 
(b)  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to sell obscene material upon any premises or in any business establishment not otherwise licensed under this chapter if such sales constitute more than 25 percent of gross revenues in any calendar year. 
Sec. 6-24. - Public dances. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
(1)  Public dance: Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing, and also all teenage dances. 
(2)  Public dancing place: Any room or space open to the public in which dancing is carried on and to which admission may be had by the public by payment directly or indirectly of an admission fee or price for dancing. 
(3)  Police officer: Any person who is a fulltime peace officer or part-time peace officer of International Falls. 
(4)  Teenage dance: Any dance held primarily for those persons 19 years of age and younger. 
(b)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a public dance without first obtaining a license from the city administrator. No license shall be issued to anyone under the age of 18 years. 
(1)  License fee. The fee for each dance shall be four times the hourly pay scale of the International Falls police patrolman as stated in the current labor contract between the city and the police department on file in the city administrator's office. 
(2)  Application for license. An application for a dance license shall be filed with the city administrator at least seven days before the date of the dance and shall specify the name and address of the person, persons, committee and place thereof and whether the dance is for teenagers, adults or both. 
(3)  At least one police officer shall be assigned by the chief of police or his designee, to every public dance and shall be in attendance if at all reasonably possible. 
(4)  The dance license shall be made available to the officer in attendance. 
(5)  A license may apply for a yearly right to hold dances as long as the locations, time and circumstances are adequately described, and the proper fees paid in advance. Upon payment of this fee the city administrator may issue up to 12 licenses. 
(c)  Dance regulations. 
(1)  Obscenity and immorality prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to dance, at any public dance, in an indecent or obscene manner as defined in section 6-22. It shall be unlawful for any person at a public dance to speak rude, boisterous, obscene or indecent manner or for any licensee to permit any person so to act or speak in a public dancing place. Nor shall any licensee permit any intoxicated person or any person who persists in violating the law, to be or remain in a public dancing place. 
(2)  Illumination. Every public dancing place shall be illuminated, while in public use, with sufficient lighting to allow the police officer in attendance to observe the activities therein. 
(3)  Hours of dancing. Public dances shall not be held or conducted after the hour of 1:00 a.m. of any day. All teenage dances shall end at 12:00 midnight, except for the prom dance as established by school district 361 shall end at 1:00 a.m. 
(d)  Application and license. 
(1)  A verified application for a dance license shall be filed with the city and shall specify the names and addresses of the person, persons, committee or organization that is to hold the dance, time and place thereof, and area of the dance floor. 
(2)  All applications shall be accompanied by affidavits of two residents showing that the applicant is of good character and reputation in the community in which he lives, that he has not been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or violation of any public dance laws within the past five years. No license shall be issued to any person who has been so convicted. 
(3)  No license shall be granted by the council for any place having so-called "private apartments" or "private rooms" furnished or used for any purposes other than legitimate business purpose which adjoins such dancing place, or which may be reached by stairs, elevators, or passageways leading from such dancing place. Nor shall a license be granted for any place which is not properly ventilated and equipped with necessary toilets, washrooms or lighting facilities. 
(4)  Applications may be referred to the chief of police for investigation prior to being acted upon by council. 
(5)  The council shall act upon all dance licensed applications at a regular or special meeting thereof, whether or not is it included in the call or agenda of the meeting. 
(6)  At least one officer of the law shall be designated by the chief of police to be present at every public dance during the entire time said dance is being held. For purposes of this subsection, the term "officer of the law" means any person who is a fulltime peace officer, parttime peace officer, or person deputized by the chief of police. 
(7)  The dance license shall be posted in the public dancing place and shall state the name of the licensee, the amount paid therefor, and the time and place licensed. The license shall also state that the licensee is responsible for the manner of conducting the dance. 
(e)  Dance regulations. 
(1)  Obscenity and immorality prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to dance, or for a licensee to permit or suffer any person to dance at any public dance in an indecent or immodest manner. It is also unlawful for any person at a public dance to speak in a rude, boisterous, obscene, or indecent manner or for any licensee to suffer or permit any person so to act or speak in any public dancing place. 
(2)  Illumination. Every public dancing place shall be brightly illuminated while in public use, and dancing therein while the lights are extinguished, dimmed or turned low so as to give imperfect illumination is prohibited. 
(3)  Certain persons prohibited. No licensee shall permit any unmarried person under the age of 16 years, unless said unmarried person is accompanied by his parent or guardian, to remain in a public dancing place. Nor shall any licensee permit any intoxicated person, or other person who persists in violating the law, to be or remain in a public dancing place. 
(4)  Hours of dancing. All public dances held on Saturday shall close promptly at 1:00 o'clock a.m. Public dances shall not be held or conducted between the hours of 1:00 o'clock a.m. and 6:00 o'clock a.m. of any day. 
(Ord. No. 39, 2nd series, eff. 4-5-85; Ord. No. 7, 3rd series, eff. 3-27-95) 
Sec. 6-25. - Tobacco. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "tobacco" means and includes tobacco in any form, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, bagged, canned or packaged product. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise dispose of any tobacco in any form unless a license therefor shall first be obtained from the city. 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  Separate licenses shall be issued for the sale of tobacco at each fixed place of business, and no license shall be issued for a movable place of business. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or give away any tobacco in any form to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person to keep for sale, sell or dispose of any tobacco in any form containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or any other deleterious or poisonous drug except nicotine. 
Sec. 6-26. - Junk dealers. 
(a)  Definition. The term "junk" as used in this section means and includes, but is not limited to, scrap of all kinds such as metal, paper, rags and wood. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to deal in junk without having a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Bond requirement. Before issuing a junk dealer's license as provided for herein, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the city administrator a bond in the penal sum of $2,000.00 with sufficient sureties approved by the council and conditioned that said applicant will in every particular conform with the requirements of any law relating to junk dealers. 
Sec. 6-27. - Peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants. 
(a)  Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Peddler means any person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivery immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term peddler shall mean the same as the term "hawker." 
Person means any natural, individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee. 
Regular business day means any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business days. 
Solicitor means a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term "canvasser." 
Transient merchant includes any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies for a period of less than 30 days any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction, provided that such definition does not include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall be relieved from these provisions by reason of a temporary association or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, unless by a partnership. 
(b)  Exceptions to definitions. 
(1)  For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms peddler, solicitor, and transient merchant shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established regular delivery route. 
(2)  In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be exempt from the definitions of peddler, solicitor, and transient merchants, as shall be anyone conducting an auction by a properly licensed auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance. 
(c)  Licensing; exemptions. 
(1)  County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by M.S. Ch. 329 as it may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to subsection (g) of this section. 
(3)  Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the city council and available from the office of the city administrator. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following information. 
a.  Applicant's full legal name. 
b.  All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially answers. 
c.  A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like). 
d.  Full address of applicant's permanent residence. 
e.  Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence. 
f.  Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent. 
g.  Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any). 
h.  Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant. 
i.  The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license. 
j.  Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license. 
k.  The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days). 
l.  Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business. 
m.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance other than traffic offenses. 
n.  A list of three most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant. 
o.  Proof of any requested county license. 
p.  Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant. 
q.  A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided. 
r.  All additional information deemed necessary by the city council. 
s.  The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification. 
t.  The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle. 
(4)  Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee established in City Code section 6-4 entitled "Fixing license fees," as it may be amended from time to time. 
(5)  Procedures. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the city administrator, within two regular business days, must determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the city administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the city administrator must inform the applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete, the city administrator must order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete application the city administrator must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the license under subsection (d) of this section, in which case the city administrator must deny the license. If the city administrator denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a Writ of Certiorari. 
A transient merchant must secure a personal permit and provide the sum of $1,000.00 or certified/cashiers check in the amount of $1,000.00 to the city, conditioned that the principal named therein will observe all laws of transient merchants, and conduct his/her business in conformity thereto for one year from the last day of selling goods, wares, or merchandise in the city pursuant to the permit. No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The city administrator shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(6)  Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license. 
(7)  License exemptions. 
a.  No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm. 
b.  No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place where the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of constitutional; rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity. 
c.  Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt organization shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  License ineligibility. The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter: 
(1)  The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county license. 
(2)  The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application. 
(3)  The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person. 
(4)  The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant. 
(5)  The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the attorney general's office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five years. 
(e)  Suspensions and revocation. 
(1)  Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the city council for violation of any of the following: 
a.  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application form. 
b.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity. 
c.  Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied under subsection (d) of this section. 
d.  Violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked. 
(3)  Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under the is chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license application. 
(4)  Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in subsection (e)(3) of this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the city administrator within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated timeframe, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision. 
(5)  Emergency. If, in the discretion of the city council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the city council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in subsection (e)(3) of this section. 
(6)  Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court. Penalty, see section 6-99. 
(f)  Transferability. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was issued. Penalty, see section 6-99. 
(g)  Registration. All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter under subsection (c) of this section shall be required to register with the city. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the city administrator [shall] issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable. 
(h)  Prohibited activities. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure. 
(2)  Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way. 
(3)  Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public. 
(4)  Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(5)  Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another person. 
(6)  Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person. 
(7)  Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive. 
(i)  Exclusion by placard. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No Peddlers, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants," or "Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited," or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section. 
(j)  Exhibition of permit. Permitees are required to exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen. 
(k)  Duty of police to enforce. It shall be the duty of the police to require any person seen peddling, soliciting, or operating as a transient merchant and who is not known by such officer to have obtained a permit hereunder to produce his permit and to enforce the provisions of this section against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 30, 3rd series, eff. 2-19-01) 
Sec. 6-28. - Pawnbrokers and second-hand goods dealers. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section, the following words shall mean: 
(1)  Pawnbroker: A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. 
(2)  Second-hand goods dealer: A person engaging in the business of buying or selling or both of second-hand goods of any kind excepting goods and merchandise defined as junk or used metal under City Code provisions, used, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicles intended to be wrecked or dismantled, and goods and merchandise taken as part or full payment for new goods and merchandise. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker or in the business of dealer in second-hand goods without a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Application-Second-hand goods and antiques. Any person desiring to have an exhibition, convention, show or exposition of second-hand goods or antiques for a limited period of time may apply to the council for a license so to do. The application shall contain the name, or names, of the persons desiring or who will be responsible for the exhibition, convention, show or exposition, and the dates, time and place during which such exhibition, convention, show or exposition will be held, provided that such period of time shall not exceed five calendar days; and the application shall give the name and address of the person, or persons who will be responsible for the conduct and management of such exhibition, convention, show or exposition, and such person shall give bond to the city, written by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota in the penal sum of $10,000.00, and conditioned that the principal named therein will observe all laws in relation to dealers in second-hand goods and antiques and conduct the business in conformity thereto, and will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any goods, wares or merchandise, article or thing, which may have come into his or their hands through the business transacted at such exhibition, convention, show or exhibition, or, in lieu thereof, will pay in money to such person or persons the reasonable value thereof. 
(d)  License fees. 
(1)  The annual license fee for a pawnbroker's license with an established place of business in International Falls shall be $25.00. 
(2)  The annual license fee for a second-hand goods dealer with an established place of business in International Falls shall be $25.00. 
(3)  The limited license fee for a second-hand goods and antique dealer for an exhibition, convention, show or exposition shall be $300.00. 
(e)  Expiration of licenses. All licenses under this section shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(f)  Bonds required. Before a license shall be issued, bonds in the following amounts shall be filed with the city administrator: 
(1)  Pawnbroker, with an established place of business in International Falls ..... $1,000.00 
bond 
(2)  Second hand goods dealer, with an established place of business in International Falls ..... $1,000.00 
bond 
(3)  Second-hand goods dealer, with limited license ..... $10,000.00 
bond 
(g)  Condition of bonds. All such bonds shall be conditioned that the principal named therein will observe all laws in relation to pawnbrokers, and dealers in second-hand goods and conduct his business in conformity thereto, and that he will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto, any goods, wares or merchandise, article or thing, which may have come into his hands through his business as such pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand goods, or in lieu thereof will pay in money to such person or persons the reasonable value thereof. 
(h)  Records required. Every person who shall be engaged in the business of pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand goods shall keep a book in which shall be clearly written in ink, at the time of each loan or purchase, an accurate account or description, in the English language, of the goods, article or thing pawned, pledged or purchased, the amount of money loaned or paid therefor, the time of the receipt of the same, the name, residence and description of the person pawning, pledging or selling the same as verified by a government issued photo identification card. Such book, as well as the article pawned or purchased, shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the mayor or any member of the police force. 
(i)  Receipts required. Every such pawnbroker and dealer in second-hand goods purchasing or receiving on deposit for a loan any article or personal property shall give to the person selling or depositing such article or personal property a plain written or printed ticket or receipt for the article or personal property so sold or deposited, showing the terms of such sale or loan and a copy of the entries in his book above required relating to such sale or loan. 
(j)  Reports to police. Every pawnbroker and dealer in second-hand goods, upon being served with a written notice to do so by a member of the police department, shall make out and deliver to the chief of police, upon blank forms to be furnished by the police department, by the end of the second business day following such service exclusive of the day of such service, a legible correct copy from the book required in subsection (h) of this section, of all personal property or other valuable things received or deposited or purchased during such time period specified in the notice together with the date when received or purchased and the name, address and description of the person or persons by whom left in pledge or from whom the same were purchased and form of government identification used for verification. Provided, that no person shall be required to furnish such description of any property purchased from merchants, manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or of goods purchased at open sale from any bankrupt stock. But such property and goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open or legitimate purchase, which must be shown to the mayor or any member of the police force when demanded. 
(k)  Redemption period. Any person pledging an article shall have three months to redeem the same before the pledge becomes forfeitable. 
(l)  Required holding period. No personal property received on deposit by any pawnbroker shall be redeemed from the place of business of such pawnbroker before the end of the third business day next after the deposit or pledge or purchase of any personal property, and no personal property purchased by any such pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand goods shall be sold or disposed of in any way within the period of ten days next after the delivery to the chief of police of the copy and statement relating thereto as required in subsection (j) of this section. 
(m)  Police order to hold property. Whenever the chief of police, or any member of the police force designated by the chief of police, shall notify any dealer or dealers not to sell any property so received on deposit or purchased by them or permit the same to be redeemed, such property shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed until such time as may be determined by the chief of police or member of the police force designated by the chief of police so requiring them to be held. 
(n)  Hours. No property shall be received as a pledge or purchase by any dealer on any day before 8:00 a.m., nor any day after 8:00 p.m. Further, no pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand goods shall be open for business on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(o)  Business at only one place. Any license issued under this section shall authorize the licensee to carry on such business only at the place designated in such license. No licensee shall store or pile, or cause or permit to be stored or piled, any second-hand goods in any building, yard, enclosure, vacant lot, street or alley or at any other place than the place designated in his said license. 
(p)  Use of "three balls." No person shall exhibit and maintain any sign usually known as a pawnbroker's sign, such as "three balls", or any number of balls, or any manner advertise to loan money on deposit, or pledge of personal property or other valuable thing, without being licensed under this section. 
(q)  Minors; prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to each particular transaction, to sell, pawn or pledge any personal property or other valuable thing with any person licensed to do business under this section. It is also unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to represent to any person licensed under the provisions of this section, at the time of his selling, pawning, attempting to pawn, or pledging of any personal property, that he is 18 years of age or over. 
(r)  Dealing with minors or persons of limited capacity. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand goods to purchase or receive on deposit any personal property, goods, wares, merchandise, article or thing, from minors except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to each particular transaction, persons of unsound mind, or intoxicated persons. 
(s)  License condition. Any applicant for a license as a dealer in second-hand goods shall specify in his application the type of goods, wares or merchandise which he desires to deal in and the license, if issued, shall limit the dealer to the type of goods, wares or merchandise specified in the application. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2nd series, eff. 3-31-82; Ord. No. 11, 4th series, eff. 2-21-04; Ord. No. 6, 5th Series, eff. 12-31-10) 
Sec. 6-29. - Gambling. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the conduct of certain gambling activities pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, §§ 349.11-349.22 inclusive. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the terms used herein shall have the meanings defined or as used in Minnesota Statutes, §§ 349.11-349.22 inclusive. 
(c)  Prohibition. There shall be no gambling in the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this section and the provisions of Minnesota Statutes §§ 349.11-349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant thereto. 
(d)  Approval by council. All forms of lawful gambling authorized by Minnesota Statutes §§ 349.11-349.22 may be approved by the council, subject to the provisions of the section of the Code and law. 
(e)  Application. An organization seeking to obtain a gambling license from the board shall file in the office of the city administrator an executed, complete duplicate application, together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as filed with the board. The application and accompanying exhibits and documents shall be filed in the office of the city administrator not later than three (3) days after they have been filed with the Board. Upon filing the application with the city, applicant shall pay to the city an amount determined by resolution of the council as and for an investigation fee. 
(f)  Conditions. Lawful gambling licenses shall be disapproved if the issuing thereof would result in a violation of any of the following conditions: 
(1)  That any fraternal, religious, veterans, or other non-profit organization whose original registered office and principal place of activity was and has been located in Koochiching County for the three years immediately preceding the date of application for a license shall be eligible for a lawful gambling license; and. 
(2)  No fraternal, religious, veterans, or other non-profit organization can lease more than one site for gambling within the city unless they expend at least 90 percent of their expenditures for lawful purposes within the City's trade area. 
(3)  That only one lease will be permitted on the premises of each on-sale liquor establishment. 
(g)  Expenditures for lawful purposes. Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §§ 349.16, must expend 75 percent of its expenditures for lawful purposes conducted or located within the city's trade area which is within the geographical boundaries of school district #361. 
(h)  Records and reports. 
(1)  Each organization shall file with the city administrator one copy of all reports, along with proof of compliance with subsection (g) of this section, five days before it is submitted to the board. 
(2)  The city's police officers may inspect the gambling premises. All books and records, including bank records, shall be available for inspection by the city administrator and/or the police at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 35, 2nd series; eff. 3-31-84; Code of 1991; Ord. No. 25, 3rd series, § 1, eff. 10-12-99; Ord. No. 29, 3rd Series, 12-1-00; Ord. No. 4, 4th series, eff. 7-18-02) 
Secs. 6-30-6-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-40. - Taxicabs. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Driver means the person driving and having physical control over a taxicab whether he be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator. 
    Operator means a licensee owning or otherwise having control of one or more taxicabs. 
    Taxicab means any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing a scheduled or unscheduled route for public use or hire upon payment of a fare or at regular fare rates, but not including such as are designed for mass transportation as buses, trains or streetcars. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  License issuance and display, and vehicle marking. All licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as otherwise herein provided. License tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. Both sides of every licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked as such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the full or abbreviated name of the licensed operator. 
(d)  Insurance required. Before a taxicab license is issued by the council, and at all times effective during such licensed period, the licensee shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount of $50,000.00 for any one person and $100,000.00 for two or more persons injured in any one accident, as well as $10,000.00 property damage insurance. Such insurance shall cover all passengers carried by the insured licensee and shall be for public taxicab purposes. All such policies shall contain a clause providing for ten days' written notice to the city administrator before cancellation and a memorandum of such insurance shall be furnished to the city before a license is issued. 
(e)  Rates. Each applicant shall file with the city administrator, before a taxicab license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed maximum rates to be charged by him during the licensed period for which the application is made. The schedule of proposed maximum rates, or a compromise schedule thereof, shall be approved by the council before granting the license. Such schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab in full view of passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from petitioning the council for review of such rates during the licensed period, and the council may likewise consider such petition and make new rates effective at any time. No taxicab licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates approved by the council. 
(f)  Mechanical condition. Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the council a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers and that it is in neat and clean condition. Such similar certificate may be required from time to time during the licensed period. In lieu of such certificate the council may accept the report of the chief of police relative thereto. 
Sec. 6-41. - Garbage and refuse haulers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Garbage means all putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage and other water-carried wastes. 
    Other refuse means ashes, glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and similar nonputrescible wastes but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone, concrete, trees, tree branches and wood. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage or other refuse for hire without a license therefor from the city, or to haul garbage or other refuse from his own residence or business property other than as herein excepted. 
(c)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from hauling garbage or other refuse from their own residences or business properties provided the following rules are observed: (1) that all garbage is hauled in containers that are water-tight on all sides and the bottom and with tight-fitting covers on top, (2) that all other refuse is hauled in vehicles with leak-proof bodies and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other means or material so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo, and, (3) that all garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only at the designated sanitary landfill. 
(d)  Hauler licensee requirements. 
(1)  Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition that the licensee have tight packer-type vehicles in good condition to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo, that the vehicle be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible and not allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect garbage or refuse, and that the same be dumped or unloaded only at the designated sanitary landfill, and strictly in accordance with regulations relating thereto. 
(2)  Every vehicle used to collect garbage or refuse shall have the name of the owner of the owner or operator and the city license number under which it is being operated on the body of the vehicle, or on a durable metal or wood plaque which shall be fastened to the body, at all times when the vehicle is used for collecting garbage or refuse. 
(3)  Before a garbage and refuse hauler's license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the city administrator evidence that he has provided public liability insurance on all vehicles in at least the sum of $50,000.00 for the injury of one person, $100,000.00 for the injury of two or more persons in the same accident, and $10,000.00 for property damages. Said policy shall carry an endorsement that the policies will not be cancelled or terminated without first giving notice to the city, in writing, at least ten days prior to the proposed cancellation. 
Sec. 6-42. - Filling stations. 
(a)  Definition. The term "filling station" means any building, structure or premise, enclosure or other place where a container or containers, tank or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing either carbon bisulphide, gasoline, naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquified petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine, or other inflammable liquids, having a flash point below 165 degrees Fahrenheit, are kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale, or distributing any such liquids from such containers, tank or tanks, provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any place where such inflammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a filling station without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. No building permit shall be issued for a filling station until such license has been granted by the council. 
(c)  General regulations-Inspection. All filling stations shall be conducted, maintained, operated and constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the City Code, and shall be inspected semi-annually by the city for compliance with proper maintenance rules and regulations. 
(d)  Curb stations prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate a filling station, or to allow any portion of a vehicle to remain outside the filling station premises, on any street or other public property. 
Sec. 6-43. - Restaurants. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Employee means any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food and drink is prepared or served. 
    Itinerant restaurant means a restaurant operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar gathering and street stands. 
    Restaurant means a restaurant, coffee shop, cafe, short order cafe, luncheonette, food bar, or snack bar in connection with another business, sandwich stand, or soda fountain, wherein food is prepared and offered for sale, and intended for human consumption. 
    Utensils means any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during a storage, preparation or serving. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant or itinerant restaurant without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Unsanitary conditions prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant or itinerant restaurant if the same is in a filthy, unclean, unsanitary or substandard condition. 
(d)  Power of board of health. If, in the opinion of the board of health, any restaurant or itinerant restaurant is operating in violation of this section, the board of health shall notify the operator thereof to place the same in a clean and sanitary condition within a reasonable time to be stated in the notice, which shall in no case be less than 48 hours and failure to comply with such notice within the time so stated shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Diseased employees prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to work in or about any restaurant or itinerant restaurant, or for any employer to knowingly permit any person to work in any such place whose condition is such that disease may spread to his associates or to the public directly through the medium of food, food products or food service, whether such condition is due to a contagious, infectious or venereal disease, in its active or convalescent stage, or to the presence of disease germs, whether accompanied by or without any symptoms of the disease itself. 
(f)  Physical examination required. It is unlawful for any person to be employed or work as a food handler without first having taken a physical examination given by any physician licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota, and having obtained a certificate therefor, as being free of any communicable disease. 
(g)  Special physical examination. Whenever a complaint is made, or whenever in the opinion of the board of health the same is necessary, special physical examination of the persons suspected of violating this section shall be held, and such persons may be prohibited from continuing in such employment if they are found to be diseased or otherwise to be violating the provisions of this section. 
(h)  Adoption of standards by reference. The Requirements and Standards of the Minnesota Department of Health, issued pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, for food, beverage and lodging establishments are hereby adopted by reference as though repeated verbatim herein. Three copies of said requirements and standards shall be kept on file in the office of the city administrator and open for inspection and use by the public, and shall be marked with the words CITY OF INTERNATIONAL FALLS-OFFICIAL COPY. 
Sec. 6-44. - Dwelling unit rental license. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "dwelling unit" means any structure, or part thereof, used by any individual person, family, or other group of individual persons as their temporary or permanent place of abode, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, apartments and single family dwellings. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person, as owner or tenant, to lease, let or sublet, for a consideration any dwelling unit to another person without a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Inspection required. Before issuance or renewal of any dwelling unit rental license, such unit or units, and the structure within which it is situated, shall be inspected by the city and shall comply with the Housing Code, the City Code, and all other law relating thereto. 
(d)  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any licensee to substantially modify any dwelling unit, or the structure within which it is situated, during any license year without the express authority of the city other than for essentially cosmetic changes. Issuance of a building permit shall not constitute such authority. 
(e)  Absentee owners or applicants. No license shall be granted or renewed if the applicant or licensee is a nonresident of the city, unless such applicant or licensee has first appointed, in writing, a local agent upon whom service of process can be made. 
(f)  Complaints. Any tenant may complain to the city and the city shall thereupon reinspect the dwelling unit. If it is found that it does not comply, the license may be revoked after a hearing thereon. 
(g)  Garbage and rubbish removal. The owner of any dwelling unit requiring a license under this section is required to remove from the premises all accumulated garbage and rubbish on at least a weekly basis. If the owner fails to have the garbage removed timely after one prior written warning, the owner shall be required to contract with an approved garbage and rubbish disposal contractor. 
(Ord. No. 7, 5th series, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 6-45. - Kennels. 
(a)  Defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "kennel" means any place, building, tract of land, abode or vehicle, wherein or whereon three or more dogs, or three or more cats, over three months of age, are kept, kept for sale, or boarded. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Ownership defined. For the purpose of this section, any person who harbors, feeds, boards or keeps a dog or cat under his control shall be deemed the owner thereof. 
Sec. 6-46. - Massage parlors. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
    Massage means the performance of manipulative exercises upon the human body of another by rubbing, kneading, stroking, or tapping with the hand or hands or with any mechanical or bathing device. 
    Massage parlor means any place or establishment wherein a massage is made available to the public for a monetary or valuable consideration. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to own, establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor without a license therefor from the city in accordance with this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A duly licensed medical doctor, osteopath, chiropractor, nurse, or physical therapist while engaged in the practice of their respective profession; 
(2)  A person engaging in the practice of massage on his or her spouse or relative within the first degree of consanguinity in either of their residences; or 
(3)  A place or establishment which is a duly licensed hospital, dispensary, convalescent home or nursing home. 
(d)  In any prosecution for violation of this section, these exceptions shall constitute affirmative defenses and it shall be incumbent upon the defendant to show that he or she or the place involved is not subject to the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Each word, phrase and paragraph of this section is hereby declared to be an individual section or provision, and the holding of any word, phrase or paragraph to be void, ineffective or unconstitutional for any cause whatsoever, shall not be deemed to affect any other word, phrase or paragraph hereof or the application of any word, phrase or paragraph to circumstances or facts not connected with such holding. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 6-47-6-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-60. - Snowplowers. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "snowplower" means a person who by means of a motor vehicle, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, heavy equipment, or other mechanized, operator-ridden, vehicle plows or removes snow for a consideration. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate or carry on the business of a snowplower without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  License fee. The annual fee for a snowplower license shall be $15.00 per applicant, provided that such fee may be amended by resolution of the council. 
(d)  Insurance required. Proof of liability insurance shall be filed with each application for a snowplower's license. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 6-61. - Licensing of private patrol systems and private detective. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance "patrol systems," "private detective" and "principal" are defined as follows: 
    Patrol service. The words "patrol service" and "patrol system" shall be deemed to be any service or system which purports to furnish or does furnish to members or subscribers for a consideration, or otherwise, any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any area in the city, or to guard or watch any property, including those persons defined as a "Protective Agent" under M.S.A. § 326.338, Subd. 4, or "Security Guard" under M.S.A. § 326.32, Subd. 13(a). Patrol service and patrol system shall also include the performance by any person of guard duty at a public function while wearing a type of uniform which would indicate that such person is a peace officer. 
    Principal. A principal is a person, corporation or company that hires the patrol service or private detective to work within the City of International Falls. 
    Private detective. A private detective is one as defined by M.S.A. § 326.338, Subd. 1. 
(b)  Permit required. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as a principal or agent, to engage in the business of being a private detective conducting or maintaining or soliciting business for any patrol service or system without first obtaining a permit from the council of the city therefore, and without paying the annual license fee hereinafter provided for. 
(c)  Applications-Granting of permit. Before any person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of conduction or maintaining any private detective or patrol service or patrol system in the city, he or it shall make an application in writing to the city council for permission to engage in such business. The patrol service or system application shall describe the area in which the applicant shall desire to operate and the services the applicant intends to perform. All applications shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall make an investigation concerning the character of the applicant and as to patrol system or patrol service application the needs for protection in the area, and the chief of police shall within 14 days report thereon to the council. Upon receiving such report, the council shall grant or deny the applicant permission to engage in such business, and such permission shall be granted unless it shall appear from such report of the chief of police that the applicant is not a person of good moral character or has not a good character in respect to honesty and integrity. The council's permit shall determine the area the applicant may operate in and the services the applicant shall provide. 
(d)  Terms and conditions of permits. Any permit granted by the council as provided in the last preceding section of the ordinance, shall be issued upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The patrol service or patrol system shall be operated only within the area contained in the permit, and shall provide only the services listed in said permit. 
(2)  Any such permit and any license issued pursuant hereto may at any time be revoked by the city council for cause shown, after ten days written notice to the holder thereof and any opportunity to be heard shall have been given. 
(3)  No licensee is permitted to carry any weapon, night stick, or club on any property other than that owned or leased by its principal employer. 
(4)  That the licensee is complying with the state statutes as to their license requirements. 
(5)  Every person, firm or corporation applying for a patrol service license shall pay a license fee to the city. 
(e)  Any licensee or principal who knowingly allows his employee to violate the terms and conditions in the permit or terms and conditions as defined herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any employee of any licensee who violates the terms and conditions in his permit or terms and conditions as defined herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 62, 2nd series; eff. Dec. 1989; Ord. No. 8, 5th series, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 6-62. - Licensing of solid waste collection and recycling collection facilities. 
(a)  Definitions and interpretation. Unless specifically altered, terms and abbreviations used in this section shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with M.S.A., Chapters 115, 115A, 116, and 400. Terms and abbreviations used herein which are not specifically defined by law shall be construed in accordance with the context and professional usage. 
    Licensee means a person who has been issued a license by the city for recycling collection or solid waste collection purposes pursuant to this section. 
    Person means any human being, any municipality or other governmental or political subdivision or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, firm, association, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
    Recyclable materials means materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid waste, by the generator for the purpose of recycling, including paper, plastic, glass, magazines, automobile oil, and batteries. 
    Recycling facility means a facility where recyclable materials are purchased from generators or collectors, processed for marketing or loaded into vehicles for transport to market. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse and other solid waste from residential, environmental, industrial, and community activities which is generated and collected in aggregate, but does not include automobile parts, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludge, tree and agriculture wastes, trees, lead acid batteries, used oil, and other materials collected, processed, and disposed of in separate waste streams. 
(b)  License requirements. No recycling or solid waste collecting facility shall be constructed, established, maintained, or operated (even temporarily from a truck or motor vehicle) unless the operator or owner thereof has first been issued therefore a license from the City of International Falls. The applicant shall meet all requirements for obtaining a license. The application shall include three sets of complete plans, specifications, design data and ultimate land use plans. The applicant shall procure a proper zoning permit to accompany the application if required by the city. 
(1)  The city shall refuse to issue a license for any recycling or solid waste collection operation which does not comply with this section. 
(2)  The city shall revoke a license for any recycling operation or solid waste collection which does not comply with this section and any applicable state and county laws, ordinances and rules. 
(3)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this section are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this section, or any other applicable law, ordinance of rule, the provision which establishes the higher standards for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare shall prevail. 
(4)  A record of every license issued for a recycling facility or solid waste collection shall be filed in the office of the city administrator. 
(c)  License application requirements. Application for a license shall contain the following: 
(1)  Location, size, and, ownership of land upon which the operation will be situated. 
(2)  General description of property used in the immediate vicinity of the operation. 
(3)  Complete construction plans and specifications and proposed operating procedures for the operation. 
(4)  All common household recyclable materials must be accepted by any recycling facility. 
(5)  A notarized affidavit stating that the applicable local governments have been given 30 days written notification of the pending application for a license. 
(6)  A sign shall be posted on the premises indicating the name of the operation and the days and hours during which it is open to the public. 
(7)  Sanitary facilities and shelter adequate for employees shall be provided on the premises or at a nearby site. 
(8)  Records shall be maintained indicating the type and quantity of recyclable materials processed by the operation. 
(9)  The operation shall be located, equipped, operated, and maintained in a manner which prevents the creation of a nuisance or unsanitary condition. 
(10)  The premise entrances and exits shall be maintained in a clean, neat, and orderly manner at all times. 
(d)  License fee and period. License fee per year is as established by the council by separate resolution. License period is January 1 through December 31 of each year. 
(e)  Parking or storing of recycling solid waste collection vehicle or site. No person shall at any time park or store any recycling or solid waste collection vehicle or site on any premises zoned for use as a single or multiple residence dwelling, within 100 feet of any aforementioned premises, or within 200 feet of any food establishment, for purposes other than, or for periods inconsistent with, providing recycling or solid waste collection at said premises. No person shall at any time park or store any loaded or partially loaded recycling or solid waste collection vehicle or site on any premises within the city, except for the purpose of and for periods consistent with, providing recycling or solid waste collection at that parcel of property. 
(f)  Location of temporary recycling centers. Temporary recycling centers may be located in public parking lots, commercially or industrially zoned parking lots, and in church, school or non-profit organization parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 2, 3rd series, eff. 8-10-92) 
Sec. 6-63. - Lodging tax. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    City means the City of International Falls. 
    Lodger means the person obtaining lodging from an operator. 
    Lodging means the furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, tourist court, public/private campground except where such lodging shall be for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms owned by religious, educational or non-profit organizations for self sponsored activities shall not constitute "lodging" for purposes of this program. 
    Operator is defined to be the person who is the proprietor of the lodging facility, whether in the capacity of owners, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other capacity. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or any other combination of individuals,. Whenever the term "person" is used in any provision of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a corporation, association, or partnership, shall mean the officers, or partners thereof as the case may be. 
    Rent means the total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge itself. 
(b)  Imposition of tax. Pursuant to M.S.A. Ch. 469.19, there is hereby a tax imposed on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any person. The lodging tax program shall commence on the day after publication of this section. A tax of three percent shall be imposed on April 1, 1995, and thereafter. The tax collected by the operator shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this program to collect from a lodger. 
(c)  Collections. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this program at the time the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of payment from the operator. 
(d)  Exception and exemptions. 
(1)  Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provisions of federal law or international treaty. 
(2)  Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time the rent is collected and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty or perjury on forms provided by the city. All such claims shall be forwarded to the city when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this chapter. 
(e)  Advertising no tax. It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(f)  Payment and returns. The taxes imposed by this program shall be paid to the city monthly. At the time of payment the operator shall submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the city administrator may require. The return shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return. 
(2)  The total amount of exceptions/exemptions. 
(3)  The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period. 
(4)  The signature of the person filing the return or that of his agent duly authorized in writing. 
(5)  The period covered by the return. 
(6)  The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax. 
(g)  Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands. The city administrator shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of such refund. In the event any adjustment is made of the state's sales tax the operator must notify the city immediately. 
(h)  Refunds. Any person may apply to the city administrator for a refund of taxes paid in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for a refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is longer. The city administrator shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by certified mail to such person at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city administrator shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this program from the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the city administrator to the claimant. 
(i)  Failure to file a return. If any operator required by this program to file a return shall fail to do so within the time prescribed, or shall make willfully or otherwise an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file such return or corrected return within five days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, the city administrator shall make a return or corrected return, for such person from such knowledge and information as the director can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments thereof made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such return) shall be paid upon within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such return or assessment made by the city administrator shall be prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action of proceeding in respect thereto. 
(1)  If any portion of a tax imposed by this program, including penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the city may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the cost and disbursements of any action. 
(2)  Upon a showing of good cause, the city administrator may grant an operator one 30-day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by this chapter provided that interest during such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of ten percent per annum. 
(j)  Penalties. 
(1)  If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to ten percent of the amount remaining unpaid. 
(2)  In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the ten percent specific penalty provided in subsection (j)(1) of this section, ten percent if the failure is for not more than 30 days with an additional five percent for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which failure continues not exceeding 25 percent in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed ten dollars, a minimum penalty of ten dollars shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added be collected in the same manner as the tax. 
(3)  If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment required by this chapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50 percent of any tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of such false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which such return related. The penalty imposed by this subsection shall be collected as part of the tax and shall be in addition to other penalties provided by this chapter. 
(4)  All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the tax due. 
(k)  Administration of tax. The city administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter. The director shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation required under this chapter. 
(l)  Examine records. The city administrator may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this program. Every such operator is directed and required to give to the city administrator the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. 
(m)  Violations. Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this program; or shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this chapter after written demand for such payments or who shall refuse to permit the city administrator to examine the books, records and paper under his or her control, or who shall willfully make an incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(n)  Use of proceeds. The 95 percent proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this program shall be used in accordance with M.S.A. § 469.190, as the same may be amended from time to time to fund a local convention/tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist/convention center. The city may retain a maximum of five percent for administrative cost. 
(o)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order of determination made by the city administrator under this chapter may file a petition for review of such notice, order or determination detailing the operator's reasons for contesting the notice, order of determination. The petition shall contain the name of petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the lodging subject to the order, notice or determination. 
(2)  The petition for review shall be filed with the mayor within ten days after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the petition the mayor, or his designee, shall set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner at least five days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(4)  At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's choosing at petitioner's own expense. 
(5)  The hearing shall be conducted by an independent third party agreed to by both the city and operator, provided only that the person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting of the order, notice or determination for which review is sought. 
(6)  The hearing examiner conducting the hearing shall make written findings of fact and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter and the evidence presented. The person conducting the hearing may affirm, reverse or modify the notice, order or determination made by the city administrator. 
(7)  Any decision rendered by the hearing examiner pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the city council. A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision must file a written notice of appeal with the mayor within ten days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the council agenda as soon as is practical. The council shall then review the findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they were correct. Upon a determination by the council that findings and conclusions were incorrect, the council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the hearing examiner or his designee upon the same standards as set forth in subsection (o)(6) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6, 3rd series, 2-27-95; Ord. No. 16, 5th series, eff. 7-13-16) 
Sec. 6-64. - Smoking prohibited in restaurants. 
(a)  Smoking prohibited in restaurants. No person shall smoke in any restaurant as defined in City Code Section 6-43(a). 
(b)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a restaurant which has an on-sale liquor license issued pursuant to City Code Chapter 5 from designating it's premises exempt from the provisions of this Code section by filing with the office of the city administrator a copy of its most recent annual report of food and liquor sales records as provided to federal or state revenue authorities documenting that sales of beer, malt liquor, and intoxicating liquor are more that 20% of total sales of food and beverages. This exception may also apply to a separated area of a restaurant with an on-sale liquor license where separation is provided by continuous floor-to-ceiling walls, interrupted only by closeable doors, which area is separately ventilated with negative air pressure in relation to the other areas of the restaurant. 
(c)  Responsibilities of proprietors. The proprietor or other person in charge of a restaurant shall ask any person who smokes where smoking is prohibited to refrain from smoking and, if the person does not refrain from smoking after being asked to do so, shall ask the person to leave. 
(d)  Ordinance consistent with other law. This ordinance is intended to complement the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, Minn. Stat.§§144.411 to 144.417 as amended. Nothing in this ordinance shall be read as permitting smoking in any location where smoking is prohibited by any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 22, 4th series, 11-11-05) 
Secs. 6-65-6-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 7 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- This chapter contains provisions as to scope and application relating to chapters 8 and 9 as well as this chapter. 

Sec. 7-1. - Application. 
(a)  The provisions of chapters 7, 8 and 9 applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States, this State, or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the State, subject to such specific exemptions as may be set forth in chapters 7, 8 and 9. 
(b)  Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of chapters 7, 8 and 9 applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Provisions specifically referring to bicycles shall be in addition to other provisions of these chapters applying to vehicles. 
Sec. 7-2. - Scope and orders of police officer. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of chapters 7, 8 and 9 relate exclusively to the streets, alleys and private roads in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads. 
(b)  Orders of a police officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
Sec. 7-3. - Traffic and parking control. 
(a)  Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking control unless the council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided in this section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, such marking or sign-posting shall attest to council action thereon. 
(b)  Temporarily restricting or directing traffic and parking; curb painting. 
(1)  When clearly marked, barricaded or sign-posted, traffic and parking may be temporarily restricted for any public or private use. All such restrictions shall be in accordance with the uniform policy promulgated by the city, acting through the chief of police, who shall be ultimately responsible to the council for the proper enforcement thereof. 
(2)  Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic lanes may be designated by painting the same upon streets and curbs. Such work shall be done under the direction of the city and in compliance with the provisions of chapters 7, 8 and 9. 
(3)  It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to sign-posting or marking authorized and described in this section. 
(4)  Experimental restrictions and directions may be placed on traffic and parking by the city, acting through the chief of police, and it shall be his duty to do so when an extra hazardous condition is observed or arises. It is unlawful to violate any restriction or direction when the same has been duly marked, barricaded or sign-posted. 
Sec. 7-4. - Ice and snow on public sidewalks and other public property. 
(a)  Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting private property within 24 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited. 
(b)  City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed from all public sidewalks, beginning 36 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow and ice which may be discovered thereon, and it may keep a record of the list of such removal and the private property adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed. 
(c)  Cost of removal to be assessed. The city administrator shall, upon direction of the council, and on receipt of the information provided for in the preceding subsection (b), extend the cost of such removal of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks which were cleared, and such special assessments shall at the time of certifying taxes to the county auditor be certified for collection as other special assessments are certified and collected. 
(d)  Civil suit for cost of removal. The city administrator shall, in the alternative, upon direction of the council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in subsection (b) hereof, the cost of such clearing and the cost and disbursements of a civil action therefor. 
(e)  City administrator to report sidewalks cleared. The city administrator shall present to the council at its first meeting after snow or ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as provided in subsection (b) of this section the report of the city thereon, and shall request the council to determine by resolution the manner of collection to be used as provided in subsection (c) or (d) of this section. 
(f)  Placing snow or ice in public street or other city property. It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific contract with the city, to remove snow from private property or alleys and place the same on a public street in such quantity, or in such manner, as to cause a hazard to travel, without adequate arrangements for the immediate removal thereof; and it is a misdemeanor for any person not acting under a contract with the city to dump snow on other city property. 
Sec. 7-5. - Regulation of grass, weeds, trees, shrubs, brush and other rank or harmful vegetation. 
(a)  City to control tree planting (standards). The city shall have control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging, all streets or other public property. The city may establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the species and types of trees to be planted, placement and the maintenance and removal thereof. Such standards shall be kept on file in the office of city administrator and may be revised from time to time by action of the council. 
(b)  Permit to plant or remove trees. It is a misdemeanor for any person to plant or remove any tree upon or overhanging streets, without first procuring from the city a permit in writing to do so. 
(c)  Cutting and removal of grass, weeds and other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or land or any part thereof in the City of International Falls to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley or for ten feet outside the property line if there be no curb, any growth of weeds, grass, brush, or other rank vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. If the grass or weeds in such place attain a height in excess of six inches it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with this subsection. It shall also be unlawful for any such person or persons to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, or plants detrimental to health to grow on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon, overhand or border any public place to allow to seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place. 
(d)  Duty of owner, lessee or occupant. It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass, brush and other rank poisonous or harmful vegetation or trees and shrubs as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of subd. 1 and 2; provided that cutting and removing such weeds, grass, and vegetation or trees and shrubs at least once in every three weeks, between May 15 and September 15 shall be deemed to be a compliance with this Code. Every owner of property abutting on any street shall, subject to the provisions herein requiring a permit therefore, trim, cut, remove, and otherwise maintain all trees and shrubs in unhazardous and healthy condition, from the line of such property nearest to such street to the center thereof. 
(e)  When city is to do work. If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with the housing inspector shall serve written notice upon the owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the care or control of any such lot or land to comply with the provision of this Code. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed such weeds, grass, brush or other vegetation within five days after receipt of such notice, or if no person can be found in the City of International Falls who either is or claims to represent the owner, the housing inspector shall cause such weeds, grass, brush and other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed and the actual cost of such cutting and removal, plus five percent for inspection and other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the housing inspector to the city council and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the property on which such weeds, grass, brush and other vegetation were located and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest and the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person who shall neglect to cut and remove weeds, grass, brush or other vegetation as directed in this Code, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice or who shall resist or obstruct the city administrator or his employees in the conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, or more than $500.00, and each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Definition. The word "person" as used in this Code shall mean and include one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock companies, societies and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued. 
(h)  Severability. If any provision of this Code or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provision or application of the Code which can be given without the valid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Code are severable. 
(Ord. No. 45, 2nd series, eff. 8-11-87) 
Sec. 7-6. - Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb and gutter. 
(a)  Methods of procedure. 
(1)  Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with this section if advance payment is made therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in advance. 
(2)  With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of Minnesota Statutes, presently beginning with § 429.011, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(b)  Permit required. It is a misdemeanor to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway, or roadway surfacing in any street or other public property in the city without a permit in writing from the city administrator. Application for such permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of work, and the length of time required for any such improvement ordered installed by the council. All applications shall be referred by the city administrator to the city engineer and no permit shall be issued until approval has been received from the city engineer. All such applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and plans and specifications consistent with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices shall also accompany the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person or property of another caused by such work. 
(c)  Specifications and standards. All construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk and curb and gutter improvements, including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with specifications and standards on file in the office of the city administrator and open to inspection and copying there. Such specifications and standards may be amended from time to time by the city, but shall be uniformly enforced. 
(d)  Inspection. The city engineer shall inspect such improvements as deemed necessary or advisable. Any work not done according to the applicable specifications and standards shall be removed and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the city engineer if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with specifications and standards, but this shall not place a continuing burden upon the city to inspect or supervise such work. 
Sec. 7-7. - Regulating the public rights-of-way in the public interest and to provide for the issuance and regulation of right-of-way permits. 
(a)  Right-of-way management findings, purpose, and intent. To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. 
Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new section of this Code relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This section imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this section, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this section provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way. 
This section shall be interpreted consistently with M.S.A. §§ 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This section shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules 7819.0050-7819.9950 and Minn. Rules, ch. 7560 where possible. To the extent any provision of this section cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This section shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Election to manage the public rights-of-way. Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to M.S.A. § 237.163, subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. 
(c)  Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section of this Code. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this section. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized. 
    Abandoned facility. A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user. 
    Applicant. Any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct, or otherwise place facilities in a right-of-way. 
    City. The City of International Falls, Minnesota. For purposes of subsection (cc), city also means the city's elected officials, officers, employees, and agents. 
    Collocate or collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the city or other governmental unit. 
    Commission. The State of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission. 
    Construction performance bond. Any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's option: 
 Individual project bond; 
 Cash deposit; 
 Security of a form listed or approved under M.S.A. § 15.73, subd. 3; 
 Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city; 
 Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; 
 A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city. 
    Degradation. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur. 
    Degradation cost. Subject to Minn. Rules 7819.1100, means the cost to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minn. Rules, Parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950. 
    Degradation fee. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost. 
    Department. The department of public works of the city. 
    Director. The director of the department of public works of the city, or her or his designee. 
    Delay penalty. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit. 
    Emergency. A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer. 
    Equipment. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way. 
    Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
    Excavation permit. The permit which, pursuant to this section, must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit. 
    Excavation permit fee. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in subsection (m). 
    Facility or facilities. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way used to provide utility or telecommunications service. 
    Five-year project plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction within the next five years. 
    Local representative. A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this section. 
    Management costs. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation M.S.A. § 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to subsection (ee) of this section. 
    Obstruct. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way, or so as to hinder maintenance of any city asset. 
    Obstruction permit. The permit which, pursuant to this section, must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein. 
    Obstruction permit fee. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the costs as provided in subsection (m). 
    Patch or patching. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's five-year project plan. 
    Pavement. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel. 
    Permit. Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in this section. 
    Permittee. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city under this section. 
    Person. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political. 
    Probation. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this section. 
    Probationary period. One year from the date that a person has been notified in writing that they have been put on probation. 
    Registrant. Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way. 
    Restore or restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation. 
    Restoration cost. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission rules. 
    Public right-of-way or right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service. 
    Right-of-way permit. Either the excavation permit, the obstruction permit, the small cell permit or any combination thereof depending on the context, required by this section. 
    Right-of-way user. 
(1)  A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S.A. § 237.162, subd. 4; or 
(2)  A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way. 
    Service or utility service. Includes (1) those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S.A. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable communications systems as defined in M.S.A. ch. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.A. ch. 308A; and (6) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling, or heating services. 
    Service lateral. An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises. 
    Small wireless facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment. 
    Supplementary application. An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued. 
    Temporary surface. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of pavement included in the city's two-year plan, in which case it is considered full restoration. 
    Trench. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement. 
    Telecommunications right-of-way user. A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of this section, a cable communication system defined and regulated under M.S.A. ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in M.S.A. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S.A. chs. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.A. ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this section except to the extent such entity is offering wireless service. 
    Two-year project plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction within the next two years. 
    Utility pole. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service. 
    Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a specific antenna. 
    Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service. 
    Wireless support structure. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city. 
(d)  Administration. The director is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. 
(e)  Utility coordination committee. The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee. Participation on the committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and, by making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the process of performing construction work therein. The city may determine the size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the city. 
(f)  Registration and right-of-way occupancy. 
(1)  Registration. Each person authorized to occupy or use, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information. 
(2)  Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city. 
(3)  Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this section. However, nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the M.S.A. ch. 216D, Gopher One Call Law. 
(g)  Registration information. 
(1)  Information required. Registration shall be requested on an application form produced by the city. The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers. 
b.  The name, address, and email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration. 
c.  A certificate of insurance or self-insurance: 
1.  Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city; 
2.  Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the: (1) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and (2) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and collapse of property; 
3.  Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; 
4.  Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; 
5.  Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter; 
6.  The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies; 
7.  If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is required to be filed under state law as recorded and certified to by the secretary of state; and 
8.  A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval from the applicable state or federal agency to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
d.  Any other information deemed necessary by the city engineer deemed necessary to adequately protect the health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
(2)  Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change. 
(h)  Reporting obligations. 
(1)  Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. 
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a "next-year project"); and 
b.  To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in this section, a "five-year project"). 
The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year projects and five-year projects. 
By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for inspection in the city's office a composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list. 
Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant. 
(2)  Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project. 
(i)  Permit requirement. 
(1)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so. 
a.  Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. 
b.  Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project. 
c.  Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion or the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked. 
(2)  Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless: (1) such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (2) a new permit or permit extension is granted. 
(3)  Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3 and notwithstanding subd. 2 of this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(4)  Permit display. Permits issued under this section shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city. 
(j)  Permit applications. Application for a permit is made to the city on forms approved by the city engineer or the city engineer's designee. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions: 
(1)  Registration with the city pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities and all other information deemed relevant by the city engineer. 
(3)  Payment of money due the city for: 
a.  Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other management costs; 
b.  Prior obstructions or excavations; 
c.  Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; 
d.  Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable. 
(4)  Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110 percent of the amount owing. 
(5)  Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards. 
(k)  Issuance of permit, conditions. 
(1)  Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, the city shall issue a permit. 
(2)  Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S.A. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rule, ch. 7560. 
(3)  Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to subdivision 2, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application. 
b.  No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit. 
c.  No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above its wireless support structure. 
d.  Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way. 
e.  Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, such equipment shall be consistent with the city's aesthetic standards regarding wireless equipment as adopted by the city engineer. Such standards shall ensure that wireless equipment is installed with a stealth design and that equipment does not detract from the character of the area in which it is installed. In addition, the city engineer shall adopt standards that ensure city assets can continue to effectively perform their intended function. Standards shall be made available with the application required for a small cell permit. 
f.  Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure. 
g.  A permit will be deemed void if the approved equipment is not installed within one year of issuance of the permit. 
(4)  Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following: 
a.  Up to $150.00 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure. 
b.  $25.00 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation; 
c.  A monthly fee for electrical service as follows: 
1.  $73.00 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts; 
2.  $182.00 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or 
3.  The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the foregoing. 
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant. 
(l)  Action on small wireless facility permit applications. 
(1)  Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such application or within any timeline established by state law. The small wireless facility permit and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this section. 
(2)  Consolidated applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application: 
a.  Are located within a two-mile radius; 
b.  Consist of substantially similar equipment; and 
c.  Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures. 
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application. 
(3)  Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if: 
a.  The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of such extension. 
b.  The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information. 
c.  The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period. 
(m)  Permit fees. 
(1)  Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs: 
a.  The city management costs; 
b.  Degradation costs, if applicable. 
(2)  Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs. 
(3)  Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover: 
a.  Management costs, and; 
b.  City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small wireless facilities. 
(4)  Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit, obstruction permit, or small cell permit shall be issued without payment of all required fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing. 
(5)  Nonrefundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach as stated in section (w) are not refundable. 
(6)  Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise. 
(n)  Right-of-way patching and restoration. 
(1)  Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under subsection (r). 
(2)  Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself. 
a.  City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work. 
b.  Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.3000. 
c.  Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities. 
(3)  Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule 7819.1100. 
(4)  Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under subsection (r). 
(5)  Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond. 
(o)  Joint applications. 
(1)  Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time. 
(2)  Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications. 
(3)  With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be required. 
(p)  Supplementary applications. 
(1)  Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area: 
a.  Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby, and 
b.  Be granted a new permit or permit extension. 
(2)  Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date. 
(q)  Other obligations. 
(1)  Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to M.S.A. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rule, ch. 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work. 
(2)  Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work. 
(3)  Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
(4)  Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in M.S.A. ch. 216D and Minn. Rule, ch. 7560 and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the director. 
(r)  Denial or revocation of permit. 
(1)  Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this section or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use and any city asset or facility. 
(2)  Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30 days after submission. 
(s)  Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rule 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the M.S.A. §§ 237.162 and 237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn. Rule, ch. 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in subsection (w)(2). 
(t)  Inspection. 
(1)  Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minn. Rule 7819.1300 or other as built documentation as deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(2)  Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work site available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work. 
(3)  Authority of director. 
a.  At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public. 
b.  The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to subsection (w). 
(u)  Work Done Without a Permit. 
(1)  Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this section for the actions it took in response to the emergency. 
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency. 
(2)  Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this section. 
(v)  Supplementary notification. If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known. 
(w)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit. 
b.  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens. 
c.  Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit. 
d.  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control. 
e.  The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to subsection (t). 
(2)  Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach. 
(3)  Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year. 
(4)  Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of the permit authorization. 
(5)  Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs. 
(6)  Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(x)  Mapping data. 
(1)  Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all equipment installed, owned, and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration. 
(2)  Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn. Rule 7560.0150, subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the director evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for: 
a.  Payments to contractors working on a public improvement project, including those under M.S.A. ch. 429, and 
b.  City approval under development agreements or other subdivision or site plan approval under M.S.A. ch. 462. The director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors. 
(y)  Location and relocation of facilities. 
(1)  Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, with other applicable standards adopted by the city engineer, and with Minn. Rule 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities. 
(2)  Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. 
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs, and hardship to the registrant. 
(3)  Nuisance. One year after the passage of this section, any facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable condition. 
(4)  Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest. 
(z)  Pre-excavation facilities location. In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S.A. §§ 216D.01-216D.09 ("One Call Excavation Notice System") before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation. 
(aa)  Damage to other facilities. When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities. 
(bb)  Right-of-way vacation; reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minn. Rule 7819.3200. 
(cc)  Indemnification and liability. By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250. 
(dd)  Abandoned and unusable facilities. 
(1)  Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this section have been lawfully assumed by another registrant. 
(2)  Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city. 
(ee)  Appeal. A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had a permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S.A. § 237.163, subd. 6; or (5) disputes a determination of the director regarding subsection (x), subd. 2 of this section may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the city council. The city council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the city council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. 
(ff)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. A permittee's rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(gg)  Severability. If any portion of this section is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this section precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein. 
(hh)  Effective date. This section shall be effective upon publication, April 20, 2019. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 30, 5th series, Pts. 1, 2, 4-20-19) 
Secs. 7-8-7-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-20. - Obstructions, fire, dumping, signs and other structures. 
(a)  Obstructions. It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, deposit, display or offer for sale, any fence, goods or other obstructions upon, over, across or under any street or other public property without first having obtained a written permit from the council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of such permit, and taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation, within the definition of an obstruction. 
(b)  Fires. It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a roadway. 
(c)  Dumping in streets. It is a misdemeanor for any person to throw or deposit in any street or any other public place any nails, dirt, glass, tin cans, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs, shreds or rubbish, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is a violation of this Section to haul any soil or material, not adequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same to fall upon the streets. 
(d)  Signs and other structures. It is a misdemeanor for any person to place or maintain a sign or other structure in the traveled or untraveled portion of any street or other public property without first having obtained a written permit from the council. In a district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises special permission allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the street may be granted upon such terms and conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of the City Code. 
(e)  Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this section shall be a separate offense, and punishable as such. 
Sec. 7-21. - Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction. 
    It is a misdemeanor for any person operating or in charge of a railroad train, car, engine, or other railroad equipment, or combination of such equipment, to permit the same to be parked or left standing upon any street crossing so as to close such crossing to vehicular traffic for a longer period than five minutes. 
Sec. 7-22. - Load limits. 
    The city, upon the recommendation of the city engineer, may from time to time impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or desirable. Such limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and legibly sign-posted thereon. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation of the limitation so posted. 
Sec. 7-23. - Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation. 
(a)  Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the improvement of a street shall be considered by the council if such petition contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized base, or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if the area along such street will be served by such utilities installed in the street. 
(b)  Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer system shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously with construction of mains. 
(c)  Waiver. The council may waive the requirements of this section only if it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon such notice and hearing as the council may deem necessary or proper. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 7-24-7-29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-30. - Curb and gutter, street and sidewalk painting or coloring. 
    It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same may be done by city employees acting within the course or scope of their employment. Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing, or uniformly painted house numbers, as such coloring may be approved by the city. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 7-31-7-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-40. - Parades. 
(a)  Definition. The term "parade" means any movement of vehicles, persons or animals, or any combination thereof, except funerals, which either moves together and as a body so as to in some way impede or affect the free and unobstructed flow of traffic, or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one or more traffic laws or regulations, if such movement is without a permit hereunder. 
(b)  Permit required. It is a misdemeanor to sponsor or participate in a parade for which no permit has been obtained from the city, and it is also a misdemeanor to obtain a parade permit and not conduct the same in accordance with a permit granted by the city administrator and accompanied by a fee of $10.00, at least 14 days in advance of the date on which it is to occur and shall state the sponsoring organization or individuals, the route, the length, the estimated time of commencement and termination, the general composition, and such application shall be executed by the individuals applying therefor or the duly authorized agent or representative of the sponsoring organization. The fee for such permit shall be waived if related to a school function. 
(c)  Procedure and granting. The city administrator shall forthwith refer all applications for parades to the chief of police for his consideration which shall take no longer than seven days. If any State trunk highways are in the route the chief of police shall make all necessary arrangements with the Minnesota Department of Highways for alternate routes or whatever may be necessary. If the chief of police finds that such a parade will not cause a hazard to persons or property, and will cause no great inconvenience to the public, and if he is able to make arrangements for necessary direction and control of traffic, he shall endorse his acceptance and return the application to the city administrator who shall then issue the permit. If the chief of police finds the parade described in the application to be a hazard, a substantial inconvenience, or if he is unable to make adequate arrangements for direction or control of traffic, he shall return the same to the city administrator with his reasons for denial, and the permit shall not be granted unless all conditions and objections of the chief of police are met or removed by the applicant. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 7-41-7-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-99. - Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(2)  As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection (1) hereof, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 8 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- See chapter 7 for scope and application relating to this chapter. 

Sec. 8-1. - Certain statutes adopted by reference. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or in chapters 7 and 9 of this Code, the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S.A. Ch. 169, commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic Regulation Act, as amended through Laws of 1981, is hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or in chapters 7 and 9 of this Code, M.S.A. §§ 171.01, 171.02, 171.08, 171.22, 171.23 and 171.24, as amended through Laws of 1981, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 27, 2nd series; 9-29-82) 
Sec. 8-2. - Truck routes. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural implement, truck over one-ton capacity, truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor in through traffic, upon any street except those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck routes. For the purpose of this chapter, through traffic" means originating without the city and with a destination without the city, as distinguished from "local traffic" which means traffic either originating or having a destination within the city. 
Sec. 8-3. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Traffic laws apply. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(b)  Manner and number riding. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(2)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except on a baby seat attached to the bicycle, provided that such seat is equipped with a harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against the child's feet hitting the spokes of the wheel or in a seat attached to the bicycle operator. 
(c)  Hitching rides. It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(d)  Where to ride. 
(1)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(2)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(3)  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(e)  Right of way-Sidewalks. Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. Provided, that it is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on a sidewalk in a business district. 
(f)  Carrying articles. It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(g)  Lighting and brake equipment. 
(1)  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with, or its operator shall carry, a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the department of public safety which is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. No person may at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, operate a bicycle unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each side of each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and with a minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle or its operator, of white reflective material. All reflective materials used in compliance with this subsection shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the commissioner of public safety. 
(2)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(h)  Sale with reflectors. It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle unless it is equipped with such reflectors as are prescribed in subsection (g) of this section. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 8-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-5. - Muffler on motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle. 
    Each motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle must have a muffler that complies with the original manufacturer's design specifications. No person shall use a muffler, cutout, bypass, straight pipe, or similar device on a motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, snowmobile, or all-terrain vehicle. 
Secs. 8-6-8-9 - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-10. - Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal. 
    It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic control device by driving upon or through any private property. 
Sec. 8-11. - Exhibition driving. 
(a)  Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates, or turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding, or, as to two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface. 
(b)  Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition driving on any street, parking lot, or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for such operation to prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section shall not apply to driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a "racetrack" means any track or premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses, dogs, or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration for admission. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 27, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82) 
Sec. 8-12. - Driving over curbs. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle over or upon a curb where no curb cut has been constructed under approval of the city. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 8-13-8-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-20. - One-way streets. 
(a)  The council may, by resolution, designate streets as one-way streets. 
(b)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to travel upon any one-way street in a direction opposite that designated when the same has been duly sign-posted. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 8-21-8-29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-30. - Snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle traffic control and regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in the Section, shall have the meanings stated: 
(1)  Snowmobile: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis or runners. 
(2)  ATV: or all-terrain vehicle: A motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less than three low pressure tires, but not more than six tires, that is limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight less than 600 pounds. 
(3)  Owner: A person, other than a lien holder having the property in or title to snowmobile or ATV entitled to the use or possession thereof. 
(4)  Operate: To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or ATV. 
(5)  Operator: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or ATV. 
(6)  Deadman throttle or safety throttle: A device which when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving mechanism. 
(7)  Natural terrain: Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or public), parking lots and other areas the surface of which has been intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation thereon. 
(b)  Scope of application. Notwithstanding provisions of this chapter to the contrary, this section shall apply to control of traffic and regulation of that certain class of vehicles falling within the definition of snowmobiles as to matters set forth herein. All provisions of this chapter, not relating to matters herein stated, apply as equally to snowmobiles as other vehicles. 
(c)  Operation of snowmobiles. Except as otherwise herein permitted or on ones own property, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile as follows: 
(1)  On the portion of any right-of-way of any public highway, street, road, trail or alley used for motor vehicle travel, except upon the most right had land of a street or alley and may in passing or making a left hand turn, operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same direction. 
(2)  On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel. 
(3)  On boulevards within any public right-of-way. 
(4)  On private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of said property. 
(5)  At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances. 
(6)  At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property. 
(7)  On all streets or trails, snowmobile operation shall not be in excess of 20 miles per hour, except on the Voyageur Trail West, which shall not be in excess of 30 miles per hour. 
(8)  So as to tow any person or thing except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile. 
(9)  At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined by M.S.A. 169.121, which is hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(10)  Within 100 feet of any pedestrian, fisherman, skating rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with the use or endanger other persons or property. 
(11)  On any trunk, county, state-aid, or county highway except as provided in M.S.A. §§ 84.92-84.929. 
(d)  Special orders. In addition to the regulations provided in subsection (c) of this section, it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile or ATV on any public place where prohibited by order of the city. The city shall have the power, by written order, to prohibit such operation whenever in its discretion the same would be likely to produce damage to property or endanger the safety or repose of other persons. Such areas shall be appropriately sign-posted before such order shall become effective. 
(e)  Direct crossings. A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway, except at interstate highway or freeway, provided: 
(1)  The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing. 
(2)  The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way. 
(3)  The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard. 
(4)  In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway. 
(5)  If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on. ATV not licensed as a motor vehicle are forbidden to cross highways or streets except when they are pushed across by human power. ATV when pushed across highways or streets shall be subject to all the regulations of this section. 
(f)  Yielding the right-of-way. It is unlawful for any person operating a snowmobile to enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(g)  Persons under 18. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 14 years to operate a snowmobile on streets, in city parks or other public land, or the roadway surface of highways, or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state-aid, or county highway as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile as permitted under this section, only if he has in his possession a safety certificate issued by the commissioner, as provided by M.S.A. 84.872. 
(2)  It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(h)  Equipment. It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within the city unless it is equipped with the following: 
(1)  Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe or similar device on a snowmobile. 
(2)  Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation. 
(3)  A safety or so-called "deadman" throttle in operating condition. 
(4)  Lighted head and tail lights at all times during operation of the snowmobile. 
(i)  Safety helmets. It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon a snowmobile, or ride upon a sled or other conveyance being towed by a snowmobile on any street, without wearing a crash helmet meeting the specifications and requirements established by the State Motorcycle Law and acts amendatory thereto. 
(j)  Locking vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to leave a snowmobile or ATV on a public place unless he shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take the same with him. 
(k)  Emergencies. Notwithstanding the prohibition of operating a snowmobile upon a roadway to the contrary, a snowmobile may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when, at locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical. 
(l)  Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal with a snowmobile or ATV. 
(m)  Signal from officer to stop. It is unlawful for a snowmobile operator, after having received a visual or audible signal from any law enforcement officer to come to a stop, to (a) operate a snowmobile in willful or wanton disregard of such signal, or (b) interfere with or endanger the law enforcement officer or any other person or vehicle, or (c) increase his speed or attempt to flee or elude the officer. 
(n)  Certain statutes adopted. M.S.A. §§ 84.81-84.90, inclusive, as amended in 1977, together with rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, are hereby adopted by reference, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(o)  Operation of ATV's. It is unlawful to operate an ATV not licensed as a motor vehicle except on private property with the owner's permission or during parades that have obtained a permit from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 48, 2nd series, eff. 9-15-87; Code of 1991; Ord. No. 12, 3rd series, eff. 3-11-96) 
Sec. 8-31. - Banning skateboarding and similar activity in the business district and posted areas. 
    No person shall use a skateboard or engage in similar actions upon: 
(1)  Any private or public land in the business district at any time unless so designated as a skateboard or similar activity area by signs authorized by the city council. The business district is located between and including Second Avenue and Eighth Avenue and Second Street and Fifth Street. 
(2)  Any private or public land where a sign has been erected not permitting skateboarding or similar activity. 
(3)  "Similar activity" is the use of a skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, scooter or similar equipment (not the use of a bicycle). 
(Ord. No. 32, 3rd series, eff. 5-29-01) 
Secs. 8-32-8-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-99. - Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(2)  As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection (1) hereof, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. 
(3)  As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he shall be punished as specified in such provision, so adopted. 
(Code of 12-15-79) 
Chapter 9 - PARKING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- See chapter 7 for scope and application relating to this chapter. 

Sec. 9-1. - Presumption. 
    As to any vehicle parked in violation of chapters 7, 8 and 9 when the driver thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 9-2. - General parking prohibitions. 
    It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection; 
(7)  In a sign-posted fire lane; 
(8)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign-posted; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street evacuation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict parking; 
(15)  In any alley, except for loading and unloading and then only so long as reasonably necessary for such loading and unloading to or from adjacent premises; 
(16)  On any boulevard which has been curbed; or 
(17)  On private property where no curb cut or access from the street or avenue exists. 
    A stopped vehicle, even if occupied, is considered a parked vehicle for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 28, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82) 
Sec. 9-3. - Recreational camping vehicle parking. 
(a)  Definition. The term "recreational camping vehicle" means any of the following: 
  Camping trailer. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
  Motor home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
  Pick-up coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation. 
  Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "Travel Trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer. 
(b)  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a recreational camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right-of-way for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours, except where signs are erected designating the place as a campsite or in a mobile home park. 
Sec. 9-4. - Unauthorized removal. 
    It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
Sec. 9-5. - Direction to proceed. 
    It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
Sec. 9-6. - Parallel parking. 
    Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within 12 inches of, the right-hand curb, and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, such vehicle shall be within such markings, front and rear, provided that upon a one-way road-way all vehicles shall be so parked, except that the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon such one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section. 
Sec. 9-7. - Angle parking. 
    Where angle parking has been established by council resolution, and is allowed, as shown by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street, provided that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section. 
Sec. 9-8. - Streets without curb. 
    Upon streets not having a curb each vehicle shall be stopped or parked parallel and in the direction of normal traffic flow as far to the right as practicable, except no vehicle can stop, park, or operate on any part of city right-of-way which is designed for water drainage. 
Sec. 9-9. - Parking hours. 
    Parking on streets shall be limited, as follows: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon any street for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours. 
(2)  The chief of police may, when authorized by resolution of the council, designate certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as five-minute, ten-minute, fifteen-minute, thirty-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-hour, eight-hour limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be established whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in any space so limited when sign-posted. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or otherwise obliterate any mark or sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time such vehicle has been parked. 
(4)  For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any vehicle moved less than one block in a limited time parking zone shall be deemed to have remained stationary. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 9-10-9-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-20. - Calendar parking. 
(a)  Streets affected. The council shall, by resolution, designate the streets upon which calendar parking shall be observed and shall provide that the same be duly sign-posted. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. 
(1)  It is unlawful to park a vehicle on the side of a street bearing odd-numbered U.S. Post Office addresses on any even-numbered date when streets have been duly sign-posted. 
(2)  It is unlawful to park a vehicle on the side of a street bearing even-numbered U.S. Post Office addresses on any odd-numbered date when streets have been duly sign-posted. 
(c)  The hours of 6:00 o'clock p.m. to 12:00 o'clock midnight of each day shall be the hours of change, therefore, no vehicle shall be in violation of this section during such hours. 
(d)  Suspension. Calendar parking may be suspended by giving notice thereof to local news media as to the street, streets, time or times of such suspension. 
(Ord. No. 28, 5th series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 10-15-18) 
Sec. 9-21. - Truck parking. 
(a)  It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, city-owned parking lot, or other public property. 
(b)  It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer, truck-tractor, or a combination thereof, within an area zoned as a residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same. 
(c)  It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than one-ton capacity upon any street in the business district which has been duly sign-posted prohibiting the same, but parking of such vehicle for a period of not more than 20 minutes shall be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property for loading or unloading when such access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so restricted. 
(d)  It is unlawful to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with a trailer, or extended body or other extension or projection beyond the original length of such vehicle, or any passenger bus, diagonally along any street except for a time sufficient to load or unload, and in such case, only parallel parking shall be permitted. Provided, however, that a truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load makes parallel parking impracticable, but then only for a period of time sufficient to load or unload. 
(e)  Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign-posted loading zones, and in alleys, for a period of up to 20 minutes, provided that such alley parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent property for loading or unloading. 
Sec. 9-22. - Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps. 
    In municipally-owned parking lots and ramps, the council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking, provided that such limitations and restrictions are sign-posted thereon. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by "one-way" signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any municipally-owned parking lot or ramp contrary to the restrictions or limitations sign-posted therein. A stopped vehicle, even if occupied, is considered a parked vehicle for the purpose of this section. 
Sec. 9-23. - Impounding and removing vehicles. 
    When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or municipally-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or municipally-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to impound such unlawfully parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of safety; provided, that if any charge shall be placed against such vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from such place of storage or safekeeping. 
Sec. 9-24. - Loading zones. 
    The council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for the specific purpose of loading or unloading merchandise from a commercial vehicle or vehicle temporarily being utilized in the transport of merchandise. Such loading zones shall be installed by order of the city administrator where in the judgment of the council a commercial loading zone is justified, and duly sign-posted. 
Sec. 9-25. - Unattended vehicle. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended while the engine is running. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended with the key in the ignition. 
Sec. 9-26. - Vehicle repair on street. 
    It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon a street, or attempt to do so, except to service such vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon. 
Sec. 9-27. - Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of selling merchandise thereon or therein, or advertising any merchandise for sale or a forthcoming event, for a period longer than 15 minutes. 
Sec. 9-28. - Courtesy parking. 
    The council is hereby authorized, by resolution, to waive hours of parking limitations herein stated upon an application duly filed on any day and to any particular group; provided, that members of such group shall have displayed in their motor vehicles a "courtesy parking" sticker, card or other similar designation. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 9-29. - Physically handicapped parking. 
(a)  Statutory parking privileges for physically handicapped shall be strictly observed and enforced. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically handicapped, to stop, park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle (1) in a sign-posted fire lane at any time, or (2) in lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours. 
(Ord. No. 28, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82) 
Secs. 9-30-9-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-40. - Parking fines. 
    Any violations of parking limitations shall be punished by a fine as prescribed by council resolution and if said fine is not paid within the time and manner prescribed by council resolution then the failure to pay the prescribed fine within such limitations shall constitute a misdemeanor as otherwise provided in section 9-99. 
(Ord. No. 16, 2nd series, eff. 7-28-81) 
Secs. 9-41-9-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-99. - Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(2)  As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection (1) hereof, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 10 - PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES AND OFFENSES 
Health 

Sec. 10-1. - Storage, deposit, and disposal of refuse. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Commercial establishment: Any premises where a commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include restaurants, clubs, churches, and schools where food is prepared or served. 
    Multiple dwelling: Any building used for residential purposes consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. 
    Refuse: Means and includes all organic material resulting from the manufacture, preparation or serving of food or food products, and spoiled, decayed or waste foods from any source, bottles, cans, glassware, paper or paper products, crockery, ashes, rags, and discarded clothing, tree or lawn clippings, leaves, weeds and other waste products, except human waste resulting from building construction or demolition. 
    Residential dwelling: Any single building consisting of one through four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. 
(b)  Storage. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on residential dwelling premises for more than one week. All such storage shall be in five to 30 gallon metal or plastic containers with tight-fitting covers, which shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; provided, that tree leaves, weeds and grass clippings may be stored in plastic bags and tree limbs must be stored in bundles weighing no more than 75 pounds and no longer than four feet. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on multiple dwelling premises for more than one week. Such storage shall be in containers as for residential dwelling premises, except that so-called "dumpsters" with close-fitting covers may be substituted. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person to store refuse on commercial establishment premises for more than 48 hours. Such storage shall be in containers as for residential dwelling premises, except that so-called "dumpsters" with close-fitting covers may be substituted. 
(4)  It is unlawful to store organic refuse unless it is drained and wrapped. 
(c)  Deposit. It is unlawful for any person to deposit refuse from any source, rubbish, offal, or the body of a dead animal, in any place other than a sanitary landfill. 
(d)  Disposal. The council may, by resolution, adopt, and from time-to-time amend, adjust and revise such rules, regulations, rates and charges as it deems necessary or proper for the operation and management of the sanitary landfill. It may give notice of any such action as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 29, 2nd series; eff. 9-29-82) 
Sec. 10-2. - Toilet installation required. 
    It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property within the city, having a dwelling house or business building situated thereon, which property is within 500 feet of any municipal water and sewer mains, to install a toilet in such dwelling or business building and make connection thereof with such water and sewer mains. Whenever the noncompliance of the owner or occupant of such property is reported to the city health officer, he shall forthwith make such investigation as he deems necessary or proper and report his findings to the council. If the city health officer finds and reports that in his opinion the lack of toilet facilities is an unhealthful or insanitary condition, the city shall forthwith serve written notice upon said owner or occupant requiring the installation of toilet facilities upon premises described in said notice, and connection thereof with the sewer and water mains, all of which shall be done within 30 days after service of such written notice. Whenever any owner or occupant shall default in compliance with such written notice the council may by resolution direct that a toilet be installed and connection made with the water and sewer mains and that the actual cost of such installation be paid in the first instance out of the general revenue fund, and assessed against the property so benefited. After such installation and connection is completed by order of the council, the city shall serve a written notice of intention to make an assessment therefor. If such assessment is not paid within ten days the city shall certify the amount thereof to the county auditor in the same manner as with other special assessments, provided that the council may by resolution provide that the assessment be spread over a term of three years upon written request by the owner of the property. 
(Code of 1979) 
Secs. 10-3-10-9. - Reserved. 
Safety 
Sec. 10-10. - Dangerous weapons and articles. 
(a)  Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another; or, 
(2)  Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another; or, 
(3)  Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a slung-shot or sand club; or, 
(4)  Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade knife opening automatically; or, 
(5)  Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another; or, 
(6)  Sell or have in his possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm; or, 
(7)  Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under fourteen years of age to handle or use, outside of the parent's or guardian's presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive; or, 
(8)  Furnish a minor under eighteen years of age with a firearm, air gun, ammunition, or explosive without the written consent of his parent or guardian or of the police department. 
(b)  Exception. Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall prohibit the possession of the articles therein mentioned if the purpose of such possession is for public exhibition by museums or collectors of art. 
(c)  Discharge of firearms and explosives. It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, except those fireworks permitted under M.S.A. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c) air gun, air rifle, or other similar device commonly referred to as a B-B gun. 
(d)  Exception. Nothing in subsection (c) of this section shall apply to a display of fireworks by an organization or group of organizations authorized in writing by the council, or to a peace officer in the discharge of his duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of his person or family. This section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms in a range authorized in writing by the council. 
(e)  Possession and sale of fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, or have in possession for the purpose of sale, except as allowed in subsection (d) of this section, any firecrackers, sky rockets or other fireworks, except those fireworks permitted under Minn. Stat. § 624.20, Subd.1(c). 
(f)  Exposure of unused container. It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or control thereof, to permit an unused refrigerator, ice box, or other container, sufficiently large to retain any child and with doors which fasten automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without removing the doors, lids, hinges, or latches. 
(g)  Use of bow and arrow. It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty, a community-wide supervised class or event specifically authorized by the chief of police, or a bow and arrow range authorized by the council. 
(Ord. No. 3, 4th series, eff. 7-18-02) 
Sec. 10-11. - Dog and cat regulation and licensing. 
(a)  Running at large prohibited. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to permit such animal to run at large. Any dog shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission of the owner unless it is on a durable leash secured to an object which it cannot move and on the premises of the owner, or on a leash and under the control of an accompanying person of suitable age and discretion. Any cat shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission of the owner unless it is on the premises of the owner. 
(b)  License required. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat, four months of age or more, to fail to obtain a license therefor from the city. 
(c)  Fees. All fees for the licensing and impounding of dogs and cats shall be fixed and determined by the council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on file in the office of the city administrator and open to inspection during regular business hours. 
(d)  License period. All dog and cat licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(e)  Tag required. All licensed dogs and cats shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing such license for the current year. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the city upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. Tags shall not be transferable, and no refund shall be made on any dog or cat license fee because of leaving the city or death of the dog or cat before the expiration of the license. 
(f)  Immunization. All applications for dog licenses shall be accompanied by a current certificate of immunization for rabies signed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Minnesota, and stating 
(1)  The owner's name; 
(2)  A description of the dog; and 
(3)  The date beyond which such immunization is not considered effective. 
On or prior to the date of expiration of the effective immunization, the owner of a dog shall file with the city a new certificate containing the same information as herein required. 
(g)  Other unlawful acts. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to (a) fail to have the license tag issued by the city firmly attached to a collar worn at all times by the licensed animal, or (b) own or keep a dog or cat which is dangerous (or potentially dangerous as defined in Minnesota Statute § 347.50), or (c) interfere with any police officer, or other city employee, in the performance of his duty to enforce this section, or (d) fail to keep his dog from barking, howling or whining, or his cat from emitting loud or unusual noise, or (e) fails to forthwith remove dog or cat waste deposited on public or private property, or (f) permit solid waste of a dog or cat to accumulate on his premises for more than 24 hours. 
(h)  Animal pound. Any dog or cat found in the city without a tag, or running at large, shall be placed in the animal pound, and an accurate record of the time of such placement shall be kept on each dog or cat. Every dog or cat so placed in the animal pound shall be held for redemption by the owner for a period of not less than five regular business days. A "regular business day" is one during which the pound is open for business to the public for at least four hours between 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 7:00 o'clock p.m. Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six months and shall show: 
(1)  The description of the animal by specie, breed, sex, approximate age, and other distinguishing traits; 
(2)  The location at which the animal was seized; 
(3)  The date of seizure; 
(4)  The name and address of the person from whom any animal four months of age or over was received; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person to whom any animal four months of age or over was transferred. 
If unclaimed, such dog or cat shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of, unless it is requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under authority of M.S.A. § 35.71. Provided, however, that if a tag is affixed to the dog or cat, or a statement by its owner after seizure, specifies that the animal should not be used for research, such animal shall not be made available to any such institution but may be destroyed after the expiration of the five-day period. 
(i)  Notice of impounding. Upon the impounding of any dog or cat, the owner shall be notified, or if the owner is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days at the City Hall describing the dog or cat and the place and time of taking. 
(j)  Release from animal pound. Dogs and cats shall be released to their owners, as follows: 
(1)  If such dog or cat is owned by a resident of the city, after purchase of a license as aforesaid, and payment of the impounding fees. 
(2)  If such dog or cat is owned by a person not a resident of the city, after immunization of any such dog for rabies, and payment of the impounding fee for the period which the dog or cat was impounded. 
(k)  Persons in possession. Any person who feeds or houses a dog or cat temporarily or permanently shall have all of the duties and bear the responsibilities of an owner under the provisions of this section. 
(l)  Confinement required. The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure any fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog, except when securely muzzled and in the control of a competent person. The owner shall also confine every female dog in heat in a building, secure enclosure, veterinary hospital, or boarding kennel, or shall control such dog on a leash while being exercised. 
(m)  Enforcement officers and right of entry. The council may designate officers for the enforcement of this section to take up and impound any dog or cat found not to be kept, confined, restrained or licensed in the manner hereby prescribed. Such officers are hereby authorized to enter upon private premises where there is reasonable cause to believe that a dog or cat is not licensed, kept, confined or restrained as required by this Section. 
(n)  Impounding required. Any dog or cat that has bitten a person or another animal shall immediately be impounded for at least 14 days and kept apart, under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, until it is determined whether such animal has or had a disease which may have been transmitted by such bite. Such impounding may be done by the owner, and need not be at the city pound, but if it is not at the city pound the owner shall notify the person in charge of the city pound immediately and shall furnish proof in writing that such dog or cat is being so impounded. Upon the expiration of such 14-day period, if it is determined that the dog or cat does not have a disease which might have been transmitted by such bite, the impounded dog or cat may be released, and the person in charge of the city pound shall be notified prior to such release. If the dog or cat is impounded at the city pound, it may be reclaimed as herein provided. Any animal which has been bitten by a dog or cat believed to have been exposed to a disease which could have been transmitted by such bite shall also be impounded for an incubation period. 
(o)  Summary destruction. If a dog or cat is diseased, vicious, dangerous or suspected to have been exposed to rabies, or cannot be approached or impounded after a reasonable effort by an enforcement officer without risk or injury to persons, such dog or cat may be summarily destroyed. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 8, 2nd series, 9-5-80) 
Sec. 10-12. - Animals and fowl-Keeping, transporting, treatment, housing. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply. 
    Animals: Includes farm animals and all other animals, reptiles and feathered birds or fowl except dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters and caged household birds. 
    Farm animals: Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens and honey bees. 
(b)  Keeping. It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal, not in transit, except (1) farm animals kept in that portion of the city zoned for agricultural purposes, or, (2) animals kept as part of a show licensed under the City Code, or, (3) animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes, or (4) animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic for treatment by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  Animals in transit. It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are (1) confined within a vehicle, cage or other means of conveyance, or, (2) farm animals being transported in a portion of the city zoned for agricultural purposes, or, (3) restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes or other means of individual restraint. 
(d)  Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
(e)  Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies or insects. 
(f)  Trespasses. It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.; 
(g)  Feeding Ring Billed Gulls prohibited. No person shall intentionally feed Ring Billed Gulls in any area within the City of International Falls zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-2A, or R-2B, because said gulls are found as nuisance, filling yards with many birds and defecating on private residential property. 
(Ord. No. 29, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82; Ord. No. 13, 3rd series, eff. 5-13-96) 
Sec. 10-13. - Curfew. 
(a)  Curfew-Minors under the age of 16. It is unlawful for any minor person under the age of 16 years to be or loiter upon the streets or public places between the hours of 10:30 o'clock p.m. and 5:00 o'clock a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Curfew-Parents and guardians. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody of any minor person to allow or permit such minor person to be or loiter upon the streets or public places in violation of this section unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(c)  Curfew-Places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment. It is unlawful for any person operating, or in charge of, any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment, or other place of business, to allow or permit any minor person to be or loiter in such place in violation of this section unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. This subsection shall not be constructed to permit the presence, at any time, of any person under age in any place where his presence is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(d)  Exceptions. Such curfew shall not apply to any students under the age of 16 years who are lawfully attending, going to or returning from school, church or community sponsored athletic, musical or social activities or events, or place of employment. 
Sec. 10-14. - Air pollution control. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit burning of any grass, weeds, leaves, rubbish or other substance upon premises owned or occupied by him, except the fire chief may issue a person an open burning permit upon application where the following fact exist: 
(1)  The material to be burned is trees, brush, grass and other vegetative matter. 
(2)  The material cannot be practicably removed by any other means. 
(3)  The burn will not take place within 600 feet of any house or dwelling occupied by people, other than the residence of the person applying for the permit; unless the fire chief believes the materials constitute a fire or health hazard, whereupon such fire cannot take place within 100 feet of a dwelling or residence other than the applicant. 
(b)  Except as may be specifically excluded in the aforementioned subsection, the Air Pollution Control Rules, 1985, Sec. 7005, updated through 1985, promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of said rules shall be marked CITY OF INTERNATIONAL FALLS-OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the city administrator and open to inspection and use by the public. It is unlawful to violate a provision of this section or the air pollution control rules hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 47, 2nd series, eff. 8-11-87) 
Secs. 10-15-10-29. - Reserved. 
Other Public Protection 
Sec. 10-30. - Shade tree disease control and prevention. 
(a)  Policy and purpose. The city has determined that the health of oak and elm trees is threatened by fatal diseases known as oak wilt and Dutch elm disease. It has further determined that the loss of oak and elm trees located on public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases, and provide for the removal of dead or diseased trees, as nuisances. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Forester. The person duly appointed by the council and acting in such capacity. 
    Nuisance. 
(1)  Any living or standing tree infected to any degree with a shade tree disease; or 
(2)  Any logs, branches, stumps or other parts of any dead or dying tree, so infected, unless such parts have been fully burned or treated under the direction of the forester. 
    Shade tree disease. Dutch elm disease or oak wilt disease. 
(c)  Scope and adoption by reference. M.S.A. §§ 18.01- 18.023, inclusive, are hereby adopted by reference, together with the Rules and Regulations of the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture relating to shade tree diseases; provided, that this section shall supersede such statutes, rules and regulations, only to the extent of inconsistencies. 
(d)  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit upon premises owned by him or upon public property where he has the duty of tree maintenance, any nuisance as herein defined. 
(e)  Inspection and diagnosis. It is the power and duty of the forester to enter upon public and private property, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of inspecting for, and diagnosing, shade tree disease. In cases of suspected shade tree disease, and in performance of his duties, the forester may remove such specimens, samples and biopsies as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis. 
(f)  Abatement of nuisance. Abatement of a nuisance, defined herein, shall be by spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise effectively treating the infected tree or wood or prevent spread of shade tree disease. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designed by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Minnesota. The city shall establish specifications for tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith. 
(g)  Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood. 
(1)  Whenever the forester finds with reasonable certainty that the infection, or danger of infection, exists in any tree or wood on any public or private property, he shall proceed as follows: 
a.  If the forester finds that the danger of infection of other trees is not imminent because of dormancy of shade tree disease, he shall make a written report of his finding to the council which shall proceed by: 
1.  Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S.A. Ch. 429; or 
2.  Abating the nuisance as provided in subsection (g)(1)b. of this section. 
b.  If the forester finds that danger of infection of other trees is imminent, he shall notify the owner of the property, or the abutting property, as the case may be, by certified mail that the nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not less than five days from the date of mailing of such notice. The forester shall immediately report such action to the council, and after the expiration of the time limited by the notice he may abate the nuisance. 
c.  If the forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate action is required to prevent the spread of shade tree disease, he may proceed to abate the nuisance forthwith. He shall report such action immediately to the council and to the abutting property owner, or to the owner of the property where the nuisance is located. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the forester's report required by subsection (g)(1)a. of this section, the council shall by resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on such resolution, the council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners and published once no less than one week prior to such meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At such hearing or adjournment thereof, the council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed project. The council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with such modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by contract. 
(3)  The forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this subsection and shall report monthly to the city administrator (or other appropriate officer) all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each. 
(4)  On or before September 1 of each year the city administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section. The council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S.A. § 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes. 
(5)  No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any tree, wood or part thereof pursuant to this section. 
(h)  Spraying trees. 
(1)  Whenever the forester determines that any tree or wood is infected or threatened with infection, he may spray or treat all nearby high value trees with an effective concentrate or fungicide or both. Activities authorized by this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the commissioner of agriculture and under the supervision of the commissioner and his agents whenever possible. 
(2)  The notice and assessment provisions of subsection (g) apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under this subsection. 
(i)  Transporting wood prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to transport any elm wood into or through the city unless the same is debarked, or, in the months of April, May or June, to transport any oak wood, without having obtained a permit from the forester. The forester shall grant such permits only when the purposes of this section will be served thereby. 
(j)  Interference prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the forester while he is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section. 
(k)  Additional duties of forester. It is the additional duty of the forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of the council, all activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of shade tree disease. He shall recommend to the council the details of a program for the control of the diseases, and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the council. 
(l)  Diseased trees in streets. The rights, duties and responsibilities of property owners set forth in this section shall be equally applicable to, and binding upon, abutting property owners with tree maintenance responsibilities under the section of the City Code entitled "Regulation of Grass, Weeds and Trees in Streets". 
(m)  Subsidies. The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of removing or maintaining trees, whether by private contract or assessment, shall be subject to a subsidy policy, if any, established by the city for the treatment or removal of trees infected with shade tree disease. 
Sec. 10-31. - Minnesota Uniform Fire Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The Minnesota Uniform Fire Code is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of said code shall be marked CITY OF INTERNATIONAL FALLS-OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the city administrator and open to inspection and use by the public. 
(b)  Storage of flammable and explosives material. Present installations for the purpose of storage of flammable liquid, liquified petroleum gas and explosives and blasting agents may continue in the agricultural district. Provided, however, that such installation shall not be expanded nor shall new installations for such purpose be permitted without a special permit from the council. Prior to issuance of any such permit, an application therefor shall be investigated by the chief of police and the chief of the fire department, and a hearing held thereon before the council. 
Sec. 10-32. - Rules, regulations and traffic governing public parks. 
(a)  Traffic prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to drive a self-propelled or motorized vehicle, except an electrically propelled wheelchair, in any park, playground, recreational area or athletic field owned or maintained by the city except upon a street or other public thoroughfare therein; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to construction or maintenance equipment operated by, or under a contract with, the city and within the scope of such operation or contract. 
(b)  Other traffic, rules and regulations. The council may, by resolution, adopt additional restrictions on traffic, together with rules and regulations for the use of public parks and sign-post the same upon such parks, playgrounds, recreational areas or athletic fields as they apply, and it is unlawful for any person to violate the same when so sign-posted. 
(c)  Tobacco prohibited on city property. No person shall use tobacco products on city-owned property including but not limited to parks, buildings and equipment except for streets and avenues. 
(Code of 1979; Ord. No. 13, 4th series, 6-28-04) 
Secs. 10-33-10-49. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-50. - Abandoning a motor vehicle. 
    It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public or private property without the consent of the person in control of such property. For the purpose of this section, a "motor vehicle" is as defined in M.S.A. Ch. 169. For the purpose of this section, an "abandoned motor vehicle" is defined as in the section of the City Code relating to disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. 
Sec. 10-51. - Prevention, reduction and elimination of blighting factors. 
(a)  Causes of blight or blighting factors. 
(1)  It is hereby determined that the uses, structures and activities and causes of blight or blighting factors described herein, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods, so as to be harmful to the public welfare, health and safety. No person, firm or corporation of any kind shall maintain or permit to be maintained, any of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the City of International Falls owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person, firm or corporation. 
a.  In any area, the storage upon any property of junk automobiles. For the purpose of this section, the term "junk automobiles" shall include any motor vehicle, part of a motor vehicle or former motor vehicle, stored in the open, which is not currently licensed for use upon the highways of the State of Minnesota, and is either: 
1.  Unusable or inoperable because of lack of, or defects in component parts; 
2.  Unusable or inoperable because of damage from collision, deterioration, alteration or other factors; 
3.  Beyond repair and, therefore, not intended for future use as a motor vehicle; or 
4.  Being retained on the property for possible use of salvageable parts. 
b.  In any area the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed 30 days. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves, or other appliances stored in the open; remnants of wood; decayed, weathered or broken construction materials no longer suitable for sale, approved building materials; metal or other material or cast off material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
c.  In any area the existence of any structure or part of any structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling or useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
d.  In any area the existence of any vacant dwelling, garage, or other out-building, unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals. 
e.  In any area the existence of any noxious or poisonous vegetation, such as poison ivy, ragweed, or other poisonous plants, or any weeds, grass over six inches tall, brush or plants, which are a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health or appearance of the neighborhood. 
f.  Buildings, fences, and other structures which have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances because they: 
1.  Are unsightly; 
2.  Decrease adjoining landowners and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and 
3.  Adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns. 
(b)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  The owner and the occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or blighted factors set forth in subsection (a) of this section is found to exist, shall be notified, by writing, by the housing inspector to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors from such property within ten days after service of the notice upon him. Such notice may be served personally or by mail, the same by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner as contained in the records of the Koochiching County Treasurer; and if the premises are occupied, to the person residing at the premises. Additional time may be granted by the enforcement officer where bona fide efforts to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors are in progress. 
(2)  Failure to comply with such notice within the time allowed shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(3)  In the case of failure to remove any blight or causes of blight, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, the blight or causes of blight within the time prescribed, the city council may order the blight or cause of blight to be removed by the city personnel or others, or the weeds to be cut by others or city personnel and to remove or otherwise destroy all such noxious, inflammable, or detrimental vegetation the city council shall certify the costs of labor and equipment along with a $150.00 administrative fee to the city administrator. The city administrator shall certify such cost to the county auditor as a special assessment against the property involved for collections in the same manner as other special assessments. As an additional or alternative remedy, the owners of any interest in said land and the occupant shall be jointly and severally liable for such costs and the costs shall be recoverable in any action brought against any of them in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3, 3rd series, eff. 12-14-92; Ord. No. 10, 3rd series, eff. 10-10-95) 
Sec. 10-52. - Prohibited use of mobile homes and recreational camping vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The terms "mobile home" and "recreational camping vehicle" shall mean and include the following definitions: 
    Camping trailer. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
    Motor home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Pick-up coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation. 
    Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home or recreational camping vehicle upon public or private property for human habitation except in a licensed mobile home park or by resolution the council may permit an organization or club to temporarily park its member's mobile home or recreational camping vehicle on public property for up to 14 total days per calendar year with a permit. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home or recreational camping vehicle overnight on any public highway, street or alley within the city limits of the City of International Falls. 
(d)  Storage is allowed at owner's primary residence, or it's commonly owned contiguous parcel(s), for the owner's camping units and one non-resident camping unit as long as they are ten feet from other structures. Front, side, and rear yard setbacks must apply. 
(e)  A property owner is allowed to use one camping unit located at his/her primary residence, or it's commonly owned contiguous parcel(s), for personal use for up to 14 total days per calendar year without a permit. 
(f)  A property owner may have one visitor camping unit on his/her property for up to 14 total days per calendar year without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 8, 4th series, eff. 3-10-03; Ord. No. 14, 5th series, eff. 9-30-15) 
Sec. 10-53. - Consumption of beer, wine or liquor on streets and public property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed container, beer, wine or liquor, as those terms are defined in Chapter 5 of the City Code, on any street or other public property except city parks and other public property when and where permission has been specifically granted by the council. Provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on streets or public property when the container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers. 
Sec. 10-54. - Consumption of beer, wine or liquor on private parking lots. 
    It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an unsealed container, beer, wine or liquor, as those terms are defined in Chapter 5 of the City Code, on any privately-owned parking lot which is clearly sign-posted prohibiting such possession and consumption. Provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on privately-owned parking lots when the container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers. 
Sec. 10-55. - Disorderly house or place of public resort. 
    It is unlawful for any person (1) to keep a disorderly house or place of public resort, whereby the peace, comfort or decency of a neighborhood is habitually disturbed; or (2) being the owner or in control of any premises, intentionally permit them to be so used. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 10-56. - Closing of kiddie parks. 
(a)  Purpose. To protect the kiddie parks and the appurtenances thereto from abuse and desecration; to provide for the recreational use of these areas; to control and regulate traffic and maintain general order therein; and to further the safety, health, comfort, morals and welfare of all persons while within the limits of the parks and parkways. 
(b)  Definition. "Kiddie parks" shall include all grounds, buildings thereon, waters therein and any other property which is now or may hereafter be at the following parks: 
(1)  Shorewood Kiddie Park is located at Lot 7 Block 2 Plat of Shorewood. 
(2)  Riverview Kiddie Park is located at Designated Park located in Government Lot 3 Plat of Riverview. 
(3)  Green Acres Kiddie Park is located at Outlot 1 Plat of Green Acres First Addition. 
(c)  Park hours. All kiddie parks shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. 9, 3rd series, eff. 9-11-95) 
Sec. 10-57. - Electronic noise. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Prohibited conduct. No person shall play, use, or operate on private property or vehicle any radio, tape or disc player, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the production of sound in such a manner, considering the time and place and the purpose for which the sound is produced, as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of a person or persons of ordinary sensibility. 
(b)  Evidence. The play, use, or operation of any radio, tape or disc player, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the production of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from said machine or device shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(c)  Responsibility of owner or person in charge. When sound violating this section is produced by a machine or device that is located in or on a vehicle, building, or land, the owner of the vehicle, building, or land is guilty of the violation; provided, however, that if the owner of the vehicle, building, or land is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle, building, or land at the time is guilty of the violation. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to sound produced by the following: 
(1)  Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities for which permits have been granted pursuant to International Falls ordinance; 
(2)  Antitheft devices; 
(3)  Safety devices; i.e., vehicle back-up warning devices; 
(4)  Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized emergency vehicles, or in functions authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 18, 3rd series, eff. 1-13-97) 
Sec. 10-58. - Regulation of tobacco sales. 
(a)  Definitions and interpretations. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa. The term "shall" means mandatory and the term "may" means permissive. The following terms shall have the definitions given to them: 
    Compliance checks shall mean the system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this section. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this section. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for educations, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state, or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices. 
    Individually packaged shall mean the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this subsection shall not be considered individually packaged. 
    Loosies shall mean the common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette. 
    Minor shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years. 
    Moveable place of business shall refer to any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions. 
    Retail establishment shall mean any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants. 
    Sale shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration. 
    Self-service merchandising shall mean open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending machines. 
    Tobacco or tobacco products shall mean any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking. 
    Tobacco related devices shall mean any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products. 
    Vending machine shall mean any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. 
(b)  License. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city. 
(1)  Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city administrator shall forward the application to the council for action at its next regularly scheduled council meeting. If the city administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. 
(2)  Action. The council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. 
(3)  Term. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue. 
(4)  Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended as provided in subsections (k) and (l) of this section. 
(5)  Transfers. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the council. 
(6)  Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this section. 
(7)  Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premise. 
(8)  Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license. 
(c)  Fees. No license shall be issued under this section until the appropriate license fees shall be paid in full. 
(d)  Basis for denial of license. The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this section; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this section: 
(1)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. 
(3)  The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or misleading information. 
(5)  The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation, from holding such a license. 
(e)  Prohibited sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device: 
(1)  To any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this section. 
(3)  By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the licensee or the licensee's employee, and the customer. 
(4)  By means of loosies as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(5)  Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. 
(6)  By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance provisions, or other regulation. 
(f)  Vending machines. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this section to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment. 
(g)  Self-service sales. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this section to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco related device between the licensee or his or her administrator and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. 
(h)  Responsibility. All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the city administrator to whatever penalties are appropriate under this section, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. 
(i)  Compliance checks and inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least twice per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years, to enter the licensed premise to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for education, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. 
(j)  Other illegal acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this section. 
(1)  Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device to any minor. 
(2)  Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
(3)  Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. 
(4)  Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this section for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This subsection shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
(5)  Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person. 
(k)  Violations. 
(1)  Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard an the accusation. 
(2)  Hearings. If a person accused of violating this section so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator. 
(3)  Hearing officer. The city's administrator shall serve as the hearing officer. 
(4)  Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this section did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officers reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under subsection (l) of this section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator. 
(5)  Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged violation occurred. 
(6)  Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this section. The city can also elect to assert both criminal and administrative remedies. 
(7)  Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(l)  Penalties. 
(1)  Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this section, or whose employee shall have violated this section, shall be charged an administrative fine of $75.00 for a first violation of this ordinance; $200.00 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and $250.00 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days. 
(2)  Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by subsection (l)(3) of this section, found to be in violation of this section shall be charged an administrative fee of $50.00. 
(3)  Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, shall comply with the diversion program administered by the city's juvenile officer. 
(4)  Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this section. 
(m)  Exceptions and defenses. Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law. 
(Ord. No. 19, 3rd series, eff. 1-13-97; Ord. No. 22, 3rd series, eff. 3-23-98) 
Sec. 10-59. - No smoking near medical facilities. 
(a)  [ Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated:] 
    Medical facility means any medical hospital, medical skilled nursing facility or buildings attached to a nursing home. 
    Public place means any public street, public sidewalk, public easement, publicly owned property, public park, publicly owned or operated parking lot or parking facility. 
    Smoke or smoking means the use or possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, tobacco smoking device or any other lighted smoking equipment. 
(b)  [ Where prohibited. ] No person shall smoke in any public place within 100 feet of the nearest property line of a medical facility, said 100 feet measured in a straight line of constant elevation. 
(c)  [ Exception. ] The prohibition of (b) above, does not apply to a person inside an enclosed motor vehicle in motion on a public street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 1, 5th series, § 1, eff. 8-9-07) 
Sec. 10-60. - Grass and weeds on private property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of any lot or parcel of land in the city to allow any weeds or grass growing upon any such lot or parcel of land to grow to a greater height than six inches or to allow such weeds or grass to go to seed. 
(b)  If any such owner, occupant or agent fails to comply with this height limitation and after notice given by the housing inspector, has not within seven days of such notice complied, the city shall cause such weeds or grass to be cut and the expenses thus incurred shall be a lien upon such real estate. The city administrator shall certify to the county auditor of Koochiching County, a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the city. Such amount together with interest, shall be entered as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2, 4th series, eff. 5-21-02) 
Sec. 10-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13, 2nd series, adopted April 27, 1981 repealed the provisions of § 10-61. 
Sec. 10-62. - Open pits, basements and other excavations. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning or in control of real estate to have any pit, basement, well, septic tank, cesspool or other excavation on said premises open and without protection for the public. 
Sec. 10-63. - Open stairways. 
    It is unlawful for the owner of any premises to construct or maintain thereon, or permit the construction or maintenance thereon, of a stairway opening to a public sidewalk without adequately protection such opening with a gate, fence, bars or other barrier adequately protecting the same. 
(Code of 1979) 
Sec. 10-64. - Obstructions on public property. 
(a)  Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, display or offer for sale, any fence, goods or other obstructions upon, over, across or under any public property without first having obtained a written permit from the council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of such permit, and taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation, within the definition of an obstruction. 
(b)  Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon public property. 
(c)  Dumping on public property. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on public property any nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is a violation of this section to place or store any building materials or waste resulting from building construction or demolition on public property without first having obtained a written permit from the council. 
(d)  Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain a sign, advertisement, or other structure on public property without first having obtained a written permit from the council. 
(e)  Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(f)  Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of this section, the council may impose such insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding such persons and property. Such insurance or bond shall also protect the city from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of such obstruction. 
Sec. 10-65. - Ice and snow in fire lanes. 
    It is unlawful for the resident manager, agent, or other person in charge or responsible for rentals or maintenance of private property to fail to properly maintain all fire lanes thereon. For the purpose of this section, proper maintenance shall include removal of all ice and snow in such fire lanes within 24 hours after it has ceased to be deposited thereon, and sanding any residual slippery condition thereof. 
(Ord. No. 29, 2nd series, eff. 9-29-82) 
Sec. 10-66. - Enforcement of duties of fire chief, housing inspector. 
    The chief of the fire department shall see that all rules and regulations and all ordinances and provisions of this Charter are enforced in court relative to the fire department and such other duties as assigned by the council as the housing inspector relating to the Housing Code, Nuisances and Blight. The housing inspector can issue citations for misdemeanors. 
(Ord. No. 2, 4th series, eff. 5-21-02) 
Secs. 10-67-10-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code of 1979) 
Chapter 11 - LAND USE REGULATION (ZONING) 

Sec. 11-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter establishes comprehensive zoning regulations for the city, in pursuance of the authority granted by M.S.A. § 462.351 (1990), Laws of 1965, to promote the health, safety, convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zones and regulating therein the uses of land in the city. 
Sec. 11-2. - Zone districts. 
    The city is hereby divided into zone districts as shown on the official Zoning District Map of the City of International Falls dated June 2, 2005, and filed in the office of the city administrator. The map and its effective date are hereby amended to reflect this ordinance and all explanatory matters thereon are hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4, 3rd series, eff. 3-22-93; Ord. No. 8, 3rd series, eff. 5-22-95; Ord. No. 1, 4th series, eff. 3-21-02; Ord. No. 5, 4th series, eff. 8-18-02; Ord. No. 21, 4th series, eff. 6-2-05; Ord. No. 3, 5th series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 3-14-18) 
Sec. 11-3. - Uses. 
    In each zone district, land and structures may be used only for the purposes provided under permitted uses, section 11-30, except those uses listed under conditional uses, section 11-30, may be reviewed under the terms and conditions of section 11-25. In addition to the requirements of this Zoning Chapter, the regulations of the Airport Zoning Ordinance must also be adhered to. In instances where the Zoning Chapter and Airport Zoning Ordinance are in conflict, the Airport Zoning Ordinance shall take precedence. 
Sec. 11-4. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Any use or structure existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its provisions, may be continued with the following limitations. Any use or building which does not conform to this chapter may not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Re-established after abandonment. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of one year shall be prima facie evidence of such abandonment; 
(3)  Enlarged, increased, replaced or removed, except in conformity of this chapter; 
(4)  Rebuilt after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost immediately prior to damage; or 
(5)  Continued beyond the periods set forth in section 11-20. 
Sec. 11-5. - Open space and structural dimensions. 
(a)  In each zone district, each structure hereafter erected or altered shall observe the height, area and yard requirements as provided on the following schedule: 
Structural Dimensions Minimum Requirements Maximum 
Requirements _______________District Lot Area Per Unit Lot 
Frontage Depth of 
Front Yard Depth of 
Rear Yard Interior 
Side Yard Corner 
Side Yard Bldg. 
Coverage* Bldg. 
Height R-1A 7,000 sq.ft.-1st unit 50' 30' 35' 5' 10' 35% 35' 4,000 sq.ft.-2nd unit R-1B 9,000 sq.ft.-1st unit 75' 30' 35' 5' 10' 30% 35' 5,000 sq.ft.-2nd unit R-2A 4,600 sq.ft.-1st unit 371/2' 25' 30' 4' 8' 50% 35' 2,000 sq.ft.-2nd unit 1,500 sq.ft.-each add'l unit R-2B 6,000 sq.ft.-1st unit 50' 25' 30' 4' 8' 40% 35' 3,000 sq.ft.-2nd unit 2,000 sq.ft.-each add'l unit C-1A No No None None None None 90% 40' Minimum Minimum C-1B No No None None None None 90% None Minimum Minimum C-2A No No 15' 15' 8' 15' 70% 35' Minimum Minimum C-2B No No 25' 15' 8' 15' 50% 35' Minimum Minimum C-3 Same as R-2B above 50' 25' 30' 4' 8' 40% 35' M-1A 10,000 sq.ft. 75' 25' 15' None 15' 60% 40' M-1B 10,000 sq.ft. 75' 25' 15' None 15' 50% 40' M-2A 15,000 sq.ft. 150' 25' 25' 25' 25' 55% 40' M-2B 15,000 sq.ft. 150' 25' 25' 25' 25' 35% None O 2.5 acres 200' 50' 50' 50' 50' 10% 35' P-1 No 
Minimum No 
Minimum 25' 25' 25' 25' 35% 35'  
*Includes accessory buildings 
STRUCTURAL DIMENSIONS CONTINUED: 
(1)  Front yard requirements and building height limitations for uses in the M-2A and M-2B districts shall comply with the following formula. Building height requirements in an M-2A and M-2B district shall only be applied to a graduated formula which relates vertical building height to the horizontal front yard setback. In all instances, a graduated front yard setback and building height requirement of a 1:1 ratio would be required. The ratio of 1:1 shall apply to buildings which exceed a 40 foot height limitation, while also maintaining the minimum 25 front yard setback. The building height requirement shall not apply to buildings which do not directly adjoin a developed city street. 
(2)  For residential use in residential districts where lot frontage is on a cul-de-sac, the minimum requirement for lot frontage shall be 40 feet so long as minimum lot area exceeds 9,000 square feet. 
(3)  In addition to the dimensional requirements stated in this section, and elsewhere in this chapter, Airport Zoning Regulations must be adhered to. 
(4)  For residential uses in C-1A or C-2A districts, the lot area per unit in the R-2A district must be observed. 
(5)  For residential uses in C-1B or C-2B districts, the lot area per unit in the R-2B district must be observed. 
(b)  No yard or lot area required for a building or structure, shall during the life of that building or structure, be occupied by or counted as yard or lot area for another building or structure. 
(c)  Accessory buildings in all districts may be placed with minimum rear and interior side yards of four feet, provided that no portion of the structure shall extend or overhang within two feet of a lot line. Front and corner side yards required of the principal building must be observed by the accessory building. 
(d)  In R-1A, R-1B, R-2A and R-2B districts, the maximum size of an accessory building shall be 1,200 square feet with a maximum height of 18 feet. 
(e)  For any residential dwelling, the minimum total floor area shall be no less than 900 square feet. 
(Code of 1991) 
Sec. 11-6. - Off-street loading and parking. 
    Space for off-street loading of vehicles shall be provided for every building used or designed for commercial purposes in an amount considered adequate by the zoning administrator for the proposed use. Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on every lot on which any new structures are hereafter established; such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be deemed to be required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(1)  Dwelling: One parking space for each unit. 
(2)  Tourist accommodations: One parking space for each room or unit. 
(3)  Theatre, stadium, auditorium, church, or other places of public assembly: One parking space for each ten seats, based on maximum seating capacity. 
(4)  Stores and other retail business establishments with less than 50,000 square feet of retail floor area: One parking space for each 100 square feet of total retail floor area. 
(5)  Office building: One parking space for each 200 square feet of office floor area. 
(6)  Industrial, manufacturing, or wholesale establishments: One parking space for each five workers, based on average annual employment and adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used incidental to the operating of the industrial or manufacturing establishment. Off-street parking for employees shall also be provided within 500 feet of the confines of the operating property. 
(7)  Restaurant, night club, cafe, tavern or bar: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor space. 
(8)  Bowling alley: Five parking spaces for each alley. 
(9)  Drive-in restaurant: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area or a minimum of ten parking spaces, whichever is greater. 
(10)  Retail business establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet of retail floor area including shopping centers or shopping malls: One-half of one parking space for every 100 square feet of total retail floor area. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79; Ord. No. 3, 2nd series; eff. 6-19-80) 
Secs. 11-7-11-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-20. - Signs. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the use and display of signs. It is recognized that signs serve an important function and, therefore, reasonable and adequate display of signs is permitted under the provisions of this section. At the same time, this section recognizes that there is a definite need to regulate such display, as signs utilize the visual element of the public right-of-way to bring messages to the public. Limitations and standards are established herein consistent with the type of the district and the uses and activities in the district. 
(b)  General requirements. Except as otherwise provided by this section, signs, where permitted, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  No freestanding sign shall be allowed within the initial five feet of required front setback space. Where no setback is required, a freestanding sign may be erected with the leading edge of the sign not more than eight feet into the street right-of-way or three feet from the curb, whichever is less, provided that no sign shall be located within 20 feet of any intersection. 
(2)  Wall signs placed against, painted on, or attached to the exterior walls of buildings, shall not extend beyond 15 inches of the wall surface. Such signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area unless made of incombustible materials approved by the city engineer or building inspector. 
(3)  No temporary signs shall be attached to a light standard or the supporting pylon of a freestanding sign. Temporary signs placed elsewhere must be expeditiously removed by the responsible party upon termination of allowable time period specified in the permit of this chapter. 
(4)  Advertising and business signs shall not face residential districts where the nonresidential property abuts, is across a side street from, or is adjacent to such residential district, excepting where a residential district is immediately across from the front of the property. 
(5)  Design characteristics: 
a.  Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means and electrical devices, and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the national electrical code. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for display purposes. The light from any illuminated sign or from any light source, including interior of a building, shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing residential districts or adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private roads, highways or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect on or into residential structures. 
b.  Obstructions. No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exitways, window or door openings used as a means of egress or to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to another part thereof or access thereto. Also, no sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
c.  Traffic hazard. No sign shall be erected near or at any intersection of any streets in such manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where by reason of position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device. 
(6)  Maintenance. It shall be the duty of the owner of any sign or awning to maintain the same constantly in a state of good repair and safety. The city engineer or building inspector, in making an inspection of any awning or sign, may order special repair to be made in order that the good appearance and safety of the same may be maintained. The building official may order repairs to be done within a set time and in all cases of repairs ordered, the owner shall submit to the city a certificate of a licensed sign hanger that the designated repairs have been made. In all cases where any sign is imminently or obviously unsafe, the city engineer or building inspector is authorized forthwith to remove such sign as a public nuisance without any demand for the removal of the same upon the owner or any person maintaining such sign. Notification of such removal action shall be made to the owner or responsible party within ten days of the action taken. 
a.  No cloth, paper or advertising matter shall be permitted to hang loose from any billboard. It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a billboard to keep and preserve the lot or parcel of land on which such billboard is erected at all times clean, inoffensive, and free and clear of any garbage, refuse, weeds, rubbish, paper or other offensive material of any kind and description, which may be deposited or gather thereon and to keep the same removed at all times for a space equal to 20 feet from any portion of such billboard. Billboards shall be kept in good repair and with displays thereon. No billboards shall be left blank for a period of more than 30 consecutive days. Where no client is found for the least of the available billboard space, the lessor shall provide public service advertising on the billboard. 
b.  Any billboard not maintained in accordance with this chapter may be ordered removed by the city engineer or building inspector. Notice of removal shall be sent to the owner of the billboard, if known, and if not known, then by certified mail to the owner of the parcel of property on which the billboard is located as shown by the public records. If no action is taken in reference to removal within 30 days, the council may order the city engineer or building inspector to physically remove the billboard and the costs of such removal shall become a lien against the property on which it is located. 
(c)  Sign requirements by type. 
(1)  Marquee and fixed awnings. 
a.  Projection over street. No marquee or fixed awnings shall hereafter be so erected as to project over public property until a permit shall have first been secured from the building inspector to erect such marquee or fixed awning. 
b.  Extending over curb. No marquee or fixed awning shall extend nearer than three feet to the curb line, nor be of greater length than the width of the building. 
c.  Minimum height. No marquee or fixed awning shall be, at any point, at a less height than ten feet above the sidewalk. 
d.  Support required. Except as hereinafter provided, every such marquee or fixed awning shall be supported by properly designed and properly anchored cantilever beams, extending into the building, or by chains or steel rods properly fastened to its outer side or front and extending from thence at an angle of at least 40 degrees with the horizontal plane, to the wall of the building, and securely anchored to said wall and to the floor or roof construction or the columns or other support below the minimum awning height, except where a permit specifically authorizing such support has been approved by the zoning board of appeals and adjustments. 
e.  Signs permitted. Any marquee or fixed awning projecting over public property may have a sign on each or any face thereof, but every such sign shall be built as an integral part of the marquee or fixed awning, except that signs not exceeding six square feet in area and allowing a minimum of eight feet clearance below the sign may be permitted under a marquee. 
f.  Height. Marquee signs shall not exceed the height of the architectural facing on which it is mounted. 
g.  Length. Marquee signs may extend the full length but in no case shall they project beyond the ends of the marquee. 
(2)  Electric signs. 
a.  An electric sign, within the meaning of this chapter, shall be any sign the illumination of which, in whole or in part, is accomplished by electric wiring, materials and/or devices installed on, in or in any manner attached to or connected with such sign. 
b.  Transformers, tubing and other electrical sign equipment shall be installed and operated so as to not cause radio and television interferences, and interference with communication systems. 
c.  No section of any sign hereafter erected or attached against the wall of a building shall prevent access to electrical boxes and fittings. 
(3)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Height. Freestanding signs may have a height not to exceed 35 feet. 
b.  Obstruction to traffic. No freestanding sign shall be erected so as to obstruct free access to or egress from any building. 
c.  Bottom clearance. The bottom capping of all freestanding signs shall be at least 36 inches above the ground for signs 15 feet or less in height. Signs exceeding 15 feet in height must maintain a ten foot bottom clearance. 
d.  Construction materials. No freestanding sign shall be constructed of combustible materials except as approved by the city engineer or building inspector following special application. 
(4)  Roof signs. 
a.  Materials. All roof signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other approved noncombustible materials except that the city engineer or building inspector may approve acceptable alternate combustible materials, upon special application. Provisions shall be made for electric ground of all metallic parts, and where combustible materials are permitted in letter or other ornamental features, all wiring and tubing shall be kept free and insulated therefrom. 
b.  Bottom clearance. There shall be a clear space of not less than six feet between the lowest part of the sign and the roof level except for necessary structural supports. 
c.  Roof sign supports. The supporting members of a roof sign shall appear to be free of any extra bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, etc. The supports shall reasonably appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building. Supporting columns of round, square or shaped steel members may be erected if required bracing, visible to the public, is minimized or covered. 
(d)  Sign standards by zoning districts. 
(1)  General. The following sign standards by zoning district shall apply to every existing zoning district and new zoning districts hereafter created unless otherwise expressly provided in such zoning districts. Only signs as described herein shall be permitted in each particular zoning district. 
(2)  Signs permitted in all zoning districts. Subject to the other conditions of this chapter, the following signs shall be permitted in any zoning district within the city. Signs in subsections (d)(1)-(6) of this section shall be considered temporary. These signs and those described in subsection (c) of this section shall be allowed to be placed in any required yard. 
a.  Construction signs: One nonilluminated temporary sign facing each bordering street, identifying all parties engaged in the construction of a building, provided that the sign shall not exceed 35 square feet in area, does not obstruct the vision in the public way, and is removed within 30 days following occupancy of building under construction. 
b.  Real estate signs: One nonilluminated real estate sign not over 16 square feet in surface area advertising the sale, rental, or lease of only the building or premises on which it is located. 
c.  Political signs: Political signs shall be permitted on each lot for a period of 60 days prior to and ten days after an election. 
d.  Owner-occupant sign: One residential name sign not to exceed one square foot in area, identifying only the name of the owner or occupant of a residential building. 
e.  Home occupation sign: One nonilluminated identification sign, not to exceed three square feet in area, for the following permitted uses: Resident professional offices, home occupations and boarding-lodging houses. 
f.  Directional and private traffic control signs: Directional and private traffic control signs indicating traffic movement onto a premise, or within a premise, not exceeding three square feet of surface area for each sign, are permitted. No advertising message may be incorporated on such signs. 
(3)  Signs permitted in residential districts. Subject to the other conditions of this chapter, the following signs shall be permitted in residential districts. 
a.  Subdivision plat signs: Temporary signs advertising a new subdivision plan provided such signs do not exceed 60 square feet in aggregate surface area, identifying only the plat in which they are located, are nonilluminated, and are erected only at dedicated street entrances to the plat. Such signs shall be removed if construction of subdivision improvements is not in progress on the plant within 60 days following the date of the sign erection, or as soon as 80 percent of the lots are developed and sold. 
b.  Residential housing development sign: One permanent residential housing development identification sign facing each bordering street shall be permitted for each development of 20 or more units. Such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Such signs shall be erected only at the dedicated street entrance, may be indirectly illuminated, and shall not exceed a height of eight feet above grade. 
c.  Club, lodge, office signs: One nonilluminated identification sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area for the following uses: clubs, lodges, fraternities, and professional offices where permitted. 
d.  Civic, religious organizations, and other permitted nonresidential uses: One illuminated or nonilluminated sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area. Such sign may include the following uses: offices of a civic, religious, or charitable organization, offices devoted to business management, professional services, trade associations, labor unions, insurance companies or agencies, banks, financial institutions, real estate offices, funeral homes, etc. 
e.  Public and quasi-public use signs: One illuminated or nonilluminated identification sign or bulletin board not to exceed a total of 12 square feet in area for the following uses: Public schools, parochial schools, colleges, public libraries, museums, social and recreational buildings, parks, playgrounds, hospitals, sanitariums, charitable and religious institutions, churches, cemeteries, and governmental office buildings. 
(4)  Signs permitted in C-1A, C-1B, C-2A, C-2B, M-1A, and M-1B districts. Subject to other conditions of this chapter, the following signs shall be permitted in the C-1A, C-1B, C-2A, C-2B, M-1A, and M-1B districts: 
a.  Signs as permitted in residence districts (Same as C-1A, C-1B, C-2A, C-2B, and M-1A, M-1B, subsection (d)(3), above). 
b.  Business signs. A maximum of three business signs limited to one facing each bordering street. One side of the main building bordering a street, or each business in a series of attached businesses such as a shopping center, shall be allowed 50 square feet of sign for the first 50 linear feet or part thereof bordering on said street or in said center, and an additional 50 square feet of sign for every additional 50 linear feet bordering on said side. Where there is a second side of the main building bordering a second street, a second sign with an additional 50 square feet shall be allowed. Where a building has an entrance opened during regular business hours bordering an alley, an additional 25 square feet of sign shall be allowed on that side of the building. 
c.  Shopping center signs. For business complexes of four or more separate stores in the C-2A or C-2B commercial district, one shopping center sign may be erected. Such sign shall be limited to a roof or freestanding sign not to exceed 100 square feet in area. Such requirements shall be applicable to the aggregate face area of a double faced sign. 
(5)  Signs permitted in other nonresidential districts. The following signs shall be permitted in nonresidential districts where such uses are otherwise permitted in the district. 
a.  Signs as permitted in residence districts. Signs as permitted and regulated for use in any Residential districts. 
b.  Business signs. Each main building or business in a series of attached businesses, such as a shopping center, may have three business signs. Two of such business signs shall be limited to ten square feet in area. One business sign may be of any type to a maximum of 100 square feet in area. 
c.  Shopping center signs. For business complexes of four or more separate stores, one shopping center sign may be erected. Such sign may be of any type to a maximum of 150 square feet in area. 
d.  Advertising signs (billboards). Existing outdoor advertising structures or signs which advertise products of business not connected with the site on which they are located shall not exceed 100 square feet for each 100 feet of frontage of the parcel or parcels on which located. No single billboard shall exceed 300 square feet in area. A double face billboard on the same frame with the post panels not more than 12 inches apart shall be considered as that of one face. No billboard shall be placed so as to interfere with visibility of any existing billboard, from a sight distance of 300 feet or less, from the travel lane of a street or highway. No billboard shall be constructed within 300 feet of school or park property or 100 feet of any public use property. Provided further, that the council may direct the city engineer or building inspector to issue a permit for a billboard at less than 300 feet from a school or park property or 100 feet of a public use property at their discretion when the billboard will not be visible from said property or will not detract from the safety, sightliness or convenience of public use of the property. No freestanding billboard shall be constructed to interfere with clear visibility at an intersection of streets or a railroad and shall in no event be constructed within 50 feet of the intersection of property lines at a street corner. No billboard shall obstruct doors, windows, fire escapes, or light and air to any building. No billboard other than a roof sign, or wall sign, shall exceed 18 feet in overall height above the ground level. 
(6)  Signs permitted in planned development. Signs permitted in planned unit development shall be as approved by the planning commission for each development. In no case shall signs in a residential planned development exceed the sign requirements stipulated in subsection (c) of this section, nor signs in a commercial planned unit development exceed the requirements of subsection (d) of this section. 
(7)  Signs permitted in M-1A or M-1B districts. No regulations. 
(e)  Prohibited signs. The following described signs are hereby declared a nuisance and shall be prohibited in all districts of the city; 
(1)  Signs imitating official signs. Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal or which contain the words "stop", "go slow", "caution", "danger", "warning", or similar words. 
(2)  Confusing signs. Signs which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device; which obstruct the view in any direction at a street or road intersection; or signs graphically designed so as to detract from driver alertness through the use of brilliant colors; "motion" patterns, extensive test or other devices. 
(3)  Signs advertising terminated businesses. Business signs which advertise an activity, business, product, or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. Where the owner or lessor of the premises is seeking a new tenant, such signs may remain in place for not more than 90 days from the date of vacancy. 
(f)  Post of bills, posters, placards or circulars. 
(1)  The posting of bills, posters, placards, and circulars on any public right-of-way or public property is prohibited. Advertising signs and devices or displays are prohibited on public property or within public right-of-way except such signs or bills as may be placed by city employees for a traffic control, parking, directional, or civic purposes and except such signs or bills as may be specifically authorized by the council to be placed by person or grouped for civic or quasi-civic promotions. 
(2)  No bills, posters, or signs are to be posted on private property, fences, trees, walls, rocks, structures, or similar appurtenances without permission of the owner and conformity to provisions of the City Code. 
(3)  Political posters and campaign signs are prohibited on public property and public right-of-way. 
(4)  Any sign, poster, or advertising placed on public property or on public street right-of-way in violation of provisions of the City Code may be summarily removed by the city, its employees or agents without notice. 
(g)  Nonconforming signs or awnings. 
(1)  Nonconforming signs may be removed. The city engineer or building inspector may order the removal of signs or awnings which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter, provided the same have not been erected in conformity with permits issued by the city after the effective date of this chapter. All awnings must be brought up to the standards of this chapter within six months after date of notification to comply with these standards has been given the owner or lessee of such awnings. 
(2)  Other signs, marquees, and awnings. Other signs, marquees, and awnings existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter and not conforming to its provisions, but which did conform to previous laws or City Code provisions shall be regarded as nonconforming uses which may be contained if properly repaired and maintained as provided in this chapter. 
(3)  Signs, marquees, or awnings which are nuisances as defined herein, unsafe, structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall comply immediately with all provisions of this chapter or shall be ordered removed by the city engineer or building inspector. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the council from granting temporary permits for lights, banners, signs, or decorations relating to civic or community celebrations, subject to such conditions as the council may see fit to impose. 
(5)  Any permit, right or privilege to extend any sign, marquee or awning into or over the public right-of-way under the provisions of this chapter, or by amendment thereto, are mere licenses revokable at any time by the council. 
(h)  Permit issuance fee. 
(1)  No permanent sign, marquee, or nonresidential awning shall be erected in the city until a permit to do so has been issued by the city (signs stipulated in subsection (b) of this section shall be exempt from this requirement). No permit shall be granted until the necessary fee has been paid and until the city has made a preliminary inspection of the sign before hanging and has ascertained that the sign and method of hanging comply with all requirements of this chapter. The Inspector may require that detailed plans and specifications be submitted with the application if necessary in his judgment. Following permit issuance and sign erection, the city shall make a final inspection of said sign, and if it complies in every respect with the minimum standards set forth in this chapter, shall endorse on the permit his certificate of approval. 
(2)  The fees for erection permits required above shall be paid to the city, and shall be assessed on the basis of the surface area of the sign as determined by the city. Such fee shall be $.10 per square foot subject to a minimum fee of $1.00 and maximum fee of $30.00. 
(Ord. No. 9.26) 
Secs. 11-21-11-24. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-25. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Certain uses exist which would not generally be acceptable as an outright use in various zone districts, however, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to adjacent and surrounding uses, these uses would not be injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare. Such uses are hereby classified as conditional uses and are subject to the provisions specified herein. 
(b)  Any conditional uses listed in this chapter shall be permitted only after review by the planning commission with a specific recommendation to the council and approved by the council. 
(c)  A conditional use permit may be granted only upon finding all of the following: 
(1)  That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity, or substantially diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; 
(2)  That the proposed conditional use will not increase local or state expenditures in relation to costs of servicing or maintaining neighboring properties; 
(3)  That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses predominant in the area; and 
(4)  That the location and character of the proposed conditional use are considered to be consistent with a desirable pattern of development for the locality in general. 
(d)  Application for conditional use permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator on a form provided for that purpose. The application shall be accompanied by plans, drawings, surveys or other data as necessary to fully describe the proposed use and its impact on surrounding property. 
(e)  A nonrefundable filing fee of $40.00 shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 9.26) 
Secs. 11-26-11-29. - Reserved. 
CLASSIFICATION LIST 
Sec. 11-30. - Permitted and conditional uses. 
(a)  R-1A residential. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide suitable areas within the community for resident dwellings of single- and two-family occupancy and where municipal utilities and services may be maintained at reasonable cost. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  Agricultural (except raising of livestock). 
b.  Church, synagogue. 
c.  Country club, golf course. 
d.  Dwelling, single-family, conventional or modular. 
e.  Dwelling, two-family, conventional or modular. 
f.  Park, playground. 
g.  Public or private school. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  Child care center, play school. 
b.  Community center. 
c.  Fire station. 
d.  Nursing home, rest home, children's home. 
e.  Public utility facilities. 
f.  Reservoir. 
g.  Rooming house, tourist room rental. 
h.  Planned unit development. 
i.  Home occupation. 
j.  Twin homes. 
k.  Professional and business office buildings in buildings that were formerly used as a church or public school. 
l.  Bed and breakfast. 
m.  Cleaning services and their related activities in buildings that were formerly used as churches or commercial buildings. 
(b)  R-1B residential. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide suitable areas within the community for resident dwellings of single- and two-family occupancy, and where municipal utilities and services may be maintained at reasonable cost. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  Agricultural (except raising of livestock). 
b.  Church, synagogue. 
c.  Country club, golf course. 
d.  Dwelling, single-family, conventional or modular. 
e.  Dwelling, two-family, conventional or modular. 
f.  Home occupation. 
g.  Park, playground. 
h.  Public or private school. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  Child care center, play school. 
b.  Community center. 
c.  Fire station. 
d.  Nursing home, rest home, children's home. 
e.  Public utility facilities. 
f.  Reservoir. 
g.  Rooming house, tourist room rental. 
h.  Planned unit development. 
i.  Home occupation. 
j.  Twin homes. 
k.  Professional and business office buildings in buildings that were formerly used as a church or public school. 
l.  Bed and breakfast. 
m.  Cleaning services and their related activities in buildings that were formerly used as churches or commercial buildings. 
(c)  R-2A residential. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide a multiple dwelling residence district suitable for the location of apartment buildings, townhouses, and other rooming or residential structures. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  All R-1A permitted uses. 
b.  Dwelling, multiple family. 
c.  Nursing home, rest home, children's home. 
d.  Rooming house, tourist room rental. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  All R-1A conditional uses. 
b.  Bait sales. 
c.  Club, lodge. 
d.  Museum. 
e.  Tourist court and home. 
f.  YMCA, YWCA. 
(d)  R-2B residential. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide a multiple dwelling residence district suitable for the location of apartments buildings, townhouses, and other rooming or residential structures. The intent of the district is residential. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  All R-1B permitted uses. 
b.  Dwelling, multiple family. 
c.  Nursing home, rest home, children's home. 
d.  Rooming house, tourist room rental. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  All R-1B conditional uses. 
b.  Bait sales. 
c.  Club, lodge. 
d.  Museum. 
e.  Tourist court and home. 
f.  YMCA, YWCA. 
(e)  C-1A commercial. 
(1)  Purpose. Designed to provide a compact shopping area for the location of general offices and general retail sales necessary for servicing the community and surrounding area. Only those uses which substantially interfere with the overall function of the district shall be excluded. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  All R-2A permitted uses. 
b.  Advertising studio. 
c.  Appliances, sales and repair. 
d.  Art gallery, sales. 
e.  Athletic club. 
f.  Bait sales. 
g.  Bake good sales. 
h.  Bank, credit union, financial institution. 
i.  Bar, tavern, saloon. 
j.  Barber, beauty shop. 
k.  Billiard parlor, bowling alley. 
l.  Broadcasting studio. 
m.  Carpet and rug cleaning, storage and sales. 
n.  Clothing sales. 
o.  Club or lodge. 
p.  Commercial school (beauty, music, dancing, business). 
q.  Curio and souvenir shop. 
r.  Department store. 
s.  Dry cleaning, laundry and linen supply. 
t.  Employment agency. 
u.  Fire station. 
v.  Floor coverings sales. 
w.  Florist sales. 
x.  Formal wear rental. 
y.  Furniture sales. 
z.  Grocery store. 
aa.  Hardware sales. 
bb.  Hotel. 
cc.  Interior decorator, shop and sales. 
dd.  Jewelry, sales. 
ee.  Key and lock shop. 
ff.  Laboratory, research, clinical. 
gg.  Library. 
hh.  Liquor sales, off-sale. 
ii.  Motion picture theatre (nondrive-in). 
jj.  Museum. 
kk.  Musical instruments, sales and repair. 
ll.  Offices, professional and business. 
mm.  Parking lot. 
nn.  Pawnbroker. 
oo.  Pet shop. 
pp.  Pharmacy. 
qq.  Post office. 
rr.  Printing, photo engraving, lithography services. 
ss.  Public building. 
tt.  Radio, TV, broadcasting studio. 
uu.  Radio, TV, electronic goods, sales and service. 
vv.  Restaurant, cafe, supper club. 
ww.  Retail store, general, specialty. 
xx.  Sauna, steam bath. 
yy.  Sporting goods sales. 
zz.  Tailor. 
aaa.  Travel bureau. 
bbb.  YMCA, YWCA. 
ccc.  Taxidermy shops. 
ddd.  Public utility facility. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  All R-2A conditional uses. 
b.  Armory. 
c.  Auditorium, assembly hall. 
d.  Automobile and truck, sales, parts, repairs. 
e.  Casket, sales and storage. 
f.  Clinic, hospital. 
g.  Funeral parlor. 
h.  Gasoline or filling station. 
i.  Monuments, sales, display. 
j.  Motel. 
k.  Plumbing fixtures and supplies, sales, shops. 
l.  Roller skating rink. 
m.  Tire repairing, sales. 
n.  Mobile home court. 
o.  Other uses, which in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, are of the same general character as the uses enumerated. 
(f)  C-1B commercial. 
(1)  Purpose. Designed to provide a compact shopping area for the location of general offices and general retail sales necessary for servicing the community and surrounding area. Only those uses which substantially interfere with the overall function of the district shall be excluded. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  All R-2B permitted uses. 
b.  Advertising studio. 
c.  Appliances, sales and repair. 
d.  Art gallery, sales. 
e.  Athletic club. 
f.  Bait sales. 
g.  Bake good sales. 
h.  Bank, credit union, financial institution. 
i.  Bar, tavern, saloon. 
j.  Barber, beauty shop. 
k.  Billiard parlor, bowling alley. 
l.  Broadcasting studio. 
m.  Carpet and rug cleaning, storage and sales. 
n.  Clothing sales. 
o.  Club or lodge. 
p.  Commercial school (beauty, music, dancing, business). 
q.  Curio and souvenir shop. 
r.  Department store. 
s.  Dry cleaning, laundry and linen shop. 
t.  Employment agency. 
u.  Fire station. 
v.  Floor coverings sales. 
w.  Florist sales. 
x.  Formal wear rental. 
y.  Furniture sales. 
z.  Grocery store. 
aa.  Hardware sales. 
bb.  Hotel. 
cc.  Interior decorator, shop and sales. 
dd.  Jewelry, sales. 
ee.  Key and lock shops. 
ff.  Laboratory, research, clinical. 
gg.  Library. 
hh.  Liquor sales, off-sale. 
ii.  Motion picture theatre (nondrive-in). 
jj.  Museum. 
kk.  Musical instruments, sales and repair. 
ll.  Offices, professional and business. 
mm.  Parking lot. 
nn.  Pawnbroker. 
oo.  Pet shop. 
pp.  Pharmacy. 
qq.  Post office. 
rr.  Printing, photo engraving, lithography services. 
ss.  Public building. 
tt.  Radio, TV, broadcasting studio. 
uu.  Radio, TV, electronic goods, sales and service. 
vv.  Restaurant, cafe, supper club. 
ww.  Retail store, general, specialty. 
xx.  Sauna, steambath. 
yy.  Sporting goods sales. 
zz.  Tailor. 
aaa.  Travel bureau. 
bbb.  YMCA, YWCA. 
ccc.  Marine (including boats, motors, trailers, and accessories) and small engine sales, services and storage. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  All R-2B conditional uses. 
b.  Armory. 
c.  Auditorium, assembly hall. 
d.  Automobile and truck, sales, parts and repairs. 
e.  Casket, sales and storage. 
f.  Clinic, hospital. 
g.  Funeral parlor. 
h.  Gasoline or filling station. 
i.  Monuments, sales and display. 
j.  Motel. 
k.  Plumbing fixtures and supplies, sales, shops. 
l.  Roller skating rink. 
m.  Tire repairing, sales. 
n.  Mobile home court. 
o.  Other uses, which in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, are of the same general character as the uses enumerated. 
(g)  C-2A commercial. 
(1)  Purpose. Intended to establish suitable areas within the city for the location and/or expansion of businesses providing retail goods and services to the motoring public. Uses would be primarily highway oriented, or be clustered shopping areas, all with a means of safe ingress and egress to abutting highways. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  All C-1A and C-1B permitted uses. 
b.  Automobile and truck sales, parts, repairs. 
c.  Beverages, wholesale and storage. 
d.  Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair. 
e.  Coin machines, rental, service. 
f.  Florist, greenhouse, nursery. 
g.  Gasoline or filling station. 
h.  Marina, yacht club. 
i.  Motel. 
j.  Roadside stand, drive-in. 
k.  Taxidermist. 
l.  Tire repairing, sales and supplies. 
m.  Tourist court and home. 
n.  Trailers, repairing, sales. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  All C-1A and C-1B conditional uses. 
b.  Advertising, outdoor, manufacturing. 
c.  Amusement park, water park or recreation area. 
d.  Animal hospital, veterinarian. 
e.  Beverages, wholesale and storage. 
f.  Building materials, storage, sales. 
g.  Carpentry and cabinet shop. 
h.  Cold storage, locker plant. 
i.  Contractor, shops, offices, yards. 
j.  Dairy products, manufacturing, sales, distribution. 
k.  Drive-in theatre. 
l.  Driving range, miniature golf, go-carting. 
m.  Farm implement dealer, distribution, repair, sales. 
n.  Ice, manufacturing, sales, distribution. 
o.  Kennel. 
p.  Sporting goods, manufacturing. 
q.  Planned unit development. 
r.  Mobile home court. 
s.  Testing and/or research facility. 
t.  Other uses, which in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, are of the same general character as the uses enumerated. 
u.  Casino. 
v.  Convention center. 
(h)  C-2B commercial. 
(1)  Purpose. Intended to establish suitable areas within the city for the location and/or expansion of businesses providing retail goods and services to the motoring public. Uses would be primarily highway oriented, or be clustered shopping areas, all with a means of safe access and egress to abutting highways. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  All C-1A and C-1B permitted uses. 
b.  Automobile and truck sales, parts, repairs. 
c.  Beverages, wholesale and storage. 
d.  Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair. 
e.  Coin machines, rental, service. 
f.  Florist, greenhouse, nursery. 
g.  Gasoline or filling station. 
h.  Marina, yacht club. 
i.  Motel. 
j.  Roadside stand, drive-in. 
k.  Taxidermist. 
l.  Tire repairing, sales and supplies. 
m.  Tourist court and home. 
n.  Trailers, repairing, sales. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  Advertising, outdoor, manufacturing. 
b.  Amusement park, water park or recreation area. 
c.  Animal hospital, veterinarian. 
d.  Beverages, wholesale and storage. 
e.  Building materials, storage, sales. 
f.  Carpentry and cabinet shop. 
g.  Cold storage, locker plant. 
h.  Contractor, shops, offices, yards. 
i.  Dairy products, manufacturing sales, distribution. 
j.  Drive-in theatre. 
k.  Driving range, miniature golf, go-carting. 
l.  Farm implement dealer, distribution, repair, sales. 
m.  Ice, manufacturing, sales, distribution. 
n.  Kennel. 
o.  Sporting goods, manufacturing. 
p.  Planned unit development. 
q.  Mobile home court. 
r.  Other uses, which in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, are of the same general character as the uses enumerated. 
s.  Casino. 
t.  Convention center. 
(i)  C-3 commercial. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide commercial and multiple dwelling residence district suitable for the location of multiple dwelling structures as well as mobile home parks and single-family mobile homes located on private lots. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  All C-2B permitted uses. 
b.  Dwelling, mobile home. 
c.  Mobile home park. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  All C-2B conditional uses. 
(j)  M-1A manufacturing. 
(1)  Purpose. To create industrial areas that are acceptable to the city and not adversely affect adjacent business or residences. Uses will not create any offensive noise, dust, heat, smoke, odor, or other objectionable influences to adjacent property owners. In the interest of general health, residential uses are not permitted. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  Acoustical materials, manufacturing, storage. 
b.  Advertising, outdoor, manufacturing. 
c.  Agricultural use (except raising of livestock). 
d.  Air express service and warehouse. 
e.  Appliances, sales and repair. 
f.  Armory. 
g.  Automobile and truck sales, parts, repair. 
h.  Bake goods manufacturing. 
i.  Beverages, wholesale and storage. 
j.  Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair. 
k.  Boat manufacturing, storage. 
l.  Bottled gas storage and distribution. 
m.  Building materials storage and sales. 
n.  Carpentry and cabinet shop. 
o.  Cesspool, septic tank manufacture and sales. 
p.  Coin machines rental, service. 
q.  Cold storage locker plant. 
r.  Contractors, shops, offices, yards. 
s.  Dairy products, manufacturing, sales and distribution. 
t.  Dry cleaning, laundry and linen supply. 
u.  Electrical light and power company yards. 
v.  Farm implement, sales and repair. 
w.  Feed and fertilizer, sales and distribution. 
x.  Fire station. 
y.  Fish, meat, wholesaling, curing, storage, packing. 
z.  Freight depot, office wholesaling. 
aa.  Gasoline or filling station. 
bb.  Hardware sales. 
cc.  Ice manufacturing sales and distribution. 
dd.  Iron and wood working. 
ee.  Key and lock shop. 
ff.  Knit goods, manufacturing, sales. 
gg.  Laboratory, research, clinical. 
hh.  Machines shop. 
ii.  Metal fabrication, plating, assembly. 
jj.  Monument sales and display. 
kk.  Parking lot. 
ll.  Plumbing fixtures, supplies, sales. 
mm.  Poultry product processing. 
nn.  Printing, photo engraving, lithograph services. 
oo.  Public park. 
pp.  Public utility facilities. 
qq.  Radio and TV sales and repairs. 
rr.  Radio and TV transmitting station. 
ss.  Radio and TV broadcasting studio. 
tt.  Reservoir. 
uu.  Retail stores, general and specialty. 
vv.  Sporting goods, manufacturing. 
ww.  Storage house unclassified. 
xx.  Trailer sales and repair. 
yy.  Tire repairing, sales. 
zz.  Welding shop. 
aaa.  Testing and/or research facility. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  Animal hospital, veterinarian. 
b.  Asphalt products. 
c.  Concrete and cement products storage. 
d.  Sewage disposal plant. 
e.  Dog pound. 
f.  Fuel storage and distribution. 
g.  Storage yards, bulk materials. 
(k)  M-1B manufacturing. 
(1)  Purpose. To create industrial areas that are acceptable to the city and not adversely affect adjacent business or residences. Uses will not create any offensive noise, dust, heat, smoke, odor, or other objectionable influences to adjacent property owners. In the interest of general health, residential uses are not permitted. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Acoustical materials, manufacturing, storage. 
b.  Advertising, outdoor, manufacturing. 
c.  Agricultural use (except raising of livestock). 
d.  Air express service and warehouse. 
e.  Appliances, sales and repair. 
f.  Armory. 
g.  Automobile and truck sales, parts, repairs. 
h.  Bake goods manufacturing. 
i.  Beverages, wholesale and storage. 
j.  Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair. 
k.  Boat manufacturing, storage. 
l.  Bottled gas storage and distribution. 
m.  Building materials storage and sales. 
n.  Carpentry and cabinet shop. 
o.  Cesspool, septic tank manufacture and sales. 
p.  Coin machines rental, service. 
q.  Cold storage locker plant. 
r.  Contractors, shops, offices, yards. 
s.  Dairy products, manufacturing, sales and distribution. 
t.  Dry cleaning, laundry and linen supply. 
u.  Electrical light and power company yards. 
v.  Farm implement, sales and repair. 
w.  Feed and fertilizer, sales and distribution. 
x.  Fire station. 
y.  Fish, meat, wholesaling, curing, storage, packing. 
z.  Freight depot, office wholesaling. 
aa.  Gasoline or filling station. 
bb.  Hardware sales. 
cc.  Ice manufacturing sales and distribution. 
dd.  Iron or wood working. 
ee.  Key and lock shop. 
ff.  Knit goods, manufacturing, sales. 
gg.  Laboratory, research, clinical. 
hh.  Machines shop. 
ii.  Metal fabrication, plating, assembly. 
jj.  Monument sales and display. 
kk.  Parking lot. 
ll.  Plumbing fixtures, supplies, sales. 
mm.  Poultry product processing. 
nn.  Printing, photo engraving, lithograph services. 
oo.  Public park. 
pp.  Public utility facilities. 
qq.  Radio and TV sales and repairs. 
rr.  Radio and TV transmitting station. 
ss.  Radio and TV broadcasting studio. 
tt.  Reservoir. 
uu.  Retail stores, general and specialty. 
vv.  Sporting goods, manufacturing. 
ww.  Storage house unclassified. 
xx.  Trailer sales and repair. 
yy.  Tire repairing, sales. 
zz.  Welding shop. 
aaa.  Other uses, which in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, are of the same general character as the uses enumerated. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  Animal hospital, veterinarian. 
b.  Asphalt products. 
c.  Concrete and cement products storage. 
d.  Sewage disposal plant. 
e.  Dog pound. 
f.  Fuel storage and distribution. 
g.  Storage yards, bulk material. 
h.  Other uses, which in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, are of the same general character as the uses enumerated. 
(l)  M-2A manufacturing. 
(1)  Purpose. To create industrial areas to accommodate a wide variety of industry which may operate to their maximum advantage. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  M-1A and M-1B permitted uses. 
b.  Asphalt products. 
c.  Concrete and cement products manufacturing and storage. 
d.  Mining operation, gravel quarry and crushing. 
e.  Paper and wood products manufacturing. 
f.  Railroad service and repair. 
g.  Storage yards, bulk material. 
h.  Float plane port of entry and/or heliport. 
i.  Office, professional and business. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  M-1A and M-1B conditional uses. 
b.  Abattoir. 
c.  Automobile and truck salvage yard processing. 
d.  Dump, ash, garbage, offal, etc. 
e.  Explosive storage and distribution. 
f.  Junk or salvage yard. 
(m)  M-2B manufacturing. 
(1)  Purpose. To create industrial areas to accommodate a wide variety of industry which may operate to their maximum advantage. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  M-1A and M-1B permitted uses. 
b.  Asphalt products. 
c.  Concrete and cement products manufacturing and storage. 
d.  Mining operation, gravel quarry and crushing. 
e.  Paper and wood products manufacturing. 
f.  Railroad service and repair. 
g.  Storage yards, bulk material. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  M-1A and M-1B conditional uses. 
b.  Abattoir. 
c.  Automobile and truck salvage yard processing. 
d.  Dump, ash, garbage, offal, etc. 
e.  Explosives storage and distribution. 
f.  Junk or salvage yard. 
(n)  O - Open space. 
(1)  Purpose. To protect and enhance vital national resources, to maintain a buffer between incompatible land uses or to restrict development in areas not yet suitable or capable of sustaining development. Allowable uses would include those which are not detrimental to the land or to the overall development pattern of the city. 
(2)  Permitted uses: 
a.  Permanent open space including parks and forests. 
b.  Soil and water conservation projects. 
c.  Public noncommercial recreational uses. 
d.  Production and harvesting of forest crops including temporary forest processing activity such as sawmills, debarking, chipping and yarding areas. 
e.  Accessory uses clearly incidental to principal uses. 
f.  Signs on site subject to provisions of this chapter. 
g.  Borrow pits. 
(3)  Conditional uses: 
a.  Single-family dwelling. 
b.  Seasonal dwelling. 
c.  Home occupations. 
d.  Farming activities. 
e.  Utility corridors. 
f.  Facilities for the production of electric power. 
g.  Borrow pit crushing, screening and batching equipment of a portable and temporary nature. 
h.  Signs, off site. 
i.  Mineral exploration. 
(o)  P-1 public. 
(1)  Purpose. To provide land areas within the city for the establishment of public services, utilities, structures and other public buildings that are necessary for the health and welfare of the citizens. 
(2)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Private or public asylum. 
b.  Athletic field. 
c.  Auditorium. 
d.  Band shell. 
e.  Clinic hospital. 
f.  College. 
g.  Community center. 
h.  Country club, golf course. 
i.  Customs house. 
j.  Fire station. 
k.  Fish hatchery. 
l.  Jail. 
m.  Library. 
n.  Park, playground. 
o.  Parking lot. 
p.  Police station. 
q.  Post office. 
r.  Public or private school. 
s.  Public beach. 
t.  Public building. 
u.  Public park. 
v.  Reservoir. 
w.  Offices, professional and business. 
x.  Multi-family dwelling in buildings on the National Registry of Historic Places. 
y.  Float plane port of entry and/or heliport. 
(3)  Conditional uses. 
a.  Airport. 
b.  Cemetery. 
c.  Fairgrounds. 
d.  Marina or yacht club. 
e.  Public utility facility. 
f.  Sewage disposal plant. 
g.  Radio, TV, transmitting station. 
h.  YMCA, YWCA. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79; Ord. No. 10, 2nd series, eff. 12-4-80; Ord. No. 15, 2nd series; eff. 7-28-81; Ord. No. 56, 2nd series, eff. 10-26-88; Code of 1991; Ord. No. 14, 3rd series, eff. 7-8-96; Ord. No. 15, 3rd series, eff. 7-8-96; Ord. No. 16, 3rd series, 7-29-96; Ord. No. 26, 3rd series, § 1, eff. 5-8-00; Ord. No. 9, 4th series, eff. 4-11-03; Ord. No. 12, 4th series, eff. 3-1-04; Ord. No. 25, 4th series, eff. 9-21-06; Ord. No. 3, 5th series, §§ 3-5, eff. 3-14-18) 
Secs. 11-31-11-39. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-40. - Planned unit developments (PUD). 
(a)  Purpose. It is recognized that the zoning chapter is structured to regulate land use and development patterns of a conventional or traditional nature; however, there are situations where innovative proposals for use of land may be submitted which do not relate to ordinance controls and would have to be rejected even though feasible and beneficial to the community. It is to accommodate such innovative proposals, even those that exceed stipulated residential densities or depart from traditional lot sizes, that the planned development district is established. The technology of land development is constantly changing, and creative but practical approaches to the use of land should be encouraged. The provisions of this section are intended to do so, in a manner which is in the best interests of both the developer and the community. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  Ownership: The tract shall be a development of land under unified control at the time of application, planned and scheduled to be developed as a whole. However, no authorizations or permits shall be granted for such development unless the applicant has acquired actual ownership of, or executed a binding sales contract for all of the property comprising such tract. For purposes of this section, ownership shall include a lease of not less than 50 years duration. The term "single ownership" shall include ownership of portions of such development by two or more wholly owned subsidiaries of a single owner, or by such single owner and one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries. 
(2)  Minimum size: No planned development may include less than three acres of contiguous land and contain less than five housing units. 
(3)  Maximum development intensity: No more than 50 percent of the gross land area of the subject tract may be developed (covered) with principal and accessory uses. 
(4)  Comprehensive plan: The development should be planned so that it is consistent with the comprehensive plan for the community. 
(5)  Harmony: The planned unit development should be planned and developed to harmonize with any existing or imminent development in the area surrounding the project site. 
(6)  Financing: The financing for the project should be proven to be available to the applicant on conditions and in an amount which is sufficient to assure completion of the planned unit development. 
(7)  Permitted uses: 
a.  These may include and shall be limited to: 
1.  Residential: 
(i)  Dwelling units in detached, semidetached, groups of attached, clustered or multi-storied structures, or any combination thereof. 
(ii)  Any nonresidential use, to the extent such nonresidential use is designed and intended to serve the residents of the planned unit development, and such other uses as exist or may reasonably be expected to exist in the future. 
(iii)  Public and private education facilities. 
2.  Commercial-industrial: In a planned unit development designed primarily for other than uses permitted above, the uses shall be limited to those permitted in the Zoning district in which the use is located. 
(8)  Open space: A minimum of 20 percent for open air recreational uses and other usable and landscaped open spaces shall be made an integral part of the plan. Such space should be effectively separated from automobile traffic and parking and be readily accessible; the term "open space" shall not include space devoted to streets and parking. 
(9)  Density: For planned residential developments proposed in existing residential zones, a maximum increase of density of 100% may be allowed based on planning commission and staff evaluation of design, landscaping and distinctiveness in siting. In recognizing that the planned unit development process is designed to encourage flexibility and innovative planning and design exercises, it becomes a matter of benefit to both landowner and community to agree upon an appropriate density having economic, aesthetic and practical value. It is intended that the city be the arbiter in all cases where density increase is proposed. 
(10)  Dimensional and special requirements: 
a.  Building height shall be 40 feet for principal uses and accessory uses shall be a maximum of 18 feet. 
b.  Required lot area per dwelling unit shall be 6,000 square feet for the first unit; 3,000 square feet for the second unit; 2,000 square feet for each additional unit. This may be calculated for the entire development and each dwelling unit is not required to have lot lines. 
c.  Along the perimeter of the P.U.D., all required front, side, and rear yard setback requirements of the underlying Zoning district shall be maintained. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Preliminary development plan: Filing. 
a.  An applicant for a planned unit development shall submit a preliminary development plan to the planning commission, with a written statement and a fee, for cost incurred by the city in checking and processing such plans. Such application shall be signed by the owner(s) of every property within the boundaries of the proposed planned unit development. 
b.  Drawings which are part of the preliminary development plan may be in general, schematic form, and must contain the following information: 
1.  Location and size of the site and nature of the landowner's interest in the land to be developed. 
2.  The density of the land use to be allocated to the several parts of the site to be developed. 
3.  The location and size of any common open space and the form of organization proposed to own and maintain such space. 
4.  The use and approximate height, bulk and location of buildings and other structures. 
5.  Proposals for the distribution of sanitary wastes and storm sewers. 
6.  Provisions for parking of vehicles and location and width of proposed streets and public ways. 
7.  In case of plans which call for development over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which applications for final approval of all sections of the planned unit development are intended to be filed. 
8.  A topographic map of the subject property or properties, prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor, covering the entire tract proposed for development and indicating existing conditions and development for an additional area including at least 300 feet from tract boundaries. Such map shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet =1 inch, shall indicate topography a two foot contour intervals and show in accurate detail the topography, existing buildings, and existing land features and trees. 
c.  The written statement which is a part of such application shall include: 
1.  A description of the character of the planned unit development and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the planned unit development regulations. 
2.  A statement of proposed financing. 
3.  A statement of provisions for ultimate ownership and maintenance of all parts of the development, including streets, structures and open spaces. 
(2)  The preliminary development plan; approval. 
a.  Within 45 days after the receipt of the application by the planning commission, a public hearing upon said application shall be held by the planning commission. The commission may continue the hearing from time to time and refer the matter back to the planning staff of the city for a further report; provided, however, the public hearing or hearings shall be concluded within 45 days after the date of the first public hearing, unless the landowner shall consent in writing to an extension of the time within which the hearings shall be concluded. 
b.  Within 15 days after the conclusion of public hearings, the planning commission shall forward the plan to the council with a written staff report recommending that the plan be disapproved, approved, or approved with modifications, and giving the reasons for these recommendations. 
c.  In the event tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner shall, within 45 days after receiving a copy of the written resolution of the council, notify the council of the acceptance or refusal to accept all said conditions. Refusal of landowner shall constitute denial of the plans by the council. Failure of the landowner to notify the council of his acceptance or denial of the conditions to the plans constitutes acceptance of the conditions. 
d.  The granting or denial of tentative approval by written resolution shall be based on findings as set forth below and shall state in full in what respects the plan would or would not be in the public interest, including but not limited to the findings of facts and conclusions on the following: 
1.  The plan is consistent with the stated objectives of planned unit development. 
2.  The relationship beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned unit development to the area in which it is proposed to be developed. 
3.  That authorized distribution of buildings, streets, and open space will permit better site planning and thus benefit both the residents of the development and the community as a whole. 
4.  That such distribution or location will not unduly increase the bulk of buildings, density of population, or intensity of use to the detriment of areas outside the development by restricting access to light and air or by creating traffic congestion. 
(3)  Final development plan: approval. 
a.  Within six months following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall file with the planning commission a final development plan containing in its final form the information required in the preliminary plan. In its discretion, and for good cause, the planning commission may extend for six months the period for filing of the final development plan. A public hearing on an application for a final approval of the plan or part thereof, shall not be required, providing the plan, or part thereof submitted for final approval, is in substantial compliance with the plan given tentative approval. 
b.  In the event the plan as submitted for final approval is not in substantial compliance with the preliminary plan, the planning commission shall, within 45 days of the date the application for final approval is filed, so notify the landowner, setting forth the particular ways in which the plan is not in substantial compliance. The landowner may (a) treat such notification as denial of the final approval, (b) refile his plan so that it does substantially comply with the preliminary plan, (c) file a written request with the planning commission that it hold a public hearing on its application for final approval. Any such hearings shall be held within 30 days after request for such hearings is made. Within 45 days of either such hearing or refiling, the planning commission shall recommend and the council shall, by resolution, either grant final approval to the plan or deny final approval to the plan. 
c.  If the council fails to act, either by grant or denial of the final approval of the plan within the time prescribed, the landowner may, after 20 days written notice to the council, file a complaint in the Court, and upon showing the planning commission and/or council has failed to act either within the time prescribed, or subsequent to the receipt of the above written notice, the plan shall be deemed to have been finally approved and the Court can enter an order directing the County clerk to record the plan as submitted for final approval, without the approval of the council. 
d.  Zoning permits shall not be issued for any of the structures or land alterations shall not be made until the following conditions are met: 
1.  Public open space has been dedicated to the city and officially recorded; or 
2.  The design and construction specifications for all utilities, street improvements and mass grading have been approved by the city engineers. 
3.  The homeowner's association by-laws, covenants and deed restrictions have been approved by the city attorney. 
4.  The final plat (if necessary) has been approved by the city and recorded with appropriate governmental agencies as required by law. Such recorded plats shall contain a statement indicating that such plat is a planned unit development. 
5.  The detailed site development plans have been approved by all appropriate city staff members and the council and such signatures appear on the plans. 
(4)  Noncompliance; inspection. 
a.  In the event that a plan, or a section thereof, is given final approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon said plan or the section thereof that has been finally approved, the landowner shall so notify the council if writing; or, in the event the landowner shall fail to commence the planned development within 12 months after final approval has been granted, then and in that event such final approval shall terminate and be deemed null and void unless such time period is extended by the council upon written application of the landowner. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall review each planned development at least once each year until completed and shall make a report (through the planning commission) to the council on the status of the development in each PUD district. If development is not progressing reasonably well, according to schedule, the owner shall be required to submit a statement to the zoning administrator setting forth the reasons for the lack of progress. 
c.  Within 30 days of such notice, the council shall either revoke the conditional use permit, and the land shall thereafter be governed by the regulations applicable in the district in which it is located; or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel compliance with the plans as approved. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79) 
Secs. 11-41-11-49. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-50. - Shoreland management. 
(a)  Management standards. Shorelands management standards are adopted in accordance with the authority granted in M.S.A. 1973, Ch. 379, and in furtherance of the policies declared in M.S.A. 1974, Chapters 105, 115, 116, and 462. The public waters of the city are "limited" to the Rainy River, which is classified as "General Development" by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(1)  Lot size. Lots not served by a public sewer shall be at least 20,000 square feet (approximately one-half acre), in area and at least 100 feet in width at the building line and at the ordinary high water mark (for lots abutting a public water, shall be at least 15,000 square feet in area and at least 75 feet in width at the building line and at the ordinary high water mark. All other lots served by a public sewer shall be at least 10,000 square feet in area and at least 75 feet in width at the building line. 
(2)  Setbacks. 
a.  The minimum setbacks from public waters shall apply to all structures at least 75 feet from the ordinary high water mark for lots not served by public sewer and at least 50 feet from the ordinary high water mark for lots served by public water. 
b.  No structure shall be erected in the floodway of a river or stream as defined in M.S.A. 1974, § 104.02 and every structure shall be located at least three feet from the right-of-way line of any town road, public street, or others not classified. 
c.  Proximity to roads and highways-no structure shall be placed nearer than 50 feet from the right-of-way line of any Federal, State or County trunk highway; or 20 feet from the right-of-way line of any town road, public street, or others not classified. 
d.  Septic tank and soil absorption systems shall be set back from the ordinary high water mark at least 50 feet and be located at least three feet above the highest known ground water level or bedrock in accordance with WPC 40. 
e.  The total area of all impervious surfaces on a lot shall not exceed 30 percent of the total lot area. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  Boathouses may be located landward of the ordinary high water mark as a conditional use provided they are not used for habitation and they do not contain sanitary facilities. 
2.  Location of piers and docks shall be controlled by applicable State and local regulations. 
3.  Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site, structural setbacks may be altered to take setbacks of existing structures into account. 
4.  Commercial, industrial, or permitted open space uses requiring location adjoining public waters may be allowed as conditional uses closer to such waters than the setbacks specified in NR 83(c) (2). 
f.  Public sewage disposal and commercial, agricultural, solid waste and industrial waste disposal shall be subject to the standards, criteria, rules and regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
(b)  Land use zoning district designation. 
(1)  The land use zoning districts established shall be based on considerations of: Preservation of natural areas; present ownership and development of shoreland areas; shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities; topographic characteristics; vegetative cover; municipal socio-economic development needs, and plans as they involve water and related land resources; the land requirements of industry which, by its nature, requires location in shoreland areas; and the necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant historical or ecological value. 
(2)  Development of shorelands shall be controlled by means of zoning district requirements. Zoning chapter regulations shall remain in effect for the control of land use management, except that shorelands management standards shall control all development within 300 feet of the normal high water mark of all rivers and streams. Shorelands of the city are hereby designated as a shoreland overlay district. 
(c)  Shoreland alterations. 
(1)  The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent erosion into public waters, to consume nutrients in the soil and to preserve shoreland aesthetics. Removal of natural vegetation in the shoreland overlay district shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be allowed, provided that sufficient vegetative cover remains to screen cars, dwellings, and other structures when viewed from the water. 
b.  Clear cutting of natural vegetation shall be prohibited. 
c.  Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after any construction project is completed in order to retard surface runoff and soil erosion. 
d.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to permitted uses which normally require the removal of natural vegetation. 
(2)  Grading and filling in shoreland areas or any alterations of the natural topography where the slope of the land is toward a public water or a watercourse leading to a public water must be authorized by a conditional use permit. The permit may be granted subject to the conditions that: 
a.  The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible. 
b.  Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted. 
c.  Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed; and 
d.  Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards. 
(3)  Excavations on shorelands where the intended purpose is connection to a public water shall require a permit from the zoning administrator before construction is begun. Such permit may be obtained only after the commissioner of natural resources has issued a permit for work in the beds of public waters. 
(d)  Shorelands management administration. 
(1)  The city shall provide for the administration and enforcement of the Shorelands Management Standards pursuant to M.S.A. 1974, § 462.362. Preparation of this section has been aided by Minnesota Reg. No. 82, 1976, Department of Natural Resources. All buildings, variances and appeals, conditional use permits and amendments shall following the regulations set forth in the zoning chapter. 
(2)  Shoreland management areas are identified on the International Falls Zoning Map, which is a part of this chapter. 
(3)  Subdivision regulations shall also be in effect for all shoreland management areas. 
(4)  Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under this section shall be received by the commissioner of natural resources at least ten days prior to such hearings. 
(5)  A copy of amendments and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under this section shall be received by the commissioner of natural resources within ten days of final action or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79) 
Secs. 11-51-11-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-60. - Administration. 
(a)  Zoning administrator. An administrative staff member designated by the city shall be the enforcement officer and shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. The duties of the zoning administrator shall be as follows: 
(1)  Examine all applications pertaining to the use of land, buildings, or structures; and grant approval of, and issue permits or take other appropriate action on, such applications when in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Keep a record of all nonconforming uses within the several zoning districts of the city. 
(3)  Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(5)  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including all maps, amendments, conditional uses, community unit plans and variances. 
(6)  Attend all scheduled planning commission and board of appeals and adjustment meetings and hearings in an ex-officio capacity. The responsibility for drafting recommendations, resolutions and decisions for the public record may be assigned to the zoning administrator at the option of the chairperson of the commission or board. 
(b)  Variance procedures. The zoning board of appeals shall have the following jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from, and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of this chapter where it is alleged that there is an error. 
(2)  To hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of the Zoning Chapter in instances where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or for a need to exceed height restrictions as provided herein when the issue of safety has been sufficiently addressed or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or conditions of such piece of property, the strict application of the terms of the chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional or undue hardship upon the owner of such property to authorize, upon an appeal relating to such property a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; provided, that such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent of the zoning plan and the City Code; provided, that no variance shall be granted unless the board finds that all the following conditions exist: 
a.  The special circumstances or conditions applying to the buildings or land in question are peculiar to such property or immediately adjoining property, and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity. 
b.  The granting of the applications is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant. 
c.  The authorizing of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property to unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets or increase the danger of fire or impair the public safety or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding areas or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(3)  The zoning board of appeals and adjustment may not permit, as a variance, any use that is not permitted under the Zoning Chapter in the zone in which the subject property is located. The board may impose conditions in the granting of variances to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties. 
(4)  To allow parking spaces as required in sec. 11-6 of this chapter to be located off street on another property provided such space is within 500 feet measured along line of public access of the use in question, and under such conditions that will protect the character of surrounding property. 
(5)  To interpret the appropriate zoning district for any uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses. 
(6)  Specific conditions and safeguards may be imposed upon the premises benefited by a variance as considered necessary to prevent injurious effects upon other property in the neighborhood or upon public facilities and services. Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(7)  No variance permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79) 
Secs. 11-61-11-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-70. - Amendments. 
    Whenever justified or required by the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice and after public hearing, report and recommendations of the planning commission thereon, the council may, by ordinance, amend the regulations set forth in this chapter for the districts established on the zoning district map in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An amendment may be initiated by the council or the planning commission, or by the verified petition of not less than 50 percent of those property owners within 350 feet of the proposed change. 
(2)  Before any amendment is adopted, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon after a notice of the hearing has been published in the official newspaper at least ten days before the hearing. 
(3)  When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of five acres or less, a notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to each owner of property within the area of the proposed change, and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the person responsible for mailing the notice may use any appropriate records to determine the names and addresses of owners. A copy of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the responsible person and shall be made a part of the records of the proceeding. 
(4)  Following the hearing, the planning commission shall make a report of it's findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment and shall file a copy with the city administrator within 60 days of the date that the proposed amendment was referred to the planning commission. 
(5)  Upon the filing of such report, the council shall hold such public hearings upon the amendment as it deems advisable. After the conclusion of the hearings, if any, the council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in such form as it deems advisable. The amendment shall be effective only if two-thirds of all the members of the council concur in its passage. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79; Code of 1991) 
Secs. 11-71-11-79. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-80. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Accessory use or structure: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use of structure. 
    Boathouse: A structure used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment. 
    Conditional use: A land use or development which would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zone district but which, if controlled as to number, area, size, location, or relation to neighborhood, and as to compatibility with official town plans, would not be injurious to the public health, safety, convenience, morals, order, comfort, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. 
    Crowding potential: The ratio of total acreage of a water body to shore miles. 
    Dwelling, mobile home: Manufactured transportable housing designed with undercarriage wheels and towing device, and intended for occupancy as a complete year-round, single-family dwelling unit upon arrival and placement on a site, with or without a permanent foundation designed to support such transportable unit. For purposes of this chapter, the term shall include all such transportable housing 29 feet or more in length, 16 feet or less in width, and 5,000 pounds or more in weight, containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical convenience as immobile housing. The term shall include transportable housing subject to tax or registration as required under the provisions of M.S.A. Ch. 168 or Ch. 273. 
    Dwelling, modular home: A single-family dwelling suitable for year-round occupancy, which consists of more than one module either partially or wholly factory-fabricated and containing a framework which does not contain wheels or towing tongue. When transported to a building site, it will be placed on a permanent foundation so as to be substantially affixed to the site and connected to a water supply, waste disposal system and electrical supply, thereby making it immobile housing. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family: A residence designed for or occupied by three or more families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities, for each. 
    Dwelling, single-family: A detached residence designed for or occupied by one family only. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A residence designed for or occupied by two families only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. 
    Family: One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain over five members. Domestic servants shall be exempt from this limitation. 
    Height, building: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Home occupation: A use of nonresidential nature conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory buildings and carried on only by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. No article may be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediate family residing therein. Home occupations shall be limited to catering service, dressmaking, carpenter and cabinet making shop, home bakery, furniture repairing, upholstery shop, real estate office, individual doctor's consultation office and other restricted business, service or profession which, in the opinion of the planning commission, is of the same general character as the uses enumerated and designed so as not to change the character of the immediate neighborhood. 
    Lot: Includes the words "plot" or "parcel". 
    Lot: For zoning purposes, as covered by this chapter, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards, and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, and provides that in no case of division or continuation shall any residential lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
    Lot frontage: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the edge nearest to the street. In the case of a corner lot, the front of the lot shall be considered to be that edge of the least dimension that abuts a street. On a lot abutting two streets at opposite ends of the lot, both edges shall be considered front yards for the purposes of minimum requirements of yards in section 11-5. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Mobile home park: A plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
    Ordinary high water mark: A mark delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary high water mark is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. 
    Parking space, off-street: An off-street parking space shall comprise not less than 180 square feet of parking stall plus necessary maneuvering space. Space for maneuvering incidental to parking or unparking shall not encroach upon any public way. Every off-street parking space shall be accessible from a public way. Maneuvering shall not be required for one- and two-family dwellings. 
    Planned unit development: A housing development of five or more units on a least three contiguous acres of land where in the dimensional requirements for the placement of the units on individual lots are relaxed for the grouping or clustering of the dwelling units. 
    Public waters: Any waters of the State which serve a beneficial public purpose, as defined in M.S.A. 1976, § 105.37, Subd. 6. However, no lake, pond or flowage of less than ten acres in size and no river or stream having a total drainage area less than two square miles shall be regulated for the purposes of these regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland, as defined herein, for a designated private use authorized by the commissioner of natural resources, shall be exempt from the provisions of these regulations. The official determination of the size and physical limits of drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be made by the commissioner of natural resources. The official size of lakes, ponds or flowages shall be the areas listed in the Division of Waters' Bulletin 25. An Inventory of Minnesota Lakes, or in the event that lakes, ponds or flowages are not listed therein, official determination of size and physical limits shall be made by the commissioner of natural resources in cooperation with the city. 
    Shoreland: Land located within the following distances from public waters: 300 feet from the ordinary high water mark of a river or stream or the landward extent of a flood plain designated by ordinance on such a river or stream, whichever is greater. The practical limits of shorelands may be less than the statutory limits where such limits are designated by natural drainage divides at lesser distances, as shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
    Shorelands setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure or sanitary facility and the ordinary high water mark or between a structure or sanitary facility and a road, highway, or property line. 
    Sign: Any device designed to inform, or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located, provided, however, that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein: 
(1)  Flags and insignias of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion; 
(2)  Legal notices; identification, information, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies; 
(3)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights; 
(4)  Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but hearing no advertising matter. 
    Sign, off-site: A sign other than an on-site sign. 
    Sign, on-site: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. 
    Signs, number and surface area: For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
    Storage yard, junk or salvage yard: Any land or buildings where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap metal, rags, paper, rubber products, glass products, plastic products, lumber products, and products resulting from the wrecking of automobiles of other machinery. For the purposes of this ordinance, any storage of two or more motor vehicles not carrying current license plates shall also be considered a storage yard. All such uses enumerated above and any others which are objectionable to adjacent property owners because of unsanitary conditions, odor, breeding of flies or vermin, or general nuisance or are otherwise considered, not in the interest of general health, welfare and safety, shall be considered storage, junk, or salvage yards. 
    Structure: Anything more than 30 inches high placed, constructed, or erected with a fixed location on the ground, including portable buildings, mobile homes, signs, tennis courts, swimming pools, etc., except that fences, utility poles, lawn lights, antennae and related minor equipment shall not be considered structures. 
    Twin homes: Two-family dwelling with a zero lot line on one side which shares a party wall governed by a party wall agreement in with each dwelling having a separate water service and each dwelling meets all other minimum requirements for a single-family dwelling except for the interior side yard requirement. 
    Used or occupied: Include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged to be used or occupied". 
    Yard: An open space between a building and any lot line unobstructed by any structure. 
    Yard, front: A yard extending across the entire front of the lot and measured between the front line of the lot and front line of the building, or any projection thereof other than steps, balconies, paved terraces, porches or bay windows. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending across the entire rear of a lot and measured between the rear lot line and the rear of the building or any projection thereof other than steps, balconies, paved terraces, porches, or bay windows. 
    Yard, side: A yard between the building on the side line of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the sideline of the lot and the side of the building, or any projections thereof other than steps, balconies, paved terraces, porches or bay windows. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79; Ord. No. 15, 2nd series; eff. 7-28-81) 
Secs. 11-81-11-84. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 23, 5th series, adopted January 16, 2018, repealed § 11-85, which pertained to schedule of fees, charges and expenses. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Secs. 11-86-11-89. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-90. - Fences. 
(a)  Fences, walls in front yards in residential zones. In an R-1A, R-1B, R-2A or R-2B zone, fences, walls, plantings or shrub plantings shall be regulated as set forth herein. On any corner lot, no fence or accessory structure or planting shall rise over two and one-half feet in height above the level of the public sidewalk within twenty feet of any corner, so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the right of the way corner. Where no sidewalk has been constructed, the two and one-half feet shall be measured from the grade at the front of the property line as established by the city engineer. No fence or wall or shrub planting of more than two and one-half feet in height above the ground shall be erected within the front set back of the particular zone of the particular property. 
(b)  Fences, walls, plantings other than in front yards in residential zones. In any R-1A, R-1B, R-2A or R-2B zone, fences not regulated in subsection (a) of this section shall not be built higher than six feet above the ground. 
(c)  No fence two and one-half feet high can be built with barbed wire or without a salvage finish on the top and the bottom. 
(d)  Fences, screens, walls, shrubs in a commercial or industrial zone may be built to a height of eight feet above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 13, 2nd series, eff. 5-2-81) 
Secs. 11-91-11-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(1)  Separability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 9.26, eff. 12-15-79) 
Chapter 12 - SUBDIVISION REGULATION (PLATTING) 

Sec. 12-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. Each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in basic physical structure of the city, a unit to which in the future communities will of necessity be forced to adhere. In order that new subdivisions will contribute toward an attractive, orderly, stable and wholesome community environment, adequate public services, and safe streets, all subdivisions hereafter platted within the city shall fully comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application the provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Scope. This chapter shall apply and be binding upon all of the area within the corporate limits of the city. Except in the case of resubdivision, this chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, annual or in any way impair or interfere with provisions of the City Code or other laws except those specifically repealed by or in conflict with, this chapter, or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the land than is imposed or required by such provisions of the City Code, contract for deed, or other law, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
    Alleys: A public way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side of a property which abuts on a street. 
    Block: The distance as measured along a street between intersecting streets from center line to center line; and where the context requires it also means the enclosed area within a perimeter of the streets or property lines enclosing it. 
    Cluster development: A subdivision development planned and constructed so as to group housing units into relatively tight patterns while providing a unified network of open space and wooded areas. 
    Collector street: A street of relatively short length that serves as a connection between a thoroughfare and several minor streets. The term includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for major circulation within such a development. 
    Cul-de-sac: A permanent street terminating at one end without connecting with another street and designed so that it cannot be further extended without condemnation or taking property not dedicated as a street. 
    Drainage course: A water course or indenture for the drainage of surface waters. 
    Final plat: The drawing of a subdivision prepared in the manner and containing the data, documents and information required by section 12-4. 
    Group housing: A housing project consisting of a group of five or more buildings constructed on a plot of ground three acres or more in size. 
    Lot: Any tract, including outlots, within a subdivision marked by the subdivider as a numbered tract to be offered as a unit of land for sale. 
    Lot width: The dimension of a lot measured on the building setback line. 
    Marginal access street: A street or service road parallel to and adjacent to a thoroughfare which provides access from the thoroughfare to abutting properties. 
    Minor street: A street of relatively short length that provides direct access to a limited number of abutting properties. 
    Official plan or city plan: The plan or plans for the orderly growth of the city as adopted and amended from time to time by the planning commission and the council. 
    Preliminary plan: A drawing of a proposed subdivision or greater area prepared in the manner and containing the data, documents and information required by section 12-3. 
    Private street or reserve strip: A purported street, way or strip of land reserved for the use of a limited number of persons or purposes as distinguished from a publicly dedicated street. 
    Public walkway: A public way designed for the use of pedestrian traffic. 
    Sanitary sewer: A constructed conduit connected with a sewer system for the carrying of liquids and solids other than storm waters to a sanitary treatment plant. 
    Setback: The building setback line or distance as measured from the nearest street, road or water shoreline. 
    Storm sewer: A constructed conduit for carrying surface or ground waters to a drainage course. 
    Street: A public way which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, or however otherwise designated. 
    Subdivider: The owner, agent or person having control of such land as the term is used in this chapter. 
    Subdivision of land and subdivide: The division of a tract of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; provided that the following shall not be deemed a subdivision: 
(1)  The division of a tract of land into lots or parcels of five acres or more with a minimum width of 165 feet and not involving a new street. 
(2)  One division of a tract of land into two lots or parcels in any 12-month period of time provided that the resulting descriptions are approved by the county auditor. 
(3)  Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order. 
    Thoroughfare: A street of considerable length that carries, or that planning evidence indicates will carry, a large volume of traffic. 
Sec. 12-3. - Preliminary plan. 
(a)  Procedure for preliminary plan. 
(1)  In order to familiarize himself with this chapter and related laws and to avoid costly revisions of plans and plats, the subdivider may have a preliminary discussion with the city engineer. 
(2)  The subdivider shall submit to the city administrator: 
a.  Three copies of the preliminary plan. 
b.  A fee of $10.00 payable to the city shall accompany the plan to help defray the expenses of the city in connection with the review of said preliminary plan. 
c.  Application for approval of a plat, made in writing by the owner or his authorized agent. The application shall specify the location and size of the tract to be platted, the intent as to character, type and use of the subdivided property and structures to be developed, the deed restrictions proposed, and the extent and character of improvements to be made by the subdivider. 
(3)  The city administrator shall upon receipt of preliminary plan, refer two copies to the planning commission and one to the city engineer. 
(4)  The city engineer shall within 30 days submit a report to the planning commission. 
(5)  At the first regular meeting following receipt of the above reports and letter, the planning commission shall determine whether such plan conforms to design standards set forth in this chapter and conforms to adopted city plans. The planning commission may approve a preliminary plan subject to certain revisions. 
(6)  Approval of a preliminary plan by the planning commission is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals outlined in section 12-4. 
(7)  The action taken by the planning commission shall be recorded in the proceedings of the commission and transmitted to the applicant. 
(b)  Data required for preliminary plan. 
(1)  The following data shall be provided: 
a.  Scale: 1 inch equals 100 feet. 
b.  Identification and description: Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be alike in pronounciation of the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the city. Short names are preferable. 
c.  Location by section, town, range or by other legal description together with small-scale sketch showing location within the section. 
d.  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor and designer of the plan. 
e.  Graphic scale. 
f.  North-point. 
g.  Date of preparation. 
h.  Existing conditions in the tract and in a reasonable area surrounding the tract. 
i.  Property lines. 
j.  Districts proposed for nonresidential use. 
k.  Total acreage of proposed plat. 
l.  Platted streets, railroad right-of-way and utility easements. 
m.  Permanent buildings or other structures. 
n.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities. 
o.  Topography of platted area, showing lakes, water courses, swamp areas, and contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet unless steep terrain enables five foot contours to adequately portray the land form conditions. Contour lines shall be shown by means of dashed lines on the preliminary plan and where practical shall be numbered to acceptable Federal government datum. 
p.  Wooded areas in outline only. 
q.  Other reasonable information, such as soil tests, if requested by the city engineer in order to make a proper review of the site. 
(2)  Subdivision design features. 
a.  Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths and names of streets. 
b.  Location and widths of proposed pedestrian ways and utility easements. 
c.  Layouts, numbers and minimum dimensions of lots. 
d.  Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres. 
e.  Minimum front and side street building setback lines indicating dimensions. 
f.  Stage development: Whenever a portion of a tract is proposed for platting and it is intended or of a size for future enlargements of such platted portion from time to time, a tentative plan for the future subdivision of the entire tract shall be submitted. 
Sec. 12-4. - Final plat. 
(a)  Procedure for final plat. After the approval and endorsement of a preliminary plan, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Unless an extension of time is requested by the subdivider and granted by the planning commission, the subdivider shall within one year following approval of the preliminary plan, submit to the city administrator: 
a.  Two cloth-on-cloth prints and two paper prints of the final plat, together with an up-to-date abstract of title or a certificate of title together with a registered property certificate. The final plat shall be of uniform size 20 inches in width and 30 inch in length and shall conform to Minnesota Platting Regulations, Chapter 505, Section 505.08. This final plat shall incorporate all changes required by the planning commission. Otherwise, it shall conform to the preliminary plan. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plan which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. The boundary of the land so platted shall be indicated by a dotted red line. If the final plat is not submitted within one year, the approval of the preliminary plan shall be considered void. 
b.  An inspection fee of $25.00 plus $5.00 per lot up to a maximum total of $100.00. This fee will be used to help defray the expenses of the city in connection with the review of the final plat and the inspection of improvements. 
(2)  The city administrator shall refer one print of the final plat to the city engineer and one to the city attorney, together with an up-to-date abstract of title or a certificate of title together with a registered property certificate. 
(3)  A report of the city engineer and the city attorney shall be submitted to the council within 30 days after the submission of the final plat. The city engineer shall state whether the final plat and the proposed improvements conform to the engineering standards and specifications established by state law and this chapter and to the preliminary plan approved by the planning commission. The city attorney shall state whether fee simple title to the platted property is in the names of the plattors. 
(4)  The council shall act on the final plat within 60 days of the date on which it was submitted to the city administrator. It shall not approve a final plat unless it: 
a.  Conforms to a preliminary plan approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Meets the design standards and engineering specifications set forth in this chapter. 
c.  Conforms to all plans as adopted by the commission and the council. 
d.  Meets all requirements and laws of the State of Minnesota. 
(5)  When the final plat is approved by the council and certified by the city administrator, the subdivider shall record it with the county recorder on the date of its approval. Otherwise the approval shall be considered void. 
(b)  Data required for final plat. If applicable, supplementary engineering data may be required on the following: 
(1)  Water supply. 
(2)  Sewage disposal. 
(3)  Drainage. 
(4)  Flood control. 
(5)  Soil and percolation tests. 
(6)  Data required under regulation of state laws including accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, easements, areas to be reserved for public use, and other legal requirements. 
(7)  An identification system for all lots and blocks. 
(8)  The dimensions of all lot and building setback lines. 
(9)  A diagram drawn to suitable scale, showing that part of the section subdivision necessary to properly determine the boundaries of the platted area. The diagram shall show all survey corners found or restored and used in making said subdivision. All U.S. Government survey corners, shown on the final plat shall be recorded in the office of the city engineer. 
(10)  Complete curve data including radii, internal angles, tangent bearings, and lengths of all arcs. 
(11)  Accurate location of all monuments. 
(12)  Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct. 
(13)  Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder of record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas in the form approved by the city attorney. 
(14)  Form for endorsement: 
    Approved by the City Council of International Falls, Minnesota at their regular meeting held this _______ day of _______, 19___. 
_____
President of the council 
Attest: 
_____
City Administrator 
Sec. 12-5. - Minimum design standards. 
(a)  Application. The following land subdivision principles, standards and requirements will be applied by the planning commission in evaluating plans for proposed subdivisions: 
(1)  The provisions outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(2)  Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical, the council may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of these regulations. 
(b)  Land requirements. 
(1)  Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No preliminary plan shall be approved if, considering the best interests of the public, the site is not suitable for plat and development purposes of the kind proposed by reason of potential flooding, swamp conditions, or adverse earth or rock formation. Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed uninhabitable because of adverse earth or rock formation shall not be approved by the planning commission for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the hazard, but such land within a plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(2)  Land subject to hazards to life, health or property shall not be subdivided for residential purposes until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan. 
(3)  Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously. 
(4)  Proposed land uses shall conform to the zoning chapter of the City Code. 
(c)  Street system. 
(1)  Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts thereof as have been officially prepared and adopted by the city. 
(2)  Proposed streets shall further conform to such city and state road and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law. 
(3)  Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce usable lots and reasonable grades. 
(4)  Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided territory unless the topography clearly indicates that such connection is not feasible. Streets giving such access shall be improved to the limits of the subdivision. Reserved strips and landlocked areas shall not be created. 
(5)  Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic and where possible, thoroughfares shall be protected for use by through traffic by marginal access streets, through lots or other means. 
(6)  Half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured. 
(7)  Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract. 
(8)  Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designed as cul-de-sac streets. 
(9)  Private streets and reserve strips shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Cul-de-sac streets. 
(1)  Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 500 feet in length, except as variances are permitted by the planning commission, upon petition presented by the subdivider, which petition may be granted if it can be clearly shown that by reason of unfavorable contours of the irregular shape of the plat from which the subdivision is being made, that a normal street pattern cannot be established, or that land would be wasted by not granting such a variance. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a minimum radius to the outside edge of the finished street or curb line of not less than 50 feet. 
(3)  Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turn-around right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is extended, the overage created by the turn-around outside the boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the temporary cul-de-sac turn-around. 
(e)  Street design widths. 
(1)  Minimum widths for each type of public street or road shall be as follows: 
Type of Street Right-of-Way Width Thoroughfare 100 feet Collector street or road 75 feet Minor street 66 feet Marginal access street and cul-de-sac 50 feet Alley 20 feet  
(2)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street or road of inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be required to meet the above standards. 
(3)  Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it or to provide parking space in areas of intensive use. 
(4)  Short extension of existing streets with lesser right-of-way and/or roadway widths than prescribed above may be permitted in special cases; provided, however, that no section of new right-of-way less than 50 feet in width shall be permitted or in the case of a marginal access street, not less than 30 feet in width. 
(f)  Street grades. Street grades shall not exceed six percent on thoroughfares, eight percent on collector streets or ten percent on other streets. Street profiles shall be required if grades exceed eight percent. 
(g)  Restriction of access. When a subdivision or portion thereof, adjoins a thoroughfare, no lot shall have direct access thereto. Said lots shall be provided with frontage on a marginal access street or street other than a thoroughfare with adequate depth for screen planting of the portion of any such lot contiguous with said major thoroughfare. 
(h)  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than five degrees in the alignment of a street occurs a curve of reasonable long radius shall be introduced, to-wit: on streets 66 feet or more in width, the center line radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet. 
(i)  Vertical curves. All changes in grades shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 26 times the algebraic difference in rates of grade for thoroughfares and one-half this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal, and one inch equals 20 feet vertical, may be required by the city engineer if topographic conditions warrant. A 300-foot minimum sight distance shall be provided. 
(j)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 70 degrees. 
(k)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be allowed. 
(l)  Street names. A proposed street which is in alignment with and joins an existing and named street shall bear the name of the existing street. 
(m)  Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear or side of all lots to be used for commercial or industrial use. 
(n)  Blocks. Blocks shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  In residential areas, blocks shall not be less than 600 nor more than 1,320 feet in length measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed block area unless minor variations are necessitated by topography or conformance with adjoining plats. 
(2)  Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design contained in this dubdivision if the nature of the use requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also be provided with similar access. Extension of streets, railroad access right-of-way, and utilities shall be provided as necessary. 
(3)  In blocks over 800 feet in length, the planning commission may require one or more public walkways within an easement not less than ten feet in width to extend entirely across the block and at locations deemed necessary at intervals not closer than 400 feet. 
(4)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots with a minimum depth of 100 feet except adjoining a lake, stream, railroad or thoroughfare or where one tier of lots is necessary because of topographic conditions. 
(o)  Arrangement of lots. 
(1)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic conditions necessitate a variation. 
(2)  Each lot must front upon a public street and said public street shall not be less than 50 feet in width. 
(3)  Through lots or double-frontage lots shall be avoided when possible. Residential lots shall be separated from thoroughfares and railroad rights-of-way by landscape buffer strip not less than 25 feet in width. 
(p)  Size of lots. 
(1)  No lot shall have less area or width than is required by the zoning chapter regulations applying to the area in which it is located. 
(2)  To minimize the danger of the building site being flooded, the city engineer may require that lots abutting a drainage course, channel, stream or lake have additional depth or width. 
(3)  Lots designed for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate for off-the-street service, loading and parking facilities. 
(q)  Public use and service areas. Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or neighborhood use as well as public service areas. 
(r)  Public open spaces. Where a proposed highway, school, park, recreation area or public access to water frontage shown on an official city plan is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the council shall require as a condition of final approval that such space within the subdivision be dedicated or reserved. Such land shall not be developed for a period of one year from the date of such final approval so that within said period the appropriate public agency may acquire said land in the manner provided by law and before it is developed for some purpose not conforming to the official plan. If it is not so acquired and no legal action is filed by such public agency within such period, said reservation shall be of no further effect and such lands then may be used for other purposes. 
(s)  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are provided for the purpose, utility easements not less than 20 feet in width across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for use in erecting, constructing and maintaining poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, surface drainage, water mains, electrical lines and other public utilities required. Such easements shall be placed along rear lot lines wherever possible. 
(t)  Drainage courses. Where storm water from adjacent areas naturally passes through a subdivision, adequate provision shall be included in the subdivision for facilities to route the storm water through the subdivision to its natural outlet to maintain or replace the natural water course. 
Sec. 12-6. - Improvements. 
    Before the council shall approve a final plat of a subdivision, the subdivider shall provide at his own expense or shall give bond in an amount equal to the city engineer's estimate, or make other financial arrangements acceptable to the council, to cover the cost of the following public improvements: 
(1)  Survey monuments. All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, street intersection corners and points of tangency and curvature shall be marked with survey monuments consisting of galvanized pipes set flush with the ground level with a minimum one inch diameter (five-eighths inch solid steel rod) and 48 inch length except that block corners shall be marked with monuments with a minimum one and one-half inch diameter. All U.S., state, county and other official bench marks, monuments or triangular stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position. 
(2)  Grading. All street grading between the property lines shall be completed to the lines and grades as shown on the grading plans, but in no case less than 40 feet in width. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage and to prevent the collection of storm water in pools. The city engineer may require the redistribution of top soil and the stabilization of the same by seeding or planting wherever this shall be necessary as an element of drainage control. 
(3)  Surface water drainage. Surface water drainage shall be provided by storm sewers or drainage course adequate to drain surface water from the subdivision and protect roadway pavements. 
(4)  Minimum pavement width and roadway surfacing. A minimum street driving surface of 26 feet and street pavement shall meet the standards of the city and shall be approved after inspection by the city engineer. 
(5)  Sanitation. 
a.  Sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system when located within the service area of a public sanitary sewerage system. 
b.  Storm water drainage shall not be permitted to combine with sanitary sewers nor shall sanitary sewerage be permitted in storm water sewers. 
c.  Where lots cannot be connected with a public sewerage system, provisions must be made for sanitary sewerage facilities consisting of a central treatment plant or individual disposal devices for each lot. This does not mean that the subdivider must provide such devices. 
d.  Any subdivision or lot not provided with off-site water and off-site sewer facilities shall be subject to soil and percolation tests being made to determine whether or not the lot size proposed will meet minimum standards of health and sanitation. Such tests shall be made at the expense of the subdivider. 
e.  All proposed sewage disposal systems shall comply with the regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health. 
(6)  Water supply. 
a.  Water supply for all areas shall be designed to meet the regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health. 
b.  Water mains not less than six inches in diameter shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots and tracts with connection to such public system together with shut-off valves and fire hydrants when the subdivision is located within the service area of a public water system. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire system at intervals of not less than 600 feet if within the service area of a public water system. 
(Code of ????; Ord. No. 6.45, eff. 4-9-66) 
Sec. 12-7. - Variations from requirements. 
    The planning commission may recommend a variation to the council from the requirements of subdivision planning procedure or public improvements in specific cases when the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size, shape or character or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict compliance with the requirements of this section would result in substantial hardship or injustice or when a group housing or cluster development is proposed. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the council in the case of plans which in the judgment of the planning commission, achieve substantially the objectives of this chapter and which are further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(1)  Policy. In recommending any variation, the planning commission shall take into account the following: 
a.  The location of the proposed subdivision, proposed land use, and existing use of land in the vicinity. 
b.  The number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
c.  Those variations that will allow the subdivider to develop his property in a reasonable manner and at the same time preserve the general intent and spirit of this chapter and protect the public welfare and interests of the city. 
d.  In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(2)  Procedure for variation. Application for any variation shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed and shall state fully the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The planning commission shall consider such application at the meeting on the preliminary plan and give its written recommendations thereon, with the reasons therefor, at the time of its approval or disapproval of said plan. If the planning commission refuses to recommend a variation, the subdivider may at once, without preparing a final plat, petition the council for a review of the decision of application for variation. 
Sec. 12-8. - Amendments. 
    Amendments may be made to this chapter by the council after recommendations of the planning commission following the holding of a public hearing with notice given in the official newspaper of the County at least ten days in advance of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 6.45, eff. 4-9-66) 
Secs. 12-9-12-98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Every persons violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 6.45, eff. 4-9-66) 
Chapter 13 - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, §§ 1, 2, effective June 4, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 13, §§ 13-1-13-10, and enacted a new Ch. 13 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 13-1. - Definition of terms. 
    Terms. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    Affiliate means any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with grantee. 
    Basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local broadcast signals; or that definition which is prescribed by the FCC. 
    Cable Act collectively means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
    Cable service means (i) the one-day transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such Video Programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of Section 621(c)) to the extent such facility is used in transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934; or (E) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Class TV cable communications channel means a signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a Subscriber terminal to another point in the communications system. 
    FCC means Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity thereto. 
    Franchise shall mean the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service to subscribers. 
    Franchising authority means the City of International Falls, Minnesota, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof. 
    Grantee means Midcontinent Communications, a South Dakota general partnership. 
    Grantor means the City of International Falls. 
    Gross revenues mean any revenue received by the grantee from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services and equipment sales and rentals in the service area, provided, however, that such phrase shall not include (i) any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the franchising authority or other governmental entity on a cable operator, or customer, or both, solely because of their status as such; (ii) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or customers (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed, both on utilities and cable operators and their services); (iii) any refunds to subscribers, advertising revenues, home shopping revenues, copyright fees, bad debt; and (iv) any other special tax, assessment or fee such as business, occupation and entertainment tax. 
    Gross revenues shall include revenues from the sale of data transmission and internet access services provided over the cable system in the event the FCC or a court or agency of competent jurisdiction holds, rules or decides that a franchise fee may be imposed on such revenues. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
    Public way shall mean the surface of and the space above and below, any public street, highway freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchising authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the cable system. Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the franchising authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the grantee's cable system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system. 
    Service area means the present municipal boundaries of the franchising authority and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means. 
    Service tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by grantee and for which a separate charge is made by Grantee. 
    Subscriber means a person who lawfully receives services of the cable system with the grantee's express permission. 
    Video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(I), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-2. - Renewal of franchise. 
(a)  Grant. Upon acceptance of this franchise by grantee, the franchise hereby provides grantee with the authority, right and privilege to construct, reconstruct, operate and maintain a cable television system to provide cable services within the franchise area. 
(b)  Right of grantor to issue and renew franchise. Grantee acknowledges and accepts the right of grantor to issue and/or renew the franchise under the law as it existed on the effective date or as the law is hereafter amended or adopted. 
(c)  Effective date. The renewal of the franchise provided for in this agreement shall be effective on the date that both parties have executed this agreement (the "effective date"), provided that said date is no later than 30 days after the date the city council, by action, approves this agreement (the "approval date"). The franchise provided for in this agreement is further contingent upon the filing by grantee with city administrator of the city of this agreement, duly executed by grantee, together with the security fund and insurance certificates provided for in this agreement and the Code, except that if such filing does not occur within 60 days after the approval date, the grantor may, in its sole discretion, declare the renewal of the franchise provided for herein to be null and void. 
(d)  Term. The term of the franchise renewed pursuant to this agreement shall be for the period of ten years, unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and commencing on the effective date. At the conclusion of the initial five-year period, the franchise shall automatically renew for an additional five-year period unless grantor provides grantee with a 60-day notice of its intent to not renew the franchise without negotiations for modifications to the contract (agreement). 
(e)  Franchise not exclusive. The franchise renewed pursuant to this agreement shall not be construed as limiting the right of grantor, through its proper offices, and in accordance with the Code and applicable law, to grant other franchises containing terms and conditions that are no more favorable nor less burdensome, as defined by M.S.A. § 238.08, Subd. 1, (b), than those imposed on grantee in the same franchise area the grantee is entitled to occupy by this agreement, permit or otherwise; provided, however, that such additional grants shall not operate to materially modify, revoke or terminate any rights granted to grantee herein and shall be in accord with the provisions of the Code. Any additional franchise granted by the grantor shall serve the entire city as a whole. 
(f)  Ownership of grantee. Grantee represents and warrants to grantor that the names of the shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners of the grantee and of any of the shareholders, partners, members and/or other equity owners of grantee are set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto. [Exhibit A is not herein set out. A copy can be found in the offices of the city.] 
(g)  Compliance with laws and regulations. The provisions of this franchise shall be subject to applicable federal, state and local law. This franchise complies with the franchise standards contained in Minnesota Statutes Annotated (M.S.A.), Chapter 238; provided, however, if any provisions of M.S.A. 238 conflict with the Cable Act or other applicable federal law or rulings, the provisions of the Cable Act or such other federal law or ruling shall have precedence. Grantee and the franchising authority shall conform to all state laws, rules and regulations regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become effective, unless otherwise stated, and shall further conform to all federal laws and regulations regarding cable as they become effective. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(2.1-2.7), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-3. - Customer service. 
(a)  Provision of services. The grantee shall render good quality cable service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt cable service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible, shall be preceded by notice to the city and subscribers and shall occur during periods of minimum use of cable service. 
(b)  Technical standards. The technical standards used in the provision of cable service shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC (47 CFR 76.601 to 76.617) as may be amended or modified from time to time, which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Performance review and system testing. In the event the city finds that there are signal or performance difficulties which may constitute violations of applicable FCC technical standards or this franchise, grantee shall be notified and afforded ten days to correct the problems or complaints. If the performance difficulty is not resolved after the cure period has elapsed in city's sole determination, city may require grantee to demonstrate compliance via testing or other means selected by the grantee. 
(d)  FCC reports. Grantee shall file with city upon written request any required FCC technical reports which demonstrate signal quality. Further, grantee shall summarize the results of any such testing provided to the city. 
(e)  Regulation of service rates. 
(1)  The city may regulate rates for the provision of cable service to the extent allowed under federal or state law(s). 
(2)  A list of grantee's current residential subscriber rates and charges shall be maintained on file with the city and shall be available for public inspection. Grantee shall give the city and subscribers written notice of any change in a rate or change in accordance with any applicable FCC requirements, unless such change arises from changes in regulatory fees, franchise fees, access costs or franchise imposed costs. 
(f)  Sales procedures. Grantee shall not exercise deceptive sales procedures when marketing any of its services within the city. Grantee shall have the right to market consistent with local ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(g)  Telephone inquiries and complaints. 
(1)  Availability. Grantee will maintain local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. During normal business hours, trained representatives of grantee shall be available to respond to subscriber inquiries. Grantee will ensure that: (1) an adequate number of trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours, and; (2) after normal business hours, the access line will be answered by a trained company representative or a service or an automated response system such as an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(2)  Telephone answer time and busy signals. Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
(h)  Installation, outage and service calls. Under normal operating conditions which will exclude the initial deployment period, each of the following standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: (1) Excluding conditions beyond the control of grantee which prevent performance, grantee will begin working on service interruptions promptly, and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known, and grantee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem and resolve such problems as soon as is reasonably possible; (2) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The grantee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the customer; (3) grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment; (4) if a representative of grantee is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time during normal business hours which is convenient for the customer. 
(i)  Complaint and other service records. Subject to grantee's obligation to maintain the privacy of certain information, grantee shall prepare and maintain written records of all complaints received and the resolution of such complaints, including the date of such resolution. Such written records shall be on file at the office of grantee. Grantee shall provide the city with a written summary of such complaints and their resolution upon request and in a form mutually agreeable to city and grantee. Grantee may be required to provide detailed compliance reports on a quarterly basis with respect to the objectively measurable service standards herein upon written demand by the city. 
(j)  Subscriber contracts. Grantee shall provide to city upon request any standard form subscriber contract utilized by grantee. If no such written contract exists, grantee shall provide a document completely and concisely stating the length and terms of the subscriber contract offered to customers. 
(k)  Billing and subscriber communications. Grantee must give subscribers 30 days advance written notice with copy to city before any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions. Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable, with itemization including, but not limited to, basic and premium charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(l)  Refunds and credits. If service is interrupted or discontinued for 24 or more consecutive hours and grantee has notice of such interruption, subscribers shall be credited pro rata for such interruption beginning with the date of notice of interruption. Credits for will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates service and receives less than a full month's service, grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than the return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service is terminated. Grantee shall not be held responsible for interruptions in programming caused by content providers. 
(m)  Late fees. Grantee may assess and collect late fees in accordance with state law, as may be amended from time to time. 
(n)  Additional customer service requirements. The city expressly reserves authority to adopt additional or modified customer service requirements to address Subscriber concerns or complaints in accordance with federal law. 
(o)  Violations. In the event enforcement of any provision in this section is initiated by council resolution, any subsequent violation of such provision shall be a violation of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(3.1-3.15), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-4. - Institutional service. 
(a)  Public, educational and government access. 
(1)  PEG responsibility. The grantor shall operate, administer, and manage PEG access in accordance with this section through the city cable commission. 
(2)  PEG channels. Grantee shall dedicate two channels for PEG access use. Nothing herein shall diminish the city's rights to secure additional channels pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 238.084, which is expressly incorporated herein by reference. Grantee may not move or renumber the PEG access channels without the written approval of the city. 
(3)  PEG availability. The grantee shall provide to each of its subscribers who receive all, or any part of, the total services offered on the cable system, reception on the specially designated access channels available for use by the general public on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis. Grantee shall provide to each of its subscribers who receive all, or part of, the total cable services offered over its cable system, reception on the PEG access channels free of charge. 
(b)  Service to public buildings. Grantee shall provide, free of charge, a drop, outlet and monthly cable service to up to five locations. Grantee shall provide a drop, outlet and free monthly cable service to governmental buildings or sites identified by the city at the cost of grantee's time and material. Any public institution may add outlets at its own expense. However, no redistribution of the free cable service provided pursuant to this section shall be allowed without the grantee's prior written consent. 
(c)  Activated two-way capacity. Grantee shall provide, free of charge, two-way activated capacity allowing live or recorded cable-cast of programming to the sites listed in Exhibit B. [Exhibit B is not herein set out. A copy can be found in the offices of the city.] 
(d)  Neighboring cable systems. Grantor may, in its sole discretion, negotiate agreements with neighboring jurisdictions served by the same cable system, educational institutions or others to share the operating expenses of the public, educational and governmental channels. 
(e)  Title to equipment. Grantor shall retain title to all public, educational and governmental equipment and facilities purchased or otherwise acquired pursuant to the previous International Falls Franchise (Ordinance No. 25, Third Series) City Code sections and with funding made available by grantee in accordance with section 13-4 of the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Relocation of channels. Grantee shall not relocate any public, educational and governmental access channel without advance notice. Grantee shall provide grantor and all subscribers with at least 60 days prior written notice of any relocation and cover the reasonable costs of customer notification. 
(g)  Oversight of PEG programming. The city's cable commission oversees all PEG access franchise obligations. The commission shall oversee the direction of PEG access and compliance with PEG access franchise requirements. By agreement with the 501c(3) public charity Koochiching County Public Television (KCC-TV), the commission has granted authority to KCC-TV to identify community programming needs; review grant applications and make necessary recommendations regarding grant funding programs; review PEG access policies and make necessary recommendations; recruit PEG access volunteers; and review and provide recommendations on services to PEG access users, producers and volunteers, newsletters and other promotions, and recognition programs. 
(h)  Commission and city council. The city's administrator will serve as the primary liaison between the cable commission and the city council. Any and all rules regarding PEG access and PEG access users must be approved by the commission. 
(i)  Compliance with federal law. In entering into this agreement, the grantee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the obligations it has undertaken in this section 13-4 have been knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently entered into. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(4.1-4.9), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-5. - Regulation by franchising authority and fees. 
(a)  Franchise fee. 
(1)  Grantee will remit to grantor a franchise fee equal to one percent of gross revenue effective 60 days after the effective date of this agreement. 
(2)  The franchising authority shall give grantee six months prior written notice of any such change in the franchise fee after the implementation of this agreement; 
(3)  The franchising authority agrees that all amounts paid by the grantee as franchise fees may be added to the price of cable services and collected from the grantee's customers as "external costs" as such term is used in 47 C.F.R. 76.922. In addition, all amounts paid as franchise fees may be separately stated on customers' bills as permitted in 47 C.F.R. 76.985. 
For the purpose of this section franchise fees shall be paid monthly. 
(b)  Access equipment and facilities. 
(1)  The city may require the grantee to pay up to $1.00 per subscriber, per month as a grant for the community's telecommunications-related capital needs. Such charge may be itemized as a "PEG Fee" and passed-through on subscriber's bills. 
(2)  The city may adopt or modify the "PEG Fee," up to the amount provided in paragraph (b)(1) above, by adopting a resolution identifying the amount thereof. The city shall provide written notice of any modification or adoption of the PEG fee to grantee within 60 days of the proposed effective change. An equivalent fee shall be required of all other franchised video service providers. 
(3)  The city, or its designee, may implement rules for use of any access channel(s). 
(c)  Rates and charges. A schedule of the current subscriber charges, as well as the form of residential subscriber contract, specifying the current length and term of subscriber contracts shall be kept on file and available for public inspection during normal office hours at the local office of grantee. 
(d)  Renewal of franchise. The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act), unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law. 
In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a), the franchising authority agrees to notify grantee of its preliminary assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of grantee under the then current franchise term. The franchising authority further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the grantee prior to the time that the four-month period referred to in Subsection (c) of Section 626 is considered to begin. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the grantee and franchising authority agree that at any time during the term of the then current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the franchising authority and grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the franchising authority may grant a renewal thereof. The grantee and the franchising authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act. 
(e)  Abandonment. The grantee shall not abandon any portion of its cable system without giving three months prior written notice to the franchising authority. Grantee shall compensate the franchising authority for any damages resulting to it from the abandonment. 
(f)  Conditions of sale. Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a renewal or extension of grantee's franchise is denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern. 
If the franchise or cable system is offered for sale, the franchising authority shall also have the right to purchase the system at its fair market value. 
Grantee and franchising authority agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, grantee and franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law; it being further agreed that grantee's continued operation of its cable system during the six-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the franchising authority or the grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, neither franchising authority nor grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law. 
(g)  Removal of property. Upon termination or forfeiture of this franchise, grantee shall, if the franchising authority so requests, remove all of its cables, wires and appliances from the streets, alleys, and other public places, with the exception of those portions of said cables, wires and appliances as are then being utilized and operated by grantee under any other lawful and effective governmental permit or license. If the same are not so removed, the franchising authority may cause the same to be removed and recover the reasonable costs thereof from grantee. 
(h)  Transfer of franchise. Any transfer of this franchise shall be completed pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 238.083 and applicable federal law, and approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. 
(i)  Continuing administration responsibility. The office of the city administrator shall be responsible for the continuing administration of this franchise in cooperation with the city's cable commission. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(5.1-5.9), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-6. - Infrastructure construction and changes. 
(a)  Construction standards. Grantee shall not commence construction of a cable communications system, open or disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway or public place without first obtaining a permit from the proper municipal authority. If grantee fails to meet the conditions of the permit, the franchising authority shall have the right to put the street or public place back into the condition which existed immediately prior to use by the grantee at the reasonable expense of the grantee. Such permit shall not be unreasonably withheld. Payment of franchise fees pursuant to section 13-5 of this franchise agreement shall relieve the grantee of payment of any right-of-way fees (if any) charged by the grantor. 
All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of the grantee shall be located, constructed, installed and maintained in compliance with applicable codes. The grantee shall keep and maintain all of its property so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and travel upon the streets and public places of the Franchise area or endanger the life or property of any persons. 
(b)  Conditions of street occupancy. All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways. 
(c)  Restoration of public ways. If during the course of grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. 
(d)  Relocation at request of franchising authority. Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than 30 days, the grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the grantee when lawfully required by franchising authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the franchising authority; but, the grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement, or right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the grantee. 
(e)  Relocation at request of third party. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: (a) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in advance; and (b) the grantee is given not less than 30 days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)  Trimming of trees and shrubbery. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables or other equipment. All tree-trimming shall be at the sole cost of the grantee. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the franchising authority or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the cable system undertaken by grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations grantee may have to the franchising authority or property owner pursuant to the terms of this section. 
Also, the grantee must provide advance written notice of no less than ten business days to the property owner of the intent to trim trees on the owner's property, including the boulevard trees, with such notice to be mailed or notice hand-delivered to residence. 
Further, grantee will remove all debris caused by the trimming from the premises of the property. 
(g)  Safety requirements. Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area. 
(h)  Aerial and underground construction. In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such facilities are actually capable of receiving grantee's cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the cable system's signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground, grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in this section shall require grantee to construct, operate and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as, but not limited to, subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals or other related equipment. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this chapter, grantee shall only be required to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time that such are placed underground. 
(1)  New Developments. The franchising authority shall provide the grantee with written notice of the issuance of building or development permits for planned commercial/residential developments within the service area requiring undergrounding of cable facilities. The franchising authority agrees to require as a condition of issuing the permit that developer give the grantee access to open trenches for deployment of cable facilities and written notice of the date of availability of trenches. Such notice must be received by the grantee at least ten business days prior to availability. Developer shall be responsible for the digging and backfilling of all trenches. The grantee shall be responsible for engineering, deployment labor, and cable facilities. Installation from utility easements to individual homes or other structures shall be at the cost of the home/building owner or Developer unless otherwise provided. 
(2)  Local improvement district. If an ordinance is passed creating a local improvement district which involves placing underground all utilities including that of the grantee which are then located overhead, the grantee shall participate in such underground project and shall remove poles, cables and wires from the surface of the streets within such district and shall place them underground in conformity with the requirements of the franchising authority. The grantee may include its costs of relocating facilities associated with the undergrounding project in said local improvement district if allowed under applicable law. 
(i)  Required extensions of service. The cable system as constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption of this chapter substantially complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the terms hereof within the service area whenever grantee shall receive a request for service from at least ten subscribers within 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable. 
(j)  Subscriber charges for extensions of service. No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground, existence of more than 150 feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers, or a density of less than ten subscribers per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. 
(k)  Emergency Use. 
(1)  In accordance with and at the time required by the provisions of FCC Regulations Part 11, subpart D, Section 11.51, and as such provisions may from time to time be amended, the Grantee shall install, if it has not already done so, and maintain an Emergency Alert System (EAS) for use in transmitting Emergency Action Notifications (EAN) and Emergency Action Terminations (EAT) in local and state-wide situations as may be designated to be an emergency by the Local Primary (LP), the State Primary (SP) and/or the State Emergency Operations Center (SEOC), as those authorities are identified and defined within Part 11 of the FCC' s rules and regulations. 
(2)  The franchising authority shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the grantee's cable system in any manner that results in inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the cable system. Except for the extent expressly prohibited by law, the franchising authority shall hold the grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the franchising authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(6.1-6.11), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-7. - Compliance and monitoring. 
(a)  Testing for compliance. The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than five business days and providing a representative of grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the franchising authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than two times a year in the aggregate, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the grantee upon grantee's request. 
(b)  Technical standards. The technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable communications systems contained in Subpart K of Part 76 of FCC rules and regulations are herein incorporated by reference. 
(c)  Technical violations. The parties hereby agree that it is not the franchising authority's intention to subject the grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the franchise for so-called "technical" breach(es) or violation(s) of the franchise or local cable ordinance, which shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  In instances or for matters where a violation or a breach by the grantee of the franchise or local cable ordinance was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the customers within the service area; or 
(2)  Where there existed circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the grantee and which precipitated a violation by the grantee of the franchise or local cable ordinance, or which were deemed to have prevented the grantee from complying with a term or condition of the franchise or local cable ordinance. 
(d)  Books and records. The grantee agrees that the franchising authority, upon reasonable notice, may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The franchising authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(7.1-7.4), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-8. - Insurance, indemnification and bonds or other surety. 
(a)  Insurance requirements. 
(1)  Upon the effective date, the grantee shall, at its sole expense and in addition to all required insurance under Section 15.27 of the Code, take out and maintain during the term of this agreement public liability insurance with a company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota with a rating by A.M. Best & Co. of not less than "A-" that shall protect the grantee, the grantor and their officials, officers, directors, employees and agents from claims which may arise from operations under this agreement, whether such operations be by the grantee, its officials, officers, directors, employees and agents or any subcontractors of grantee. This liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to property, resulting from grantee's vehicles, products and operations. The amount of insurance for single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal injury and property damage shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 with the grantee maintaining an umbrella policy with a minimum of $2,000,000.00 coverage in the aggregate. 
The following endorsements shall be attached to the liability policy: 
a.  The policy shall provide coverage on an "occurrence" basis. 
b.  The policy shall cover personal injury as well as bodily injury. 
c.  The policy shall cover blanket contractual liability subject to the standard universal exclusions of contractual liability included in the carrier's standard endorsement as to bodily injuries, personal injuries and property damage. 
d.  Broad form property damage liability shall be afforded. 
e.  The grantor shall be named as an additional insured on the policy. 
f.  An endorsement shall be provided which states that the coverage is primary insurance and that no other insurance maintained by the grantor will be called upon to contribute to a loss under this coverage. 
g.  Standard form of cross-liability shall be afforded. 
h.  An endorsement stating that the policy shall not be canceled without 30 days' notice of such cancellation given to the grantor. 
(2)  Grantee's coverage shall always be equal to or greater than the city's liability maximums pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 466.04. 
(3)  Grantee shall submit to grantor documentation of the required insurance, under the franchise and under the Code, including a certificate of insurance signed by the insurance agent and companies named, as well as all properly executed endorsements. 
(b)  Indemnification. 
(1)  In addition to grantee's indemnification obligations under Section 15.26 of the Code, grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees (collectively the "indemnified parties") harmless from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liabilities, demands, damages, judgments, settlements, disability, losses, expenses (including attorney's fees and disbursements of counsel) and costs of any nature that any of the indemnified parties may at any time suffer, sustain or incur arising out of, based upon or in any way connected with the grantee's operations, the exercise of the franchise pursuant to this agreement, the breach by grantee of its obligations under this agreement or the Code and/or the activities of grantee, its subcontractor, employees and agents hereunder. Grantee shall be solely responsible for and shall indemnify, defend and hold the indemnified parties harmless from and against any and all matters relative to payment of grantee's employees, including compliance with Social Security and withholdings. 
(2)  The indemnification obligations of grantee set forth in this agreement are not limited in any way by the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for grantee under workers' compensation, disability or other employee benefit acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this agreement, or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance held by grantee. 
(3)  Grantor does not, and shall not, waive any rights against grantee which it may have by reason of the indemnification provided for in this agreement, because of the acceptance by grantor, or the deposit with grantor by grantee, of any of the insurance policies described in this agreement. 
(4)  The indemnification of grantor by grantee provided for in this agreement shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of any kind suffered by reason of any of the grantee's operations referred to in this agreement, regardless of whether or not such insurance policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any such damages or claims for damages. 
(5)  Grantee shall not be required to indemnify grantor for negligence or misconduct on the part of grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees. Grantor shall hold Grantee harmless, subject to the limitations in Minnesota statutes Chapter 466, for any damage resulting from the negligence or misconduct of the Grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in utilizing any access channels, equipment, or facilities and for any such negligence or misconduct by grantor in connection with work performed by grantor and permitted by this agreement, on or adjacent to the cable system. 
(c)  Grantee's insurance. Grantee shall not commence any cable system reconstruction work or permit any subcontractor to commence work until all insurance required under this agreement and the Code has been obtained. Said insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the expiration of this agreement. 
(d)  Workers compensation insurance. Grantee shall obtain and maintain workers' compensation insurance for all of grantee's employees, and in case any work is sublet, Grantee shall require any subcontractor similarly to provide workers' compensation insurance for all of their employees, all in compliance with state laws, and to fully indemnify the grantor from and against any and all claims arising out of occurrences on the work. Grantee hereby indemnifies grantor for any and all costs, expenses (including attorneys' fees and disbursements of counsel), damages and liabilities incurred by grantor as a result of any failure of either grantee or any subcontractor to take out and maintain such insurance. Grantee shall provide the grantor with a certificate of insurance indicating workers' compensation coverage on the effective date. 
(e)  Bonding. 
(1)  Within 60 days of the approval date, grantee shall establish and provide to grantor a bond, as security for the full and timely payment and performance by grantee of all of its obligations under this agreement and the Code. The bond shall consist of two parts. The first part shall be in the amount of $25,000.00 and shall be payment and performance bonds and which shall be in a form acceptable to grantor's city attorney. The second part shall be payment and performance bonds, in an amount equal to ten percent of the cost of the work or the contract price of any improvement of the cable system, where the contract price exceeds $10,000.00. 
(2)  The bond may be drawn upon by grantor in the event the grantee shall fail to well and truly observe, fulfill or perform each and every, all terms and conditions of the Code and of this franchise. Actions brought by grantee hereunder may be subject to 47 U.S.C. § 555A - Limitations of Franchising Authority Liability - which is hereby incorporated by reference and is fully set forth herein. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of the normal permit requirements made of all contractors working within the city's rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(8.1-8.5), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-9. - Enforcement and termination of franchise. 
(a)  Notice of violation. In the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
(b)  Grantee's right to cure or respond. Grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in subsection (a): (a) to respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance or; (b) to cure such default or; (c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. 
(c)  Public hearing. In the event that grantee fails to respond to the notice described in subsection (a) pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (b), or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within 30 days after the grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to subsection (a), the Franchising authority, or its agent, shall issue a written notice to the grantee to appear before the franchise administrator, or other appropriate and delegated agent, to resolve the issue of noncompliance. Upon determination by the agent that the grantee is in non-compliance with the franchise agreement and that no proposed remedy is satisfactory to the franchising authority, the agent shall make a written recommendation to schedule a public meeting to investigate the alleged default. Said public meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchising authority that is scheduled at a time that is not less than five business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee, in writing, of the time and place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard. 
(d)  Enforcement. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the franchising authority, after such meeting, determines that grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may: 
(1)  Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this franchise, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default; 
(2)  Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; 
(3)  In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, any attempt by grantee to evade the provisions of the franchise, or grantee practices fraud or deceit upon the franchising authority, declare the franchise agreement, and the rights and privileges thereof, to be revoked; or 
(4)  Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages. 
(5)  Any such determination by the franchising authority shall be subject to a de novo review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the franchising authority to enforce prompt compliance. 
(e)  Force majeure. The grantee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise), where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic act of nature, labor disputes, governmental, administrative or judicial order or regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond the grantee's ability to anticipate and control. This provision also covers work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their own utility poles on which the grantee's cable and/or equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(9.1-9.5), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-10. - Unauthorized reception. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. In addition to those criminal and civil remedies provided by state and federal law, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the cable system without the express consent of the grantee. Further, without the express consent of grantee, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove, or injure any property, equipment, or part of the cable system or any means of receiving cable service or other services provided thereto. Subject to applicable federal and state law, the franchising authority shall incorporate into its criminal code, if not presently a part thereof, criminal misdemeanor law which will enforce the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(10.1), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-11. - Consumer protection provisions. 
(a)  Subscriber privacy. No signal of a class IV cable communications channel may be transmitted from a Subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber. Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for the systems conducting system-wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity, determining system-wide viewership, or monitoring for the purpose of billing. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(11.1), 6-4-14) 
Sec. 13-12. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Preemption. If the FCC, or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the franchising authority, the jurisdiction of the franchising authority shall cease and no longer exist. 
(b)  Actions of franchising authority. In any action by the franchising authority or representative thereof mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(c)  Notice. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the franchising authority or grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. 
The notices or responses to the Franchising Authority shall be addressed as follows: 
City of International Falls 
Attn: City Administrator 
600 4 th Street 
International Falls, MN 56649 
The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows: 
Midcontinent Communications, Inc. 
Attn: Nancy Vogel 
3901 N Louise Ave. 
Sioux Falls, SD 57107 
With a copy to: 
Midcontinent Communications, Inc. 
Attn: Director of Franchising 
3901 N Louise Ave. 
Sioux Falls, SD 57107 
and a copy to: 
Midcontinent Communications 
Attn: Legal Department 
3901 N Louise Ave. 
Sioux Falls, SD 57107 
Franchising authority and the grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. 
(d)  Descriptive headings. The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein. 
(e)  Severability. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise or any renewal or renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12, 5th Series, § 2(12.1-12.5), 5-19-14) 

Chapter 14 - LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note Ord. No. 32, 5th series §§ 17, effective July 27, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 14, §§ 14-114-13, and enacted a new Ch. 14 as set out herein. The former Ch. 14 pertained to sales and use tax for transportation and public infrastructure projects and derived from Ord. No. 31, 5th series, § 1, 6-29-19. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Authority. 
Pursuant to Minnesota Session Laws 2019, First Special Session, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 20 and Section 34, the Minnesota Legislature has authorized the City of International Falls to impose a local sales and use tax to provide revenues to pay the costs of collecting and administering the tax to the commissioner of revenue of the state of Minnesota and to finance the capital and administrative costs related to the funding of designated projects as defined in Minnesota Session Laws 2019, First Special Session, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 20 and Section 34 and approved by the voters at the November 6, 2018 referendum. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 1, 7-27-19)  
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases have the meanings given them in this section unless the language or context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended. 
City. "City" means the City of International Falls, Minnesota. 
Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of revenue of the State of Minnesota or a person to whom the commissioner has delegated functions. 
Designated projects. "Designated projects" means transportation and public infrastructure projects as authorized by the Minnesota Legislature in Minnesota Session Laws 2019, First Special Session, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 20 and Section 34 and approved by the voters at the November 6, 2018 referendum. 
State sales and use tax laws and rules. "State sales and use tax laws and rules" means those provisions of the state revenue laws applicable to state sales and use tax imposition, administration, collection, and enforcement, including M.S.A. chs. 270C, 289A, 297A, and Minnesota Rules, chapter 8130, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 2, 7-27-19)  
Sec. 14-3. - Local sales and use tax imposed; amount of tax; coordination with state sales and use tax laws and rules. 
A local sales tax is imposed in the amount of one (1) percent on the gross receipts from sales at retail sourced within city limits which are taxable under the state sales and use tax laws and rules. A local use tax is imposed in the amount of one (1) percent on the storage, use, distribution or consumption of goods or services sourced within city limits which are taxable under the state sales and use tax laws and rules. All of the provisions of the state sales and use tax laws and rules apply to the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter. The local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected and remitted to the commissioner on any sale or purchase when the state sales tax must be collected and remitted to the commissioner under the state sales and use tax laws and rules and is in addition to the state sales and use tax. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 3, 7-27-19)  
Sec. 14-4. - Effective date of tax; transitional sales. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to sales and purchases made on or after October 1, 2019. The local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to: 
(a)  The gross receipts from retail sales or leases of tangible personal property made pursuant to a bona fide written contract, which unconditionally vests the rights and obligations of the parties thereto, provided that such contract was enforceable prior to October 1, 2019, and that delivery of the tangible personal property subject thereto is made on or before October 1, 2019. 
(b)  The gross receipts from retail sales made pursuant to a bona fide lump sum or fixed price construction contract, which unconditionally vests the rights and obligations of the parties thereto and which does not make provision or allocation of future taxes, provided that such contract was enforceable prior to October 1, 2019, and that delivery of the tangible personal property used in performing such construction contract is made before April 1, 2020. 
(c)  The purchase of taxable services, including utility services, if the billing period includes charges for services furnished before and after October 1, 2019, but the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall apply on the first billing period not including charges for services furnished before October 1, 2019. 
(d)  Lease payments for tangible personal property and motor vehicles that includes a period before and after October 1, 2019, but the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall apply on a prorated basis to lease payment amounts attributable to that portion of the lease payment period on or after October 1, 2019 and on the entire lease payment for all lease payment periods thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 4, 7-27-19)  
Sec. 14-5. - Tax clearance; issuance of licenses. 
(a)  The city may not issue or renew a license for the conduct of a trade or business within the city if the commissioner notified the licensing division of the city that the applicant owes delinquent city taxes as provided in this chapter, or penalties or interest due on such taxes. 
(1)  City taxes include sales and use taxes provided in this article. Penalties and interest are penalties and interest due on taxes included in this definition. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes does not include a tax liability if: (i) an administrative or court action which contests the amount or validity of the liability has been filed or served, (ii) the appeal period to contest the tax liability has not expired, or (iii) the applicant has entered into a payment agreement and is current with the payments. 
(c)  Applicant means an individual if the license is issued to or in the name of an individual or the corporation or partnership if the license is issued to or in the name of a corporation or partnership. 
(1)  A copy of the notice of delinquent taxes given to the licensing division of the city shall also be sent to the applicant taxpayer. In the case of renewal of a license, if the applicant requests in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the notice of hearing, then, a contested hearing shall be held under the same procedures as provided in M.S.A. ch. 270A for the state sales and use tax imposed under M.S.A. ch. 297A; provided further that if a hearing must be held on the state sales and use tax, hearings must be combined. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 5, 7-27-19)  
Sec. 14-6. - Deposit of revenues; costs of administration; termination of tax. 
(a)  All of the revenues, interest, and penalties derived from the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter collected by the commissioner and remitted to the city shall be deposited by the city finance director in the city treasury and shall be credited to the fund established to pay the costs of collecting the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter and to finance the capital and administrative costs directly related to completing the designated projects. 
(b)  The local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall terminate at the earlier of: (1) thirty (30) years; or (2) when the city council determines that thirty million dollars ($30,000,000.00), plus an amount sufficient to pay the costs related to issuing bonds and interest on the bonds has been received from the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter to pay for all the capital and administrative costs directly related to completing the designated projects. Any funds remaining after payment of all such costs and retirement or redemption of the bonds shall be placed in the general fund of the city. The local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter may terminate at an earlier time if the city council so determines by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 6, 7-27-19)  
Sec. 14-7. - Agreement with the commissioner. 
The city may enter into an agreement with the commissioner regarding each party's respective roles and responsibilities related to the imposition, administration, collection, enforcement, and termination of the local sales and use tax imposed by this chapter. Any such agreement shall not abrogate, alter, or otherwise conflict with the state sales and use tax laws and rules, this ordinance, or Minnesota Session Laws 2019, First Special Session, Chapter 6, Article 6, Section 20 and Section 34. 
(Ord. No. 32, 5th series, § 7, 7-27-19) 

Chapter 20 - LISTING OF UNCODED ORDINANCES IN EFFECT 
    All ordinances described in this chapter remain in effect after adoption of the City Code. They are of a permanent and continuing nature as authority for a specific act which has been performed. These ordinances are of two types, that generally distinguish them from other provisions of the City Code, either (1) their texts have no continuing reference value, or (2) they are in the nature of a contract and of only occasional reference value. For these reasons it appears justified to list and describe them here only to facilitate finding them in the event this becomes necessary. 
Issuance of Bonds 
    Ordinance No. 1.05, adopted July 28, 1919, provides for the issuance and sale of $100,000.00 Permanent Improvement Revolving Fund bonds, fixing the form and details, and providing for payment. 
    Ordinance No. 1.18, adopted February 26, 1968, provides for the issuance of $1,000,000.00 negotiable coupon general obligation revenue bonds to defray cost of constructing hospital facilities. 
    Ordinance No. 1.26, adopted June 12, 1979, provides for the issuance of $1,700,000.00 General Obligation Bonds for the purpose of financing various improvements within the City. 
Railroad Permit 
    Ordinance No. 6.14, adopted March 21, 1938, grants permission to the Minnesota, Dakota and Western Railway Company to construct, maintain and operate a railroad track across Fifth Street and the alley in Block 11, on a line directly North of the alley through Blocks 12 and 62, according to the amended plat of said Blocks 12 and 62 of the City of International Falls. 
Special Police Department Fund 
    Ordinance No. 1.25, adopted July 12, 1977, establishes a "Special Police Department Fund", and provides for the administration thereof. 
    Ordinance No. 71, 2nd Series, adopted May 28, 1991, amends Ordinance No. 1.25. 
Purchase of Easement 
    Ordinance No. 6.31, adopted June 20, 1955, authorizes purchase of street easement rights along Eighth Street westerly from Thirteenth Avenue to the point where Fourteenth Avenue is properly located, and along the west boundary of the city from the edge of the present right-of-way for Highways 71 and 11, then south along said westerly boundary to Fourteenth Avenue. 
Establishing and Designating Street Grades 
    Ordinance No. 6.01, adopted August 23, 1912, establishes and designates the grades of streets and alleys in the City. 
Numbering Houses and Lots 
    Ordinance No. 9.02, adopted March 11, 1912, regulates the numbering of houses and lots in the City. 
Naming and Renaming Streets 
    Ordinance No. 6.24, adopted January 30, 1950, renames part of Highway No. 11 as Third Avenue East, part of Thirteenth Street as Fifteenth Street, and part of Twelfth Street as Thirteenth Street. 
Authorize Construction for Excavation and Stabilization 
    Ordinance No. 816, adopted June 12, 1979, authorizes construction of excavation and stabilization of certain streets, and awards contract to Bowman Construction in the amount of $118,760.00. 
Adoption of Codification 
    Ordinance No. 75, 2nd Series, Adopted August 26, 1991, provides for an updated Municipal Code for the City of International Falls. 
Senior Citizen Building 
    Ordinance No. 6, 2nd Series, adopted April 22, 1980, awards contract for construction of Senior Citizen Building. 
Lodging Tax 
    Ordinance No. 59, 2nd Series, adopted April 24, 1989, establishes a "City Lodging Tax" and provides for the administration thereof. 
Local Improvements 
    Ordinance No. 57, 2nd Series, adopted April 3rd, 1989, the City of International Falls adopted assessment procedures for improvements similar to the previous Charter for International Falls, and electing Official at the time of the State General Election. 
Grant of Franchise 
    Ordinance No. 7.24, adopted June 26, 1967, grants franchise to International Gas Company to sell and distribute gas for a period of thirty years. 
    Ordinance No. 3.30, adopted January 22, 1968, grants franchise to International T.V. to maintain a community antenna television cable distribution system for a period of fifteen years. 
    Ordinance No. 3.39, adopted April 8, 1976, grants permission to Inter City Gas Company for increase in gas rates. 
    Ordinance No. 9, 2nd Series, adopted January 1, 1981, grants franchise to Minnesota Power & Light Company to construct and maintain an electric distribution and transmission system for a period of twenty years. 
    Ordinance No. 18, 2nd Series, adopted February 8, 1982, grants cable communications franchise to International T.V. Cable Company for a term to expire January 31, 1983. 
    Ordinance No. 30, 2nd Series, adopted August 30, 1982, grants cable communications franchise to International T.V. Cable Corporation (with consent to transfer to Falls Cablevision, Inc.) for a term to expire July 31, 1997. 
    Ordinance No. 21, 3rd Series, adopted June 23, 1997 grants franchise to Northern Minnesota Utilities, Division of UtiliCorp United Inc., to erect, maintain, and operate a gas distribution system for a period of 25 years. 
    Ordinance No. 31, 3rd Series, adopted June 13, 2001 grants a franchise to Minnesota Power, Inc., it's successors and assigns, the right to construct and maintain an electric distribution and transmission system within the city for a period of 20 years. 
Purchase of Real Estate 
Ordinance 
Number Date of 
Adoption Brief Description 6.06 3-24-19 North 80 feet and 6 inches of Lots 11 and 12, Block 9. 6.09 12-10-27 Block 33 of the Plat of the City. 6.10 6-29-29 North 100 feet of Lots 1 and 2, Block 14, Plat of the City. 6.11 6-20-32 W1/2 of SE1/4 of SW1/4, 9-70-24. 6.12 7-11-32 South 42 feet of Lots 1 and 2, Block 14, Plat of the City. 6.16 7-5-38 Lots 3 to 12 in Block 34, and all of Blocks 27 and 28. 6.17 11-6-39 Part of Government Lot 1, 33-71-24. 6.18 12-7-42 Lots 3 and 4, Block 14, subject to unpaid taxes against said property on Lots 13 to 20, Block 62. 6.19 2-17-47 Tracts in Government Lot 2, 33-71-24; two tracts in Government Lots 1 and 2, 33-71-24. 6.20 2-4-48 Lots 5, 6, 7 and 8 in Block 14 of the Plat of the City. 6.25 8-25-52 West 300 feet of North 300 feet, Lot 16, Auditor's Plat 19, located in the West corner Lot 16 of Auditor's Plat 19. 6.28 8-9-54 Lots 21, 22 and 23, Block 62, according to amended Plat of Block 12 and 62. 6.35 5-19-58 West 100 feet of West 200 feet of Lot 1, and West 100 feet of North one-half of Lot 2, Block 3, Hadler and Linsten's Addition. 6.36 10-6-58 Lot 24, Block 62. 6.40 7-24-61 Lots 9 and 10, Block 9, Hadler Addition. 6.42 5-28-62 East 70 feet of Lot 1, Block 3, Auditor's Plat 25. 6.46 8-15-66 Lots 1, 3, 4, 5, 8 and 9 and North one-half of Lot 10 of Auditor's Plat 19. 6.48 10-23-67 Lots 45 and 46, Plat of Brennen's Beach. 6.50 1-15-68 Joint purchase with County of N1/2 of NW1/4, 31-71-23. 6.52 12-30-68 Part of Lot 16, Auditor's Plat 19. 6.58 6-26-72 Lots 7, 8 and 9, Block 16, Plat of the City.  
Sale of Real Estate 
Ordinance 
Number Date of 
Adoption Brief Description 6.18 12-7-42 South 50 feet of Lots 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12, Block 17. 6.37 10-13-58 West 67 feet of North one-half of Lot 1, Block 3, Plat of Hadler and Linsten's Addition. 6.47 7-31-67 Tract abutting Twelfth Avenue and Rainy River. 6.57 12-27-71 Lots 4, 5, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and East one-half of 23, Block 37. 6.62 9-9-74 Part of Lot 51, Plat of International Falls, lying easterly of northern extension of East line of Lot 3, Block 37.  
Vacating Streets and Alleys 
Ordinance 
Number Date of 
Adoption Brief Description 6.13 12-3-34 Portion of Fourth Street between Ninth Avenue and intersection of Fourth Street with Third Street. 6.15 5-3-38 Alley in Block 11, lying East of West boundary line of Lots 7 and 8 in Block 11. 6.23 9-26-49 Part of Fourth Avenue in Hadler's Addition lying between North and South lines of Blocks 9 and 10 except portions lying between extensions of North and South lines of alley in Blocks 9 and 10. 6.26 1-11-54 Portions of street, avenue and alley in Block 37, Amended Plat of Blocks 37, 38, 43-48, 51 and 97; part of Riverside Drive between east line of Eight Avenue and east line of Baker's Acre and line projected due south from SW corner of Baker's Acre; part of Eighth Avenue lying north of north line of Second Street; and part of alley in Block 37, Amended Plat of Blocks 37, 38, 43-48, 51 and 97 lying east of west line of Lot 17 projected NWly direction. 6.27 3-29-54 Alley in Block E subject to restriction. 6.29 1-31-55 Portions of street, avenue and alley in Block 37, Amended Plat of Blocks 37, 38, 43-48, 51 and 97; part of Riverside Drive between east line of Eighth Avenue and east line of Baker's Acre and line projected due south from SE corner of said Baker's Acre; part of Eighth Avenue lying north of north line of Second Street; and part of alley in Block 37, Amended Plat of Blocks 37, 38, 43-48, 51 and 97, lying east of west line of Lot 17 projected in NWly direction. 6.33 07-01-57 Boulevard in Park Avenue Riverview Addition. 6.41 08-21-61 Portion of Fifth Street abutting Block 50 and triangular piece of land lying north of Fifth Street and west of west line of Eleventh Avenue. 6.63 11-10-75 Removes requirement to maintain right of public access from Riverside Drive to Second Street between Ninth Avenue and Eighth Avenue projected North from intersection of Eighth Avenue to Second Street. 72, 2nd series 05-28-91 Second Street-from Boise Cascade east property line located 109 feet east of the Fifth Avenue right-of-way; and include the 66 feet of Fifth Avenue right-of-way and 300 feet of Block 24 and proceeding west for 15 feet 6 inches to the curb line of Sixth Avenue, thence north to the north R/W line of Second Street, thence east 490 feet 6 inches and thence south 80 feet. Fifth Avenue-66 feet of right-of-way from the south right-of-way line of Second Street 142 feet. Sixth Avenue-from the corner of Boise Cascade property known as Lot 1, Block 24, thence west 15 feet 6 inches to the curb line, thence south 142 feet, thence east 15 feet 6 inches, thence north 142 feet. 18, 5th Series 11-21-16 Lots 1 through 13 of Block E should never be sold separately from Lots 1 through 8 without provision for replacing the alley which is not proposed to be vacated.  
Annexations 
Ordinance 
Number Date of 
Adoption Brief Description 6.08 4-11-27 E1/2 of SE1/4 of 33-71-24, including platted portions Blocks 93, 94, 95 and 96 and Sunnyside Addition. 6.21 8-23-48 Part of Gov. Lot 2 lying S of N line of Sixth Street extended W to Rainy River; parts of Gov. Lot 3 and NW1/4 of SE1/4 lying N and W of State Trunk Highways No. 11 and No. 71 and NEly of SWly boundary line of Plat of Riverview; and part of W1/2 of SE1/4 contained in Parkway Addition, Blocks 1 and 2, 33-71-24. 6.30 4-18-55 E 33 ft. of NW1/4 of SE1/4, 33-71-24. 6.32 11-7-55 Part of Gov. Lot 3, NW1/4 of SE1/4 and N1/4 of SE1/4, 33-71-24 lying E of Trunk Highways No. 11 and No. 71, except portions annexed. 6.34 (Amended by Ord. No. 656) 4-7-58 Portion of Rainy River Bank between City limits and International Boundary in said Rainy River. 6.39 3-20-61 Part of Gov. Lot 3 and SE1/4 of SW1/4, 33-71-24. 6.43 9-23-63 Part of SW1/4 of SE1/4, 33-71-24. 6.44 11-26-63 Tract abutting Trunk Highways No. 11 and No. 71 between Eleventh Street and Fourteenth Avenue. 6.49 12-26-67 Tract in Gov. Lot 3, SW1/4 (SW1/4 SW1/4), 33-71-24; tract in Gov. Lots 3 and 4 (SE1/4 SE1/4), 33-71-24; part of Gov. Lot 4, 33-71-24 and tract in Gov. Lot 4, 33-71-24. 6.50 2-1-71 (Amends Ordinance No. 6.34). 6.54 2-17-69 Two tracts in Gov. Lot 4, 33-71-24; part of Gov. Lot 1, 32-71-24; part of Gov. Lot 4, 4-70-24; part of Gov. Lot 4, SE1/4 of SW1/4 and SW1/4 of SE1/4; 33-71-24; Gov. Lot 2, 4-70-24 and part of Gov. Lots 3 and 4, 4-70-24, and part of Gov. Lot 4 and SE1/4 of SW1/4 and SW1/4 of SE1/4, 33-71-24; Block 1 of Plat of Shorewood and part of Gov. Lot 1, 32-71-24; Blocks 3 and 4 of Plat of Shorewood and part of Gov. Lot 1, 4-70-24; part of Gov. Lots 3 and 4, 4-70-24; and part of Gov. Lot 1, Sec. 5, and Gov. Lot 4, 4-70-24. 6.55 (Amended by Ord. No. 6.64) 12-14-70 Part of Gov. Lots 3 and 4, 33-71-74, and Gov. Lot 4 and SE1/4 of SW1/4 of 33-71-24; part of Gov. Lot 2, 33-71-24. 6.59 10-9-73 Part of SE1/4 of NE1/4 and SW1/4 of NE1/4 of 5-70-24; part of Gov. Lot 1, Sec. 5 and SE1/4 of NE1/4 of 5-70-24; part of SE1/4 of NE1/4 of 4-70-24; part of SE1/4 of NE1/4, 5-71-24; part of Gov. Lot 1, Sec. 5 and Gov. Lot 4, 4-70-24; part of Gov. Lot 1 in SE1/4 of NE1/4 of Sec. 5, also Gov. Lot 4, Sec. 4 and SE1/4 of NW1/4 of 4-70-24; and part of SE1/4 of NE1/4 and SW1/4 of NE1/4, 5-70-24. 6.60 2-25-74 Gov. Lot 1, 31-71-24; Gov. Lot 3 except E 300 ft., 5-70-24; Gov. Lot 2 lying W of Block 3, Plat of Shorewood, 32-71-24; Gov. Lot 4, 5-70-24; Gov. Lot 1, 6-70-24. 6.64 (Amends Ord. No. 6.55) 12-24-76 Part of Gov. Lots 3 and 4, 4-70-24, and Gov. Lot 4 and SE1/4 of SW1/4, 33-71-24; part of Gov. Lot 2, 33-71-24. 6.65 6-14-77 Parcel in Gov. Lot 2, 5-70-24. 2nd Series 12 02-23-81 SW 1/4 of NE 1/4, 4-70-24; part of S 1/2 of NW 1/4, 4-70-24; and portions of Trunk Highway 11-71 and County Road 106 rights-of-way in N 1/2 of Sections 4 and 5, 70-24. 53 01-11-88 PARCEL ONE A: Government Lots 1, 2, 3 and that part of 4 lying in the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 35-71N-24W, containing approximately 89.53 acres. PARCEL ONE B: The SE 1/4 of the NE 1/4, 35-71N-24W less that part lying southerly of Trunk Highway No. 11 as now located and established and westerly of the Second Creek; which lies northerly of a line run parallel with and distant 475 feet southerly of the following described line: From a point on the east line of said Section 35 distant 422.4 feet south of the meander corner, located near the South boundary of the Rainy River; run northeasterly at an angle of 64° 32' with said east section line for 758.2 feet to the point of beginning of the line to be described; thence run southwesterly on the last described course for 100 feet; thence deflect to the right on a ten chord spiral curve of decreasing radius (spiral angle 2°00') for 200 feet; thence deflect to the right on a 2°00' circular curve (delta angle 21°57' 30") for 1097.9 feet; thence deflect to the right on a ten chord spiral curve of increasing radius (spiral angle 2°00') having a length of 200 feet for 49 feet and there terminating. PARCEL TWO B: the NE 1/4 of the SE 1/4, and the N 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 and the Trunk Highway 332 Right-of-way located in the South 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 both parcels being in Section 35, Township 71 North, Range 24 West, containing a total of approximately 97.49 acres. PARCEL ONE C: described as follows: that part of Lot 35 Auditor's Plat No. 2 in Government Lot 1, Section 36, Township 71N, Range 24W of the Fourth Principal Meridian described as follows: commencing at the Northeast Corner of said Lot 35; thence South 44°56' 06" West, bearing assumed, along the southeasterly line of said Lot 35, also being the northwesterly right-of-way of Koochiching C.S.A.H. No. 21, a distance of 568.06 feet to the point of beginning of the land to be described; thence continue South 44°56' 06" West along said southeasterly line a distance of 390 feet, more or less, to the intersection with the centerline of the creek, being about 835 feet northeasterly of the southwest corner of Government Lot 1 of said Section 36; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the shoreline of Rainy River; thence northeasterly along said shoreline a distance of 400 feet, more or less, to the intersection with a line bearing North 45°03' 54" West from the point of beginning; thence South 45°03' 54" East a distance of 229 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning and there terminating. Containing 1.8 acres, more or less; PARCEL TWO C: described as follows: That part of Lot 35, Auditor's Plat No. 2 in Government Lot 1, Section 36, Township 71 N, Range 24 W, West of Parcel One C described herein, containing 5.2 acres, more or less. Parcel One C and Parcel Two C total approximately 7 acres. 54 04-11-88 PARCEL ONE A: That part of the West 1/2 of the East1/2 of Section 35, Township 71N, Range 24W not already within the corporate boundaries; and the W 1/2 of Section 35, Township 71N, Range 24W including the Plat of Blocks 201 through 209 of International Falls not already within corporate boundaries. PARCEL ONE B: That part of the SE 1/4 of NE 1/4 of Section 35, Township 71N, Range 24W not already within the corporate boundaries. 61 10-10-89 Lots 1-6 of Auditor's Plat 22. Boundaries are as follows: The West boundary line of said parcel is the West line of Lots 1-6 of said Plat; the North boundary line is the North line of said Lot 6; the East boundary line is the East line of Lots 1-6 of said Plat; the South boundary line is the South line of said Lot 1. 74 08-26-91 Lots Fifteen and Sixteen (15 & 16) of the Plat of Goldville West of County Road 106, Lots Seventeen and Eighteen (17 & 18) of said Plat and that portion of vacated avenue known as Gold Avenue due East of Lots Seventeen and Eighteen (17 & 18) of said Plat. Boundaries of said parcel are as follows: Eastern Boundary: West Right of Way of County Road 106 North of the South line of Lot Eighteen (18), Plat of Goldville extended easterly. Northern Boundary: South Right of Way line of North Street between the West lines of Lot Eighteen (18) and the East line of Lot Fifteen (15) of said Plat extended Northerly. Western Boundary: Westerly line of Lot Seventeen and Eighteen (17 & 18) of said Plat. Southern Boundary: South line of Lot Eighteen (18) extended easterly to the Western Right of Way of County Road 106. 20 (3rd Series) 03-24-97 The West 100 ft. of the East 300 ft. of N1/2, E1/2, N1/2, SE1/4, NE1/4, Section 9, T 70 N, R 24 W, and the East 300 ft. of the North 100 ft. of the S1/2, E1/2, N1/2, SE1/4, NE1/4, said Section, Township and Range of said Plat. 27 (3rd Series) 10-22-99 Beginning at a point on the South line of Lot Thirty-five (35) of Auditor's Plat Number Eleven (11) in Section Nine (9), Township Seventy, Range Twenty-four (24) that is two hundred (200) feet West of the Southeast corner of Lot Thirty-five (35), said point of beginning is located on the existing city limit boundary; thence run West along the South line of Lot Thirty-five (35) to a point that is Thirty-three (33) feet from the Southwest corner of Lot Thirty-five (35); thence angle right and run parallel with and Thirty-three (33) feet from the West line of Lot Thirty-five (35) and Lot five (5) to a point on the North line of Lot Five (5); thence angle right and run on the North line of Lot Five (5) to a point that is two hundred (200) feet from the Northeast corner of Lot Five (5), said point being located on the existing city limit boundary; thence angle right and run parallel with and Two hundred (200) feet from the East line of Lot Five (5) and Lot Thirty-Five (35) along the existing city limit boundary to the said point of beginning on the South line of Lot Thirty-Five (35) and there terminating. 10 (4th series) 11-15-03 The West boundary is the West line of Government Lot 2 Section 6-70-24; the East boundary is the East line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (SE1/4 NW1/4); All of the foregoing property is in Section 5, Township 70, Range 24, The South boundary is the South line of Government Lot 2 and the South line of the South Half of the Northwest Quarter (S1/2 NW1/4); The North boundary is the North line of Government Lot 2 and the North line of the South Half of the Northwest Quarter (S1/2 NW1/4).  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1989 Code. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1989 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Eff. Date Section  Section 
this Code 2, 3rd series  8-10-92       Added 6-62 3, 3rd series 12-14-92 10-51 4, 3rd series  3-22-93 11-2 6, 3rd series  2-27-95       Added 6-63 7, 3rd series  3-27-95 6-24(c)(3) 8, 3rd series  5-22-95 11-2 9, 3rd series  9-11-95       Added 10-56 10, 3rd series 10-10-95 10-51(b) 11, 3rd series 12-26-95 5-43 12, 3rd series  3-11-96 8-30(c)(7) 13, 3rd series  5-13-96 10-12(g) 14, 3rd series  7- 8-96 11-30(l)(2)h. 15, 3rd series  7- 8-96 11-30(f)(3)p. 16, 3rd series  7-29-96 11-30(f)(2)ccc. 11-30(f)(3)p. 18, 3rd series  1-13-97       Added 10-57 19, 3rd series  1-13-97       Added 10-58 20, 3rd series  3-24-97 Ch. 20 21, 3rd series  6-23-97 Ch. 20 22, 3rd series  3-23-98 10-58 23, 3rd series  9- 9-98       Added 4-21 11- 9-98 1.1       Added 13-1 2.1-2.6       Added 13-2 3.1-3.14       Added 13-3 4.1-4.8       Added 13-4 5.1-5.4       Added 13-5 6.1-6.3       Added 13-6 7.1-7.5       Added 13-7 8.1       Added 13-8 9.1-9.3       Added 13-9 10.1-10.5       Added 13-10 24, 3rd series  1- 1-99 2-9 25, 3rd series 10-12-99 6-29 26, 3rd series  5- 8-00 11-30(o)(2)w. 27, 3rd series 10-30-00 Ch. 20 29, 3rd series 12- 1-00 6-29 30, 3rd series  2-19-01 6-27 31, 3rd series  6-13-01 Ch. 20 32, 3rd series  5-29-01       Added 8-31 Res. of  8-13-01       Added 4-5 1, 4th series  3-21-02 11-2 2, 4th series  5-21-02       Added 10-66 10-60(b) 3, 4th series  7-18-02 10-10(c) 4, 4th series  7-18-02 6-29(f)92) 5, 4th series  8-18-02 11-2 6, 4th series  3-10-03 2-21 7, 4th series  3-10-03 5-41(f) 8, 4th series  3-10-03 10-52(b) 9, 4th series  4-11-03       Added 11-30(a)(3)m.       Added 11-30(b)(3)m. 11, 4th series  2-21-04 6-28(n) 12, 4th series  3- 1-04       Added 11-30(g)(3)u.       Added 11-30(g)(3)v.       Added 11-30(h)(3)s.       Added 11-30(h)(3)t. 11-30(g)(3)c. 11-30(h)(3)b. 13, 4th series  6-28-04       Added 10-32(c) 20, 4th series  3-31-05       Added 1-10 21, 4th series  6- 2-05 11-2 22, 4th series 11-11-05       Added 6-64 23, 4th series  6-24-05 2-51(2) 25, 4th series  9-21-06       Added 11-30(o)(2)x. 1, 5th series  8- 9-07 1       Added 10-59 3, 5th series  2-11-08 1, 2 11-2 3, 4 11-30(l)(2)h.       Added 11-30(l)(2)i. 5       Added 11-30(o)(2)y. 4, 5th series  7- 7-08 1       Rpld 2-51 2       Added 2-52 6, 5th series 12-31-10 6-28 7, 5th series  6-18-12 6-44 8, 5th series 11- 5-12 6-61 10, 5th series  3-11-14 1 5-23 11, 5th series  3-11-14 1 5-43 12, 5th Series  6- 4-14 1       Rpld 13-1-13-10 2       Added 13-1-13-12 13, 5th series 11-22-14 2, 3 2-2 14, 5th series  9-30-15 2-4 10-52 15, 5th series  6-11-16 2, 3 5-3 16, 5th series  7-13-16 2 6-63(f) 17, 5th series  8-10-16       Added 4-20(r) 18, 5th series 12- 3-16 Ch. 20 19, 5th series 12-10-16 2, 3 2-52 20, 5th series  7- 1-17       Rpld 5-1-5-99 1-30       Added 5-1-5-30 23, 5th series  1-16-18 II       Rpld 11-85 27, 5th series  9-22-18 1 2-52 28, 5th series 10-15-18 1, 2 9-20(c) 29, 5th series 12-20-18 I 3-5(b) II 3-5(h) 30, 5th series  4-20-19 Pt. 1       Rpld 7-7 Pt. 2       Added 7-7  
